CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF ALGONAC, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Published in 2017 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Terry Stoneburner 
Mayor 
____________ 
Rocky Gillis, Mayor Pro Tem 
Michael Bembas 
Corey Blair 
Ray Martin 
Jake Skarbek 
Helen Meldrum 
City Council 
____________ 
James Downey 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Sam Boelke 
City Clerk 
CITY OFFICIALS AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Eileen M. Tesch 
Mayor 
____________ 
Michael Bembas, Mayor Pro Tem 
Corey Blair 
Raymond Martin 
Terry Stoneburner 
Mark Thompson 
Jim Osieczonek 
City Council 
____________ 
James Downey 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Sam Boelke 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Algonac, Michigan. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1988 Code, as supplemented, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1988 Code, as supplemented, and any ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Bill Carroll, Senior Code Attorney, and Kellyn Wilcox, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Cynthia Greenia, former City Clerk, James Downey, City Attorney, and Douglas Alexander, City Manager, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Algonac, Michigan. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and indexes. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Algonac, Michigan. 
©?Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Algonac, Michigan. 2017. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2017-03 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF ALGONAC, MICHIGAN; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
THE CITY OF ALGONAC ORDAINS: 
Section 1. Short title. 
This ordinance shall be known as the "Code of Ordinances adopting ordinance" and may be so cited. 
Section 2. Adoption of Code of Ordinances. 
The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Algonac, Michigan," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 50, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 3. Repealer. 
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before May 16, 2017, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 4. Prior ordinances not revived. 
The repeal provided for in section 3 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 5. Penalty. 
Except as otherwise provided by law and by this Code, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or both; however, unless otherwise provided by law, a person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Code that substantially corresponds to a violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of imprisonment is 93 days shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, imprisonment for a term of not more than 93 days, or both. A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be responsible for costs. 
    Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 6. Code additions or amendments. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 7. Later ordinances. Ordinances adopted after May 16, 2017 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 8. Effective date. This ordinance shall become effective immediately. 
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the City Council this 5 th day of December, 2017 
By:??___________ 
Eileen Tesch, Mayor 
ATTEST: 
___________ 
Sam Boelke, Clerk 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date Adopted Include/Omit Supp. No. 2017-03 12-?5-2017 Include 1 2018-01 ?2-20-2018 Omit 1 2018-02 ?4-17-2018 Include 1 2018-03 ?6-?5-2018 Include 1 ZOA-2018-04 ?7-10-2018 Include 1 2018-05 10-16-2018 Include 1 2018-06 11-20-2018 Include 1 2018-07 12-?4-2018 Include 1  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Home Rule Charter of the City of Algonac, Michigan, which was adopted by the electors on October 23, 1973, and became effective August 13, 1974. Amendments are indicated by a history note following the amended sections. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. Other changes made for clarity are enclosed by brackets. 
State Law reference— Home rule cities generally, MCL 117.1 et seq.; power to adopt and amend Charter, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 22. 

PREAMBLE 
CITY OF ALGONAC 
    Under the sovereignty of Almighty God, in whom we faithfully trust, We, the People of the City of Algonac, in order to secure the benefits of efficient self-government and to promote our common welfare, do ordain and establish this Charter for the government of our city, pursuant to authority granted by the Constitution and laws of the State of Michigan. 
CHAPTER 1. - NAME AND BOUNDARIES 

1.1 - [Name and boundaries:] 
    The name of this organized city is "City of Algonac." It is a body corporate and embraces the following described territory in the County of St. Clair, together with such territory as may from time to time be attached thereto, and less such territory as may from time to time be detached therefrom, in accordance with law: 
    All of Fractional Sections ten (10) and eleven (11), the South one-half (½) of Fractional Section Two (2) and the Southeast one-quarter (¼) of Section Three (3) in Town Two (2) North and Range Sixteen (16) East in the County of St. Clair, and in the State of Michigan. All lying Northerly and Westerly of the North Channel of St. Clair River. 
    The North one-half (½) of all of that part of Fractional Section Nine (9) lying North and East of Supervisor R. T. Gilbert's Plat No. Two (2), and North one-half (½) of the South one-half (½) of all that part of Fractional Section Nine (9) lying North and East of Supervisor R. T. Gilbert's Plat No. Two (2) in Fractional Section Nine (9), T2N, R16E, Clay Township, St. Clair County, Michigan. 
    Commencing at the corner of Sections Three (3), Four (4), Nine (9) and Ten (10), T2N, R16E, being the point of beginning. Thence South 86 degrees 01' W 1877.70 feet to a point on the section line between sections 3 and 9; thence South 02 degrees 33' E 1201.65 feet to a point; thence South 00 degrees 14' E 70.82 feet to a point; thence North 84 degrees 27' E 1826.23 feet to a point; thence North 00 degrees 05' E 1226.00 feet to the point of beginning. 
State Law reference— Incorporation, consolidation of territory and alteration of boundaries of home rule cities, MCL 117.61 et seq. 
CHAPTER 2. - MUNICIPAL POWERS 

2.1 - Continuation of Powers of Former Charter: 
    All powers, privileges and immunities not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter possessed by the City of Algonac by virtue of its incorporation as such, and enumerated in the Charter of the City adopted December 27, 1966, are hereby expressly retained by the City and shall constitute a part of the powers of the City, even though not expressly enumerated herein to the extent they are not inconsistent with powers granted to cities. 
2.2 - General Powers: 
    Unless otherwise provided or limited in this Charter, the City and its officers shall be vested with all the powers, privileges, and immunities expressed or implied, which cities and their officers are permitted to exercise or provided for in their charters under the constitutions and laws of the State of Michigan, and the United States of America. 
State Law reference— Permissible that Charter provide that the city may exercise all municipal powers in the management and control of municipal property and in the administration of the municipal government, MCL 117.4j(3). 
2.3 - Inter-Governmental Contracts: 
    The city shall have power to join with any governmental unit or agency or with any number or combination thereof by contract or otherwise as may be permitted by law, to perform jointly, or by one or more of them, for or on behalf of the other or others any power or duty which is permitted to be so performed by law or which is possessed or imposed upon such governmental unit or agency. 
State Law reference— Intergovernmental contracts between municipal corporations, MCL 124.1 et seq. 
CHAPTER 3. - ELECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Michigan election law, MCL 168.1 et seq.; mandatory that Charter provide for the time, manner and means of holding elections, MCL 117.3(c). 

3.1 - Non-Partisan Elections: 
    The nomination and election of all city officers shall be on a non-partisan basis. 
3.2 - Election Procedure: 
    Except as such statute[s] relate to political parties or party or partisan procedure and except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the general election statutes shall apply and control, as near as may be, all procedures relating to city elections, including but not limited to: qualifications of electors, establishment of precincts, verification of petitions, registration of voters, and voting hours. The Clerk shall give public notice of each city election in the same manner as is required by law for the giving of public notice of general elections in the state. 
State Law reference— Michigan election law, MCL 168.1 et seq.; notice of election, MCL 168.653a. 
3.3 - Wards and Precincts: 
    The City of Algonac shall consist of one ward. From time to time the Council shall establish convenient election precincts as required and provided by law. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for one or more wards, MCL 117.3(e); election precincts, MCL 168.654 et seq. 
3.4 - Regular City Elections: 
(a) ?A regular city election shall be held on Tuesday following the first Monday in November of each even numbered year for the purpose of electing Councilmen. 
State Law reference— Regular election date, MCL 168.642. 
3.5 - Elective Officers and Terms of Office: 
(a) ?The elective officers of the City shall be seven (7) Council persons all of whom shall be elected from the City at large. 
(b) ?Except as hereinafter provided for in 3.5(c) below, Council persons shall be elected for a term of four years. All such terms of Council persons shall commence at 8:00 p.m. at the then prevailing local time on the Monday next following the election at which they are elected. 
(c) ?At the regular city election held on November 6, 1984, the four candidates for Council who receive the four highest number of votes shall be declared elected for a term beginning on November 12, 1984, and ending on the Monday next following the date of the regular city election in 1988. The three candidates for Council who receive the fifth, sixth, and seventh highest number of votes shall be declared elected for a term beginning November 12, 1984, and ending on the Monday next following the date of the regular city election in 1986. 
(Amd. of 11-6-1984) 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for election of such officers as may be deemed necessary, MCL 117.3(a). 
3.6 - Special Election: 
    Special city elections shall be held when called by resolution of the Council at least forty-five (45) days in advance of such election, or when required by law. Any resolution calling a special election shall set forth the purpose of such election. No more special city elections shall be called in any one year than the number permitted by law. 
State Law reference— Special election approval, MCL 168.631, 168.639. 
3.7 - Election Commission: 
    An Election Commission is hereby created consisting of the Clerk, Attorney, and a non-office holding citizen appointed by the Council. The Election Commission shall appoint the Board of Election Inspectors for each precinct and have charge of all activities and duties required of it by law relating to the conduct of elections in the City. The compensation of election personnel shall be determined in advance by the City Council. In any case where election procedure is in doubt, the Election Commission shall prescribe the procedure to be followed. 
State Law reference— Board of city election commissioners, MCL 168.25. 
3.8 - Primary Election: 
    A regular city primary election shall be held on the date prescribed by statute for the holding of general fall primary elections, except as hereinafter provided. 
    If upon the expiration of the time for filing nominating petitions for any elective city office, valid petitions have been filed for no more than twice the number of candidates for such office to be elected at the following regular city election, then no primary election shall be held with respect to such office. 
    Candidates, equal in number to twice the number of persons to be elected to each office at the next subsequent regular city election, who receive the highest number of votes at any such primary election shall be declared the nominees for election to the respective offices for which they are candidates. The names of such candidates, together with the names of candidates who filed valid nominating petitions for any office for which no primary was held, shall be certified by the Clerk to the Election Commission as nominees for the next subsequent regular city election. 
3.9 - Nominations: 
(a) ?The method of nomination of all candidates for the city elections shall be by petition. Such petitions for each candidate shall be signed by not less than twenty-five nor more than forty registered electors of the city. No person shall sign his name to a greater number of petitions for any one office than there are persons to be elected to said office at the following regular city election. Where the signature of any individual appears on more petitions than he is permitted to sign, such signatures shall be counted only to the extent he is permitted to sign in the order of filing the petitions containing such signatures. 
(b) ?Nomination petitions in accordance with State law for candidates for regular city primary elections shall be filed with the Clerk. 
(c) ?The Clerk shall, prior to every election, publish notice of the last day permitted for filing nomination petitions and of the number of persons to be nominated or elected to each office at least one week and not more than three weeks before such day. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for nomination of elective officers, MCL 117.3(b); nominating petitions, MCL 168.322; certification of nominating petitions by city clerk, MCL 168.552; validity of petition or signature, MCL 168.552a. 
3.10 - Form of Petitions: 
    The form of nominating petition shall be substantially as that designated by the Michigan Election Law for the nomination of non-partisan judicial officers. A supply of official petition forms shall be provided and maintained by the Clerk. 
State Law reference— Nonpartisan nominating petitions, MCL 168.544a. 
3.11 - Approval of Petitions: 
(a) ?The Clerk shall accept only official nominating petitions which are approved by Michigan Election Law and which, considered together, contain the required number of valid signatures for candidates having those qualifications required for the respective elective city offices as set forth in this Charter. The Clerk shall receive no nominating petition for any person named thereon as a candidate, unless the petition is accompanied by an executed affidavit or other proofs establishing the facts which show the eligibility of such candidates for the office named in an executed affidavit. 
(b) ?The Clerk shall, forthwith after the filing of a petition notify, in writing, any candidate whose petition is then known not to meet the requirements of this section, but the failure to so notify any candidate shall in no way prevent a final determination that the petition does no [not] meet such requirements. Within five days after the last date for filing petitions, the Clerk shall make his final determinations as to the validity and sufficiency of each nomination petition and whether or not the candidate has the qualifications required for his respective elective city office by this Charter and shall write his determinations thereof on the face of the petition. 
(c) ?The Clerk shall immediately notify, in writing, the candidate whose name appears thereon of his determinations. Such notice to any candidate whose petition is found invalid or insufficient or who is found not to be qualified shall be delivered by personal messenger or by certified or registered mail. 
State Law reference— Preparation and filing of nominating petitions, MCL 168.542 et seq. 
3.12 - Public Inspection of Petitions: 
    All nominating petitions filed shall be open to public inspection in the office of the Clerk, except during a five (5)-day period immediately following the last day for filing such petitions. 
State Law reference— Public inspection of petitions, MCL 168.555. 
3.13 - Form of Ballot: 
(a) ?The form, printing and numbering of ballots or the preparation of the voting machines used in any city election shall conform as nearly as may be to the provisions of statute, except that no party designation or emblem shall appear. In all city elections, the names of qualified candidates or nominees for each office shall be listed under a separate heading and shall be rotated systematically in the manner prescribed by statute for rotation of names. 
(b) ?If two or more candidates or nominees for the same office have the same or similar surnames, the Election Commission shall print the occupation and residence address under the respective names of each of such candidates or nominees on the ballots (or on labels or slips to be placed on voting machines when used). 
(c) ?Except as provided in this section there shall be no supplementary identification of candidates or nominees on the ballot. 
State Law reference— Arrangement of ballot, MCL 168.706. 
3.14 - Canvass of Votes: 
    The Board of Canvassers as constituted by state law shall canvass the votes cast at all elections. 
State Law reference— Board of canvassers, MCL 168.24a et seq.; canvass of returns, MCL 168.323. 
3.15 - The Tie: 
    If, at any primary or election, there shall be no choice between candidates by reason of two or more persons having received an equal number of votes, the Council shall name a date for the appearance of such persons for the purpose of determining the nomination or election by lot as provided by law. 
State Law reference— Determination of election by lot, MCL 168.851, 168.852. 
3.16 - Recount: 
    A recount of the votes cast at any city election for any office or upon any proposition may be had as provided by state law. 
State Law reference— Recounts, MCL 168.861 et seq. 
3.17 - Recall: 
    Any elected official may be recalled from office by the electors of the City and a vacancy created thereby shall be filled in the manner provided by state law. 
State Law reference— Permissible that Charter provide for recall of its officers, MCL 117.4i(g); recall generally, MCL 168.951 et seq. See also Mich. Const. 1963, art. II, § 8. 
CHAPTER 4. - [OFFICERS][3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Mandatory that charter provide for certain officers, MCL 117.3(a); mandatory that Charter provide for the qualifications, duties and compensation of its officers, MCL 117.3(d). 

4.1 - City Council: 
    The electors of the city shall elect a City Council of seven (7) members, one of whom shall serve as Mayor. The Council shall constitute the legislative and governing body of the city and shall have power and authority, except as in this Charter or by statute otherwise provided, to exercise all powers conferred upon or possessed by the city, and shall have the power and authority to adopt such laws, ordinances and resolutions as it shall deem proper in the exercise thereof. In all cases where the word "Council" is used in this Charter, the same shall be synonymous with the word "Commission" or any other term used in any state or federal law in referring to municipal legislative or governing bodies. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for election of certain officers, MCL 117.3(a). 
4.2 - Qualifications of Councilmen: 
    Members of the Council shall meet the eligibility requirements contained in Section 5.1 of this Charter. The Council shall be the sole judge of the eligibility and qualifications of its own members, subject only to review by the court. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for qualifications of officers, MCL 117.3(d). 
4.3 - Compensation of Mayor and Councilmen: 
    The compensation of Mayor and Councilmen shall be determined by ordinances: provided, however, that no change in such compensation shall be effective during the term of office for which any member of the Council making the change was elected. All votes on this question shall be by roll call. Until otherwise provided by ordinance, such compensation shall be as follows: Each Councilman and the Mayor shall receive Twenty Dollars ($20.00) for each regular and Ten Dollars ($10.00) for each special meeting which he attends, but the compensation shall not exceed Six Hundred Dollars ($600.00) in any fiscal year. The Mayor, in addition, shall receive the sum of Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) per year. 
    Further, said Councilmen shall upon authorization of the Council, be allowed reasonable expenses, when actually incurred on behalf of the City. Such compensation shall be paid quarterly and except as otherwise provided in this Charter, shall constitute the only compensation which may be paid the Mayor and Councilmen for the discharge of any official duty for or on behalf of the city during their tenure of office. 
Editor's note— Compensation has been increased in Code of Ordinances § 2-19. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for compensation of officers, MCL 117.3(d). 
4.4 - Election of Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem: 
    The Council shall, at its first organizational meeting following each regular city election, and after the newly elected members take office, elect one of its members to serve as Mayor and one to serve as Mayor Pro Tem, both for a term expiring at the first organization Council meeting following the next regular city election. 
    In the event of absence or disability of both the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem the Council may designate another of its members to serve as Acting Mayor during such absence or disability. 
4.5 - Duties of Mayor: 
(a) ?Insofar as required by statute, and for all ceremonial purposes, the Mayor shall be the executive head of the city. He shall have a voice and vote in all proceedings of the Council equal with that of other members of the Council but shall have no veto power. He shall be the presiding officer of the Council. 
(b) ?The Mayor shall be a conservator of the peace, and in emergencies may exercise within the city the powers conferred upon sheriffs to suppress riot and disorder, and shall have authority to command assistance of all able-bodied citizens to aid in the enforcement of the ordinances of the city and to suppress riot and disorder. 
(c) ?The Mayor shall execute or authenticate by his signature such instruments as the Council, this Charter or any statute of the State of Michigan or laws of the United States shall require. 
(d) ?Except as may be required by statute, the Mayor shall exercise only such power as this Charter or the Council shall specifically confer upon him. 
(e) ?In the absence or disability of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem shall perform the duties of Mayor. In the absence or disability of both, the designated Acting Mayor shall perform such duties. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for duties of officers, MCL 117.3(d). 
4.6 - Administrative Service: 
    The administrative officers of the City shall be the City Manager, Attorney, Clerk, Treasurer, Assessor, Chief of Police, and such additional administrative officers as may be created by ordinance. The Council may by ordinance create additional administrative offices and may by ordinance combine any administrative offices in any manner it deems necessary or advisable for the proper and efficient operation of the city. 
    The City Manager and Attorney shall be appointed by the Council for an indefinite period, shall be responsible to and serve at the pleasure of the Council and shall have their compensation fixed by the Council. 
    The Offices of Clerk, Treasurer, and Assessor shall be filled by appointment by the Council, upon the recommendation of the City Manager. 
    All other administrative officers of the City, except the City Manager and Attorney, shall be appointed by the City Manager for an indefinite period, subject to confirmation by the Council. All administrative officers except the Attorney shall be responsible to the City Manager and shall have their compensation fixed by him in accordance with budget appropriations and subject to approval of the Council. Such officers may be discharged by the City Manager at his discretion. 
    Except as may be otherwise required by statute or this Charter the Council shall establish by ordinance such departments of the City as it deems necessary or advisable and shall prescribe therein the functions of each department and the duties, authorities and responsibilities of the officers of each department. The City Manager may prescribe such duties and responsibilities of the officers of those departments responsible to him as are delegated to him by the City Council. 
    All personnel employed by the city who are not elected officers of the city or administrative officers by, or under the authority of this Charter shall be deemed to be employees of the city. The head of each department shall have the power to hire, suspend or discharge the employees of his department with confirmation by the City Manager. 
    Any administrative officer or employee who has been discharged may within ten days thereafter petition the Council to hear the facts regarding such discharge, and in such case the Council may, in its sole discretion, hold a hearing and inquire into such facts and may make such decision in the matter as it considers proper. 
    The Council may require any administrative officer or employee, if he is not a resident at the time of his appointment or employment to become a resident of the city within the time set by the Council and so remain throughout his tenure of office or employment. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for certain officers, MCL 117.3(a); mandatory requirement that Charter prescribe duties of city officers, MCL 117.3(d). 
4.7 - Relationship of Council to Administrative Services: 
    The Council shall deal with the administrative services pursuant to ordinances and resolutions adopted by the City Council from time to time. 
4.8 - City Manager: Appointment and Qualifications: 
    The Council shall appoint a City Manager within ninety days after any vacancy exists in such position. The City Manager shall hold office at the pleasure of a majority of the Council but shall not be removed from office during a period of 60 days following a regular City election except for cause shown. He shall be selected on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his training and experience. 
4.9 - Acting City Manager: 
    The Council shall, on or before the date of the next regular council meeting, appoint or designate an Acting City Manager during the period of a vacancy in the office or during the absence of the City Manager from the City, such Acting City Manager shall, while he is in such office, have all the responsibilities, duties, functions and authority of the City Manager with compensurate remuneration for services rendered. 
4.10 - City Manager: Functions and Duties: 
    The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the City government. His functions and duties shall be as follows: 
(a) ?To be responsible to the Council for the efficient administration of all administrative departments of the city government except the department under the direction of the Attorney; 
(b) ?To see that all laws and ordinances are enforced; 
(c) ?To appoint, with the consent of the Council, the heads of the several city departments whose appointment is not otherwise specified in this Charter, and to direct and supervise such department heads; 
(d) ?To give to the proper department or officials ample notice of the expiration or termination of any franchises, contracts or agreements; 
(e) ?To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise, or in any contract, are faithfully kept and performed; 
(f) ?To recommend an annual budget to the Council and to administer the budget as finally adopted under policies formulated by the Council, and to keep the Council fully advised at all times as to the financial conditions and needs of the city; 
(g) ?To recommend to the Council for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient, and to attend Council meetings with the right to take part in discussions but not to vote; 
(h) ?To exercise and perform all administrative functions of the city that are not imposed by this Charter or ordinance upon some other official; 
(i) ?To be responsible for the maintenance of a system of accounts of the city which shall conform to any uniform system required by law and by the Council and to generally accepted principles and procedure of governmental accounting. He shall submit financial statements to the Council quarterly, or more often as the Council directs; 
(j) ?To act [as] a Purchasing Agent for the city and in such capacity shall purchase all supplies and equipment and dispose of the same in accordance with procedures established by the Council; 
(k) ?To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required of him by ordinance or by direction of the Council. 
4.11 - Clerk: Functions and Duties: 
(a) ?The Clerk shall be the Clerk of the Council and shall attend all meetings of the Council and shall keep a permanent journal of its proceedings in the English language. 
(b) ?The Clerk shall be custodian of the City seal, and shall affix it to all documents and instruments requiring the seal, and shall attest the same. He shall also be custodian of all papers, documents, bonds, and records pertaining to the city, the custody of which is not otherwise provided for. 
(c) ?The Clerk shall certify by his signature all ordinances and resolutions enacted or passed by the Council. 
(d) ?The Clerk shall provide and maintain in his office a supply of forms for all petitions required to be filed for any purpose by the provisions of this Charter. 
(e) ?The Clerk shall have power to administer oaths of office. 
(f) ?The Clerk shall perform such duties as may be prescribed for him by this Charter, by the Council or by the City Manager. 
State Law reference— Mandatory requirement that charter provide for city clerk, MCL 117.3(a). 
4.12 - Treasurer: Functions and Duties: 
(a) ?The Treasurer shall have the custody of all moneys of the city, and any bond pertaining solely to the Clerk, and all evidences of indebtedness to the City or held in trust by the city. 
(b) ?The Treasurer shall collect all moneys of the City, the collection of which is not provided for elsewhere by the Charter or ordinance. He shall receive from other officers and employees of the City all money belonging to and receivable by the city that may be collected by such officers and employees, including fines, license fees, taxes, assessments and all other charges. All moneys shall be turned over to the treasurer after collection or receipt, and he shall in all cases give a receipt therefor. 
(c) ?The Treasurer shall keep and deposit all moneys or funds in such manner and only in such places as the Council may determine and shall report the same in detail to the City Manager. 
(d) ?The Treasurer shall disburse all city funds in accordance with the provisions of statute, this Charter and procedure to be established by the Council. 
(e) ?The Treasurer shall have such powers, duties and prerogatives in regard to the collection and custody of state, county, school district and city taxes as are conferred by statute upon township treasurers in connection with state, county, township and school district taxes upon real and personal property. 
(f) ?The Treasurer shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by this Charter, by the Council or by the City Manager. 
State Law reference— Mandatory requirement that Charter provide for city treasurer, MCL 117.3(a). 
4.13 - Assessor: Functions and Duties: 
    The certified Assessor shall possess all powers vested in, and shall be charged with all the duties imposed upon assessing officers by statute. He shall prepare all regular and special assessment rolls in the manner prescribed by this Charter, by ordinance and by statute. He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him in this Charter, by the Council or by the City Manager. 
State Law reference— Mandatory requirement that Charter provide for city assessor, MCL 117.3(a). 
4.14 - Attorney: Functions and Duties: 
(a) ?The Attorney shall act as legal advisor to, and be attorney and counsel for, the Council and shall be responsible solely to the Council. He shall advise any officer or department head of the city in matters relating to his official duties when so requested and shall file with the Clerk a copy of all written opinions given by him. 
(b) ?The Attorney shall prosecute such ordinance violations and he shall conduct for the city such cases in court and before other legally constituted tribunals as the Council may request. He shall file with the Clerk copies of such records and files relating thereto as the Council may direct. 
(c) ?The Attorney shall prepare or review all ordinances, contracts, bonds and other written instruments which are submitted to him by the Council and shall promptly give his opinion as to the legality thereof. 
(d) ?The Attorney shall call to the attention of the Council all matters of law, and changes or developments therein, affecting the City. 
(e) ?The Attorney shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by this Charter or by the Council. 
(f) ?Upon the recommendation of the Attorney, or upon its own initiative, the Council may retain special legal counsel to handle any matter in which the city has interest, or to assist and counsel with the attorney therein. 
4.15 - Compensation of Attorney and Special Counsel: 
    The compensation of the Attorney shall be set by the Council. No compensation to special legal counsel shall be paid except in accordance with an agreement between the Council and the Attorney or Special Counsel made before the service for which such compensation is to be paid has been rendered. 
4.16 - Deputy Administrative Officers: 
    The Clerk, Treasurer, and Assessor may appoint their own deputies subject to the written confirmation of the City Manager, and may terminate the status of their deputies at their discretion, upon written notice to the City Manager. Such deputies shall, in each case possess all the powers and authorities of their superior officers except as the same may be from time to time limited by their superiors or by the City Manager. 
4.17 - Planning and Zoning: 
    The Council shall maintain a city planning commission in accordance with and having all the powers and duties granted by the provisions of statute relating to such commissions. 
    The Council shall maintain a zoning ordinance in accordance with the provisions of statute relating to such ordinances. Insofar as may be, such ordinance shall provide that zoning be coordinated with the work of the city planning commission. 
State Law reference— Michigan planning enabling act, MCL 125.3801 et seq.; Michigan zoning enabling act, MCL 125.3101 et seq. 
4.18 - Independent Boards and Commissions: 
    The Council man [may] not create any board or commission, other than those provided for in this Charter, to administer any activity, department or agency of the city government except (a) a municipal hospital, (b) municipal cemetery, (c) recreation, (d) housing authority, (e) any activity which by statute is required to be so administered. The Council may, however, establish (a) quasi-judicial appeal boards and (b) boards or commissions to serve solely in an advisory capacity to the City Council. 
CHAPTER 5. - GENERAL PROVISIONS REGARDING OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL OF THE CITY 

5.1 - Eligibility for Office and Employment in City: 
(a) ?To be eligible for election to a city office, a person shall be a qualified and registered elector of the City. 
(b) ?Each member of a city board or commission created by or pursuant to this Charter shall be a qualified and registered elector of the City on day of appointment and throughout his tenure of office. 
(c) ?No elective officer, under this Charter, may be appointed to any city office or be employed by the city while he is in office or for one year thereafter: However, after the expiration of his term of office, he may be appointed as a member of an independent board or commission or fill a vacancy in the position of Councilman. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for qualifications of officers, MCL 117.3(d). 
5.2 - Vacancies in Office: 
    Any city office, or membership in any Board or Commission, shall become vacant before the expiration of the term of such office or membership for any one or more of the following reasons: 
(a) ?The occurrence of any event or the doing of any act specified by State Law to create a vacancy; 
(b) ?Removal from office by the Governor of Michigan; 
(c) ?The absence from the city of any officer continuously for more than sixty days without permission of the Council; 
(d) ?In the case of the Mayor and the Councilmen; absences from four consecutive regular meetings of the Council or from twenty-five percent of such meetings in any fiscal year of the city, unless such absence shall be excused by the Council at the time that it occurred and the reason therefor entered in the proceedings of the Council; 
(e) ?Assumption by the officer of any office which is incompatible with the city office held by him. 
State Law reference— Removal of city officers by governor, MCL 168.327. 
5.3 - Filling vacancies: 
    If a vacancy occurs in an elective office, the remaining members of the Council shall, within thirty days thereafter, fill the vacancy for the balance of the unexpired term thereof; provided, that, if the vacancy occurs on the Council within sixty prior to a regular city election, it shall not be filled until after the next organization of the Council. 
    If a vacancy occurs in an appointive office, such vacancy shall be filled in the manner provided for making original appointment. In the case of members of boards and commissions appointed for a definite term, such appointments shall be for the unexpired term. 
State Law reference— Vacancies in city office to be filled as provided in Charter, MCL 201.37. 
5.4 - Resignations: 
    Resignations of elective officers and members of boards and commissions shall be made in writing and filed with the Clerk. Resignations of appointive officers shall be made in writing to the appointing officer or body and shall be acted upon immediately. 
5.5 - Change in Term of Office or Compensation: 
    Except by procedures provided in this Charter, the terms of office of the elective officers and of members of boards and commissions appointed for definite terms shall not be shortened. The terms of elective officers of the city shall not be extended beyond the period for which any such officer was elected except that an elective officer shall, after his term has expired, continue to hold office until his successor is elected and has qualified. The Council shall not grant or authorize extra compensation to any officer or employee after the service has been rendered. The salary of any elective officer shall not be increased or decreased from the time of this election or appointment until the end of the term of office for which he was elected or appointed. 
5.6 - Oath of Office and Bond: 
    Every officer, elected or appointed, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take the oath of office to support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State of Michigan and the Charter of the City of Algonac, and shall file the same with the Clerk, together with any bond required by law or by the Council. In case of failure to comply with the provisions of this section within ten days from the date of his election or appointment, such officer shall be deemed to have declined the office and such office shall thereupon be vacant, unless the Council shall, by resolution, extend the time in which such officer may qualify as above set forth. 
State Law reference— Oath of public officers, Mich. Const. 1963, art. XI, § 1. 
5.7 - Surety Bonds: 
    The Council may require any officer or employee to give bond, to be approved by the Attorney, in such sum as the Council determines. The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful and proper performance of the duties of the office or employment concerned. All officers and employees who receive, distribute or are responsible for city funds or investments shall be bonded. The resignation, removal, or discharge of any officer or employee, shall not exonerate the officer or employee or their sureties from any liability incurred by them. All official bonds shall be corporate surety bonds and the premiums thereof shall be paid by the City. No official bond shall be issued for a term exceeding three years, except bonds which are required of officers who are elected for terms of office which are longer than three years. The bonds of all officers and employees shall be filed with the Clerk except that the Clerk's bond shall be filed with the Treasurer. The requirements of this section may be met by the purchase by the City of one or more blanket corporate surety bonds covering all or any group or groups of the offices and employments of the City. Any officer or employee who is covered by a blanket surety bond need not be bonded individually for the purpose of qualifying for office. 
5.8 - Delivery of Office: 
    Whenever any officer or employee shall cease to hold such office or employment for any reason whatsoever, he shall within five days or sooner on demand, delivery to his successor in office or to his superior all the books, papers, moneys, and effects in his custody as such officer or employee. Any officer violating this provision may be proceeded against in the same manner as public officer generally for a like offense under statute. Any employee found guilty of violating this provision by a competent tribunal may be punished by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars or imprisonment for not to exceed ninety days, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
5.9 - Compensation of Officers and Employees: 
(a) ?The compensation of all officers and employees of the city, whose compensation is not provided for herein shall be fixed by the appointing officer or body within the limits of budget appropriations and in accordance with any pay plan adopted by the Council. 
(b) ?The respective salaries and compensation of officers and employees as fixed by, or pursuant to, this Charter shall be in full for all services to the city of such officers or employees and shall be in lieu of all fees, commissions and other compensation receivable by such officers or employees for such services, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. 
(c) ?Such fee, commissions and compensations shall belong to the city and shall be collected and accounted for by such officers or employees, and be paid into the city treasury and a statement thereof shall be filed periodically with the City Manager. 
(d) ?Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the payment of necessary bona fide expenses actually incurred in service in behalf of the city. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for compensation of officers, MCL 117.3(d). 
5.10 - Employee's Welfare Benefits: 
    The Council shall have the power to establish or make available to the administrative officers and employees of the city and its departments and boards a pension plan and/or any recognized standard plan of group life, hospital, health, or accident insurance. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide employee disability, injury or death benefits, MCL 117.4i(i). 
5.11 - Anti-Nepotism: 
    Unless the Council shall by unanimous vote, which vote shall be recorded as part of its official proceedings, determine that the best interests of the city shall be served, the following relatives of any elective or appointive officer are disqualified from holding any appointive office or employment during the term for which said elective or appointive officer was elected or appointed; spouse, child, parent, grandchild, grandparent, brother, sister, half-brother, half-sister or the spouses of any of them. All relationships shall include those arising from adoption. This section shall in no way disqualify such relatives or their spouses who are bona fide appointive officers or employees of the city at the time of the election or appointment of said official. 
CHAPTER 6. - THE COUNCIL: PROCEDURE AND MISCELLANEOUS POWERS AND DUTIES 

6.1 - Regular Meetings: 
    The Council shall provide by resolution for the time and place of its regular meetings and shall hold at least two regular meetings each month. An organizational meeting shall be held on Monday following each regular city election. 
State Law reference— Open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq.; mandatory that charter provide for open meetings, MCL 117.3(l). 
6.2 - Special Meetings: 
    Special meetings shall be called by the Clerk on the written request of the Mayor or any two members of the Council on at least 24 hours written notice to each member of the Council, served personally or left at his usual place of residence; but a special meeting may be held on shorter notice if all members of the Council are present or have waived notice thereof in writing. Except by unanimous consent of all members of the Council, a matter shall not be acted upon at any special meeting unless it has been included in the notice of the meeting. 
State Law reference— Open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq. 
6.3 - Meetings to be Public: 
    All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be open to the public and citizens shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard under such rules and regulations as the Council may prescribe. 
State Law reference— Open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq. 
6.4 - Adjournment of Meeting: 
    A majority of the members of the Council in office at the time shall be a quorum for the transaction of business at all Council meetings, but in the absence of a quorum a lesser number may adjourn any meeting to a later time or date, and in the absence of all members the Clerk may adjourn any meeting for not longer than one week. 
6.5 - Organization and Rules of the Council: 
    The Council shall determine its own organization, rules, and order of business subject to the following provisions: 
(a) ?A journal of the proceedings of each meeting shall be kept in the English language by the Clerk and shall be signed by the presiding officer and Clerk of the meeting; 
(b) ?A vote upon all ordinances and resolutions shall be taken by "Yes" and "No" vote and entered upon the records, except that where the vote is unanimous it shall only be necessary to so state; 
(c) ?No member of the Council shall vote on any question in which he has financial interest, other than the common public interest, or on any question concerning his own conduct, but on all other questions each member who is present shall vote when his name is called, unless excused by the unanimous consent of the remaining members present. Any member refusing to vote except when not so required by this paragraph shall be guilty of misconduct in office. 
(d) ?In all roll call votes, the names of the members of the Council shall be called in alphabetical order and the name to be called first shall be advanced one position alphabetically in each successive roll call vote. 
(e) ?Any two or more members of the Council may by vote either request or compel the attendance of its members and other officers of the City at any meeting. Any member of the Council or other officer who when notified in writing of such request for his attendance shall attend such meeting unless excused by the Council; 
(f) ?The proceedings of the Council or a summary thereof, shall be published within fifteen days following each meeting. Any such summary shall be prepared by the Clerk and approved by the Mayor and shall show the substance of each separate proceeding of the Council; 
(g) ?There shall be no standing committees of the Council. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for keeping of a journal, MCL 117.3(m); conflicts of interest as to contracts, MCL 15.321 et seq.; standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.; freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq. 
6.6 - Investigations: 
    The Council, or any person or committee authorized by it for the purpose, shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any department, office or officer and to make investigations as to matters in which the municipality has an interest. The Council for the purpose stated herein, may summon witnesses, administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and other evidence. 
    Failure on the part of any officer to obey such summons or to produce books, papers and other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this section shall constitute misconduct in office. Failure on the part of any employee or other person to obey such summons or to produce books, papers or other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this section shall constitute a violation of this Charter and such person when found guilty of such violation by a competent tribunal may be punished by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars or imprisonment, not to exceed ninety days, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
    It is provided further, that in case of failure on the part of any person to obey such summons or to produce such books, papers and other evidence as so ordered, the Council may invoke the aid of the proper judicial tribunal in requiring obeyance of such summons or production of such books, papers and other evidence. 
6.7 - Providing for Public Health and Safety: 
    The Council shall see that provision is made for the public peace and health, and for the safety of persons and property. Unless and until a board of health is established for the city by ordinance, the Council shall constitute the board of health of the city, and it and its officers shall possess all powers, privileges and immunities granted to boards of health by statute. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for public peace, health, etc., MCL 117.3(j). 
CHAPTER 7. - LEGISLATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for ordinances, MCL 117.3(k); general authority relative to adoption of ordinances, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 22. 

7.1 - Prior Legislation: 
    All valid bylaws, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City of Algonac which are in force and effect at the time of the effective date of this Charter shall continue in full force and effect until repealed or amended. 
    Any reference in any such bylaw, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation to a board or commission shall be construed to refer instead to the Council. 
    Those provisions of any effective valid by law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation which are inconsistent with the Charter are hereby repealed. 
7.2 - Ordinances and Resolutions: 
    All official action of the Council shall be by Ordinance or resolution adopted by not less than four members of the Council, unless otherwise required by law. All actions of the Council which do not constitute ordinances shall be deemed to be resolutions. Action by resolution shall be limited to matters required or permitted to be so done by law or pertaining to the internal affairs or concerns of the city government. All other acts of Council and all acts carrying a penalty for the violation thereof, shall be by ordinance. Each ordinance shall be identified by a short title and by a number, and by a code section number when the codification or [of] ordinance[s] is completed. 
(Amd. of 11-6-1984) 
State Law reference— Codification authority, MCL 117.5b. 
7.3 - Enactment, Amendment, Repeal, and Effective Date of Ordinance: 
(a) ?Each proposed ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form. The style of all ordinances shall be: The City of Algonac Ordains: 
(b) ?No ordinance shall be passed at the same meeting at which it is introduced unless the same is declared to be an emergency ordinance by a vote of not less than six members of the Council. 
(c) ?An ordinance may be repealed or amended only by an ordinance passed in the manner provided in this section. An ordinance may be repealed by reference to its number and title only. 
(d) ?If a section of an ordinance is amended, the section shall be reenacted and published at length. This requirement shall not apply to the schedules of one-way streets and of parking limitations contained in any traffic ordinance. 
(e) ?Each ordinance, after adoption, shall be identified by a number. 
(f) ?The effective date of all ordinances shall be stated therein, but shall not be earlier than 10 days after enactment, nor before publication thereof. 
7.4 - Publication and Recording of Ordinances: 
(a) ?Each ordinance shall be published within fifteen days after its enactment by publishing the full text thereof in a newspaper as defined in Section 16.4 either separately or as part of the published Council proceedings. 
(b) ?All ordinances shall be recorded by the Clerk in a book to be called THE ORDINANCE BOOK and it shall be the duty of the Mayor and Clerk to authenticate such records by their official signatures thereon, but the failure to so record and authenticate such ordinance shall not invalidate it or suspend its operation. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for publication of all ordinances before they become operative, MCL 117.3(k). 
7.5 - Penalties for Violations of Ordinances: 
    Any ordinance may provide for the punishment of those who violate its provisions. The punishment for the violation of any ordinance shall not exceed a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for ninety (90) days or both, in the discretion of the court; said imprisonment may be in the county jail or city prison, or in any work house in the state authorized by law to receive prisoners from such city. 
Editor's note— MCL 117.3(k) permits a 93-day imprisonment for violations substantially corresponding to state law that carries that penalty, notwithstanding any Charter limitation. 
State Law reference— Limitation on penalties, MCL 117.3(k), 117.4i(k). 
7.6 - Technical Codes: 
    The Council may adopt, by ordinance, any provision of state law or any detailed technical code or set of regulations promulgated by the State, or by a department, board, or agency thereof, or by any organization or association organized and conducted for the purpose of developing any such code, or set of regulations, by reference thereto in the adopting ordinance and without publishing the technical code or set of regulations in full. The code or set of regulations shall be fully identified in the ordinance, and a statement of the purpose of the code or set of regulations shall be published with the adopting ordinance. Such publication shall contain notice that a copy of the code or set of regulations is available for public inspection in the office of the Clerk. Printed copies of the code or set of regulations shall be kept in the office of the Clerk, available for public distribution at cost. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
7.7 - Severability of Ordinances: 
    Unless an ordinance shall expressly provide the contrary, if any portion of an ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be found to be invalid by a court, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining portions or applications of the ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid portion or application, if such remaining portions or applications are not determined by the court to be inoperable, and, to this end, ordinances are declared to be severable. 
7.8 - Codification of Ordinances: 
(a) ?After the effective date of this Charter, the Council may direct and complete the codification of the ordinances of the city and shall provide for the publication of subsequent amendments thereto so that such amendments may readily be made a part of such code and maintain the same in current form. Any such codification may include provisions not previously contained in the ordinances of the city. 
(b) ?The Council shall provide for making copies of the codification available for public inspection and for distribution to the public at a reasonable charge therefor and shall publish notice of the printing and availability of such codification before the effective date thereof. Such printing and making available of the codification and notice thereof shall constitute the publication, as required by law, of any such codification, other provision of this Charter for the publication of ordinances notwithstanding. 
(c) ?The copies of the ordinances and of the codification thereof, and of provisions adopted by reference in accordance with Section 7.6 may be certified by the Clerk and, when so certified, shall be competent evidence in all courts and other legally established tribunals as to the matter contained therein. 
State Law reference— Authority to codify, MCL 117.5b. 
7.9 - Initiative and Referendum: 
    An Ordinance may be initiated by petition, or a referendum on an enacted ordinance may be had by petition, as hereafter provided. 
State Law reference— Permissible that Charter provide for initiative and referendum, MCL 117.4i(g). 
7.10 - Initiatory and Referendary Petitions: 
(a) ?An initiatory or a referendary petition shall be signed by not less than ten percent of the registered electors of the city, as of the date of the last regular city election, and all signatures on said petition shall be obtained within sixty days before the date of filing the petition with the Clerk. Any such petition shall be addressed to the Council and may be the aggregate of two or more petition papers identical as to content, except as to signatures, and simultaneously filed by one person. An initiatory petition shall set forth, in full, the ordinances it proposes to initiate, and no petition shall propose to initiate more than one ordinance. A referendary petition shall identify the ordinance or part thereof, or code sections it proposes to have repealed. 
(b) ?Each signer of a petition shall sign his name, and shall place thereon after his name, the date, and his place of residence thereon after his name, the date, and his place of residence by street and number, or by other customary designation. To each petition paper, there shall be attached a sworn affidavit by the circulator thereof, stating the number of signers thereof and that each signature thereon is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and that it was made in the presence of the affiant. Such petition shall be filed with the Clerk, who shall, within fifteen days, canvass the signatures thereon. If the petition does not contain a sufficient number of signatures of registered electors of the city, the Clerk shall notify forthwith, by registered or certified mail, the person filing such petition and fifteen days from such notification shall be allowed for filing of supplemental petition papers. When a petition with sufficient signatures is filed within the time allowed by this section, the Clerk shall present the petition to the Council at its next regular meeting. 
7.11 - Council procedure on Initiatory and Referendary Petitions: 
    Upon the presentation to the Council of an initiatory or referendary petition by the Clerk, the Council shall, within thirty days, unless otherwise provided by statute, either; 
1. ?Adopt the ordinance as submitted by an initiatory petition; 
2. ?Repeal the ordinance, or part thereof, referred to by a referendary petition; or 
3. ?Determine to submit the proposal provided for in the petition to the electors. 
7.12 - Submission of Initiatory and Referendary Ordinances to Electors: 
    Should the Council decide to submit the proposal to the electors, it shall be submitted at the next election held in the city for any other purpose, or, in the discretion of the Council, at a special election called for that specific purpose. In the case of an initiatory petition, if no election is to be held in the city for any other purpose within one hundred fifty days from the time the petition is presented to the Council and the Council does not enact the ordinance, then the Council shall call for a special election within ninety days from such date of presentation for the submission of the initiative proposal. The result of all elections, held under the provision of this section shall be determined by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon, except in cases where otherwise required by statute or the Constitution. 
7.13 - Ordinance Suspended: Miscellaneous Provisions on Initiatory and Referendary Petitions: 
(a) ?The presentation to the Council by the Clerk of a valid and sufficient referendary petition, containing a number of signatures equal to twenty-five percent of the registered electors of the city as of the date of the last regular city election, which signatures have been obtained within sixty days before the date of filing the petition with the Clerk, shall automatically suspend the operation of the ordinance in question, pending repeal by the Council or final determination by the electors. 
(b) ?An ordinance adopted by the electorate through initiatory proceedings may not be amended or repealed for a period of two years after the date of the election at which it was adopted and an ordinance repealed by the electorate may not be reenacted for a period of two years after the date of the election at which it was repealed. Any such ordinance may be adopted, amended or repealed at any time by appropriate referendum or initiatory procedure in accordance with the foregoing provision of this chapter or if submitted to the electorate by the Council on its own motion. 
(c) ?If two or more initiated ordinances, adopted at the same election, shall have conflicting provisions, the provision in the ordinance receiving the highest number of affirmative votes shall govern. 
CHAPTER 8. - GENERAL FINANCE—BUDGET, AUDIT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Revised municipal finance act, MCL 141.2101 et seq.; uniform budgeting and accounting act, MCL 141.421 et seq. 

8.1 - Fiscal Year: 
    The fiscal year of the city and of all the agencies shall begin on the first day of July of each year and end on the thirtieth day of June of the following year. 
8.2 - Budget Procedures: 
    The City Manager shall prepare and submit to the Council on or before the first (1st) regular meeting in April of each year a recommended budget covering the next fiscal year, and shall include therein at least the following information: 
(a) ?Detailed estimates with his supporting explanations of all proposed expenditures for each department, office, and agency of the city, showing the expenditures for corresponding items for the last preceding fiscal year in full, and for the current fiscal year to March first and estimated expenditures for the balance of the current fiscal year; 
(b) ?Statement of the bonded and other indebtedness of the city, showing the debt redemption and interest requirements, the debt authorized and unissued, and the condition of sinking funds if any; 
(c) ?Detailed estimates of all anticipated revenues of the city from sources other than taxes with a comparative statement of the amounts received by the city from each of the same or similar sources for the last preceding fiscal year in full and for the current fiscal year to March first and estimated revenues for the balance of the current fiscal year; 
(d) ?A statement of the estimated balance or deficit for the end of the current fiscal year; 
(e) ?An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from current and delinquent taxes and the amount to be raised from bond issues which, together with any available unappropriated surplus and any revenues from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures; 
(f) ?A schedule showing all recommended capital outlay expenditures during the following five fiscal years. The schedule shall list each proposed acquisition of capital equipment or facility and each proposed capital expenditure program with estimates of cost, as accurate as may be made without detailed plans and specifications. This schedule shall be for the guidance of the Council in the adoption of the regular annual budget; 
(g) ?Such other supporting information as the Council may request. 
State Law reference— Mandatory requirement that charter provide for annual appropriation of money for municipal purposes, MCL 117.3(h). 
8.3 - Budget Hearing: 
    A public hearing on the proposed budget shall be held before its final adoption at such time and place as the Council shall direct. Notice of such public hearing, a summary of the proposed budget and notice that the proposed budget is on file in the office of the Clerk shall be published at least one week in advance of the hearing. The complete proposed budget shall be on file for public inspection during office hours at the Clerk's office for a period of not less than one week prior to such hearing. 
State Law reference— Public hearings required prior to adoption of budget, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 32. 
8.4 - Adoption of Budget: 
(a) ?Not later than the first regular meeting in June of each year, the Council shall by resolution adopt a budget for the next fiscal year, shall appropriate the money needed for municipal purposes during the next fiscal year of the city and shall provide for a levy of the amount necessary to be raised by taxes upon real and personal property for municipal purposes subject to the limitations contained in Section 9.1. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for an annual appropriation, MCL 117.3(h). 
8.5 - Budget Control: 
(a) ?Except for purposes which are to be financed by the issuance of bonds or by special assessment, or for other purposes not chargeable to a budget appropriation, no money shall be drawn from the treasury of the city except in accordance with an appropriation thereof for such specific purposes, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred without an appropriation covering all payments which will be due under such obligation in the current fiscal year. The Council, by resolution may transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance, or any portion thereof, from one account, department, fund or agency to another. 
(b) ?The Council may make additional appropriations during the fiscal year for unanticipated expenditures required of the city but such additional appropriations shall not exceed the amount by which actual and anticipated revenues of the year are exceeding the revenues as estimated in the budget, unless the appropriations are necessary to relieve an emergency endangering the public health, peace, or safety. 
(c) ?Except in those cases where there is no other logical account to which an expenditure can be charged, expenditures shall not be charged directly to the contingency fund (or other similar fund). Instead, the necessary part of the appropriation for the contingency fund (or other similar fund) shall be transferred to the logical account and the expenditure then charged to such account. 
(d) ?At the beginning of each month during the fiscal year, and more often if required by the Council, the City Manager shall submit to the Council data showing the relation between the estimated and actual revenues and expenditures to date; and if it shall appear that the revenues are less than anticipated, the Council may reduce appropriations, except amounts required for debt and interest charges, to such a degree as may be necessary to keep expenditures within the revenues. 
(e) ?The balance in any budget appropriation which has not been encumbered at the end of the fiscal year shall, subject to restriction imposed or permitted by law, revert to the general fund. 
8.6 - Depository: 
    The Council shall designate depositories for city funds and shall provide for the regular deposit of all city moneys. The Council shall provide for such security for city deposits as is authorized or permitted by law, except that personal surety bonds shall not be deemed proper security. 
State Law reference— Designation of depositories, MCL 129.12; deposit of public moneys, MCL 211.43b. 
8.7 - Independent Audit: Annual Report: 
(a) ?An independent audit shall be made of all city accounts at least annually, and more frequently if deemed necessary by the Council. Such audit shall be made by a Certified Public Accountant experienced in municipal accounting selected by the Council. 
(b) ?The City Manager shall prepare an annual report of the affairs of the city including a financial report. Copies of such audit and annual report shall be made available for public inspection at the office of the City Manager. 
State Law reference— Annual accounting of public funds, Mich. Const. 1963, art. IX, § 21. 
CHAPTER 9. - GENERAL FINANCE—TAXATION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— General property tax act, MCL 211.1 et seq.; mandatory requirement that Charter provide for levy, collection and return of state, county and school taxes in conformity with the general laws of the state, MCL 117.3(i). 

9.1 - Power to Tax—Tax Limit: 
    The city shall have the power to assess taxes and to levy and collect rents, tolls, and exercise. Exclusive of any levies authorized by law to be made beyond charter tax rate limitations the annual ad valorem tax levy shall not exceed two percent of the assessed value of all real and personal property in the city. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for annually levying and collecting taxes, MCL 117.3(g); local tax restrictions, Mich. Const. 1963, art. IX, § 31. 
9.2 - Subjects of Taxation: 
    The subjects of ad valorem taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for state, county, and school purposes under the general law. Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, city taxes shall be levied, collected, and returned in the manner provided by statute. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide that subjects of taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for state, county and school purposes under general law, MCL 117.3(f); property subject to taxation, MCL 211.1 et seq. 
9.3 - Exemptions: 
    No exemptions from taxation shall be allowed except as expressly required or permitted by law. 
State Law reference— Property exempt from taxation, MCL 211.7 et seq. 
9.4 - Tax Day: 
    Subject to the exceptions provided or permitted by law, the taxable status of persons and property shall be the same as for state, county, and school purposes under the general law. 
State Law reference— Designation of tax day, MCL 211.2; time, place and method of assessment, MCL 211.10 et seq. 
9.5 - Preparation of the Assessment Roll: 
(a) ?On or before the first Monday in March in each year, the Assessor shall prepare and certify an assessment roll of all property in the city. Such roll shall be prepared as required by the general property tax act. Values shall be estimated according to recognized methods of systematic assessment. The records of the Assessor shall show separate figures for the value of the land, and of the building improvements thereon, and of personal property. The method of estimating all such values shall be as nearly uniform as possible. 
(b) ?On or before the first Monday in March, the Assessor shall give, by first class mail, a notice of any change from the previous year in the assessment value of any property or of the addition of any property to the roll of the owner as shown by such assessment roll. If the entire city is affected then notice by publication shall be sufficient. The failure to give any such notice or of the owner to receive it shall not invalidate any assessment roll or assessment thereon. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for preparation of assessment roll, MCL 117.3(i); assessment roll, MCL 211.24 et seq. 
9.6 - Board of Review: 
    The Board of Review shall be composed of three freeholders of the city who shall meet the eligibility requirements for elective officers contained in Section 5.1 and who, during their term of office, shall not be city officers or employees or be nominees or candidates for elective city office. Further, the filing by a member of the Board of Review of his nomination petition for an elective city office or the filing of a consent thereto shall constitute a resignation from the Board of Review. The appointment of members of such Board shall be based upon their knowledge and experience in property valuation. One member of the Board shall be appointed by the Council in January of each year for a term of three years, to replace the member whose term expires that year. The Council shall fix the compensation of the members of the Board. The Board of Review shall annually, in February, select its own chairman for the ensuing year, and the Assessor shall be clerk of the Board and shall be entitled to be heard at its sessions, but shall have no vote. A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for a board of review, MCL 117.3(a); board of review, MCL 211.28 et seq. 
9.7 - Duties and Functions of Board of Review: 
    For the purpose of revising and correcting assessments, the Board of Review shall have the same powers and perform like duties in all respects as are conferred by law upon and required of Boards of Review in townships, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. It shall hear the complaints of all persons considering themselves aggrieved by assessments, and, if it shall appear that any person or property has been wrongfully assessed or omitted from the roll, the Board shall correct the roll in such manner as it deems just. In all cases the roll shall be reviewed according to the facts existing on the tax day and no change in the status of any property after that day shall be considered by the Board in making its decisions. Except as otherwise provided by law, no person, other than the Board of Review, shall make or authorize any change upon or addition or corrections to, the assessment roll. It shall be the duty of the Assessor to keep a permanent record of all proceedings of the Board and to enter therein all resolutions and decisions of the Board. 
9.8 - Meetings of the Board of Review: 
(a) ?The Board of Review shall convene in its first session on the second Monday in March of each year at such time of day and place as shall be designated by the Council and shall remain in session for at least eight hours for the purpose of considering and correcting the roll. In each case in which the assessed value of any property is increased over or decreased from the amount shown on the assessment roll as prepared by the Assessor or any property is added to such roll by the Board, or the Board has resolved to consider at its second session such increasing or decreasing of an assessment or the adding of any property to such roll, the Assessor shall give notice thereof to the owner as shown by such roll, by first class mail, mailed not later than the second day following the end of the first session of the Board. Such notice shall state the date, time, place, and purpose of the second session of the Board. The failure to give any such notice or of the owner to receive it shall not invalidate any assessment roll or assessment thereon. 
(b) ?The Board of Review shall convene in its second session on the fourth Monday in March of each year at such time of day and place as shall be designated by the Council and shall continue in session until all interested persons have had an opportunity to be heard, but in no case for less than six hours. At the second session, the Board may not increase or decrease any assessment or add any property to the rolls, except in those cases in which the Board resolves at its first session to consider such increase or addition at its second session. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for meeting of board of review, MCL 117.3(i); completion of review of assessments, MCL 211.30a. 
9.9 - Notice of Meetings: 
    Notice of the time and place of the sessions of the Board of Review shall be published by the clerk at least ten days prior to each session of the Board. 
State Law reference— Open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq. 
9.10 - Endorsement of Roll: 
    After the Board of Review has completed its review of the assessment roll, and not later than the first Monday in April, the majority of its members shall endorse thereon and sign a statement to the effect that the same is the assessment roll of the city for the year in which it has been prepared. The omission of such endorsement shall not affect the validity of such roll. 
State Law reference— Completion of review of assessments prior to first Monday in April required, MCL 211.30a. 
9.11 - Clerk to Certify Tax Levy: 
    Within three days after the Council has adopted the budget for the ensuing year, the Clerk shall certify to the Assessor the total amount which the Council determines shall be raised by general ad valorem tax. He shall also certify all amounts of current or delinquent special assessments and all other amounts which the Council requires to be assessed, reassessed, or charged upon the said roll against any property or any person in accordance with the provisions of this Charter or any ordinance of the city. 
9.12 - City Tax Roll: 
    After the Board of Review has completed its review of the assessment roll, the Assessor shall prepare a copy of the Assessment Roll to be known as the "City Tax Roll," and upon receiving the certification of the several amounts to be raised, as provided in Section 9.11, the Assessor shall spread upon said tax roll the several amounts determined by the Council to be charged, assessed or reassessed against persons or property. He shall also spread thereon the amounts of the general ad valorem City tax, county tax, and school tax, according to and in proportion to the several valuations set forth in said assessment roll. To avoid fractions in computation of any tax roll, the Assessor may add to the amount of the several taxes to be raised not more than the amount prescribed by law. Any excess created thereby on any tax roll shall belong to the city. 
State Law reference— Avoidance of fractions, MCL 211.39. 
9.13 - Tax Roll Certified for Collection: 
    After spreading the taxes, the Assessor shall certify the tax roll, and the Mayor shall annex his warrant thereto directing and requiring the Treasurer to collect prior to March first of the following year, from the several persons named in said roll the several sums mentioned therein opposite their respective names as a tax or assessment and granting to him, for the purpose of collecting the taxes, assessments and charges on such roll, all the statutory powers and immunities possessed by township treasurers for the collection of taxes. On or before June first, the roll shall be delivered to the Treasurer for collection. 
State Law reference— Collection of taxes, MCL 211.44 et seq. 
9.14 - Tax Lien on Property: 
    On July first, the taxes thus assessed shall become a debt due to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed, and the amounts assessed on any interest in real property shall become a lien upon such real property, for such amounts and for all interest and charges thereon, and all personal taxes shall become a first lien on all personal property of such persons so assessed. Such lien shall take precedence over all other claims, encumbrances, and such liens to the extent provided by law and shall continue until such taxes, interest, and charges are paid. 
State Law reference— Lien for taxes, MCL 211.40. 
9.15 - Taxes Due: Notification Thereof: 
(a) ?City taxes shall be due on July first of each year. The Treasurer shall not be required to call upon all persons named in the city tax roll, nor to make personal demand for the payment of taxes, but he shall (1) publish, between June fifteenth and July first, notice of the time when said taxes will be due for collection and the penalties and fees for the late payment thereof, and (2) mail a tax bill to each person named in said roll. In cases of multiple ownership of property only one bill need be mailed. 
(b) ?Failure on the part of the Treasurer to publish said notice or mail such bills shall not invalidate the taxes on said tax roll nor release the person or property assessed from the penalties and fees provided in this chapter in case of late payment or non-payment of the same. 
9.16 - Collection Charges on Late Payment of Taxes: 
    All taxes paid on or before the thirty-first day of August shall be collected by the Treasurer without additional charge. On the first of September, the Treasurer shall add to all taxes paid thereafter a collection charge of four percent of the amount of said taxes and on the first day of October and of each succeeding month he shall add an additional one-half of one percent of said taxes for each of said months or fraction thereof that said taxes remain unpaid. Such collection charges shall not exceed six percent and shall belong to the city and constitute a charge and shall be a lien against the property to which the taxes apply, collectible in the same manner as the taxes to which they are added. If delivery of the tax roll to the Treasurer, as provided in Section 9.13, is delayed for any reason by more than thirty days after June first the application of the collection charge provided herein shall be postponed thirty days for each thirty days or major fraction thereof of such delay. 
9.17 - Failure or Refusal to Pay Personal Property Tax: 
    If any person, firm or corporation shall neglect or refuse to pay any personal property tax assessed to him or them, the Treasurer shall collect the same by seizing the personal property of such person, firm or corporation to an amount sufficient to pay such tax, fees, and charges for subsequent sale, wherever the same may be found in the state, and from which seizure no property shall be exempt. He may sell the property seized to an amount sufficient to pay the taxes and all charges in accordance with statutory provisions. The Treasurer may, if otherwise unable to collect a tax on personal property, use, in accordance with statute, the person, firm, or corporation to whom it is assessed. 
State Law reference— Failure or refusal to pay tax, MCL 211.47. 
9.18 - Delinquent Tax Roll to County Treasurer: 
    All city taxes on real property remaining uncollected by the Treasurer on the first day of March following the date when said roll was received by him shall be returned to the County Treasurer in the manner and with like effect as provided by statute for returns to the township treasurers of township, school, and county taxes. Such returns shall include all the additional assessments, charges, and fees hereinbefore provided, which shall be added to the amount assessed in said tax roll against each property or person. The taxes thus returned shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes returned to the County Treasurer are collected, as provided by law, and shall be and remain a lien upon the property against which they are assessed until paid. If by change in the law or otherwise, the Treasurer of the County of St. Clair is no longer charged with the collection of delinquent real property taxes, such delinquent taxes shall be collected in the manner then provided by law for the collection of delinquent township, school and county taxes. 
State Law reference— Return of delinquent taxes, MCL 211.55 et seq., 211.78. 
9.19 - State, County and School Taxes: 
    For the purpose of assessing and collecting taxes for state, county and school purposes, the city shall be considered the same as a township, and all provisions of law relative to the collection of and accounting for such taxes shall apply. For those purposes the Treasurer shall perform the same duties and have the same powers as are granted and imposed upon township treasurers by law. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for levy, collection and return of state, county and school taxes, MCL 117.3(i). 
CHAPTER 10. - GENERAL FINANCE—BORROWING POWER[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Revenue bond act of 1933, MCL 141.101 et seq.; revised municipal finance act, MCL 141.2101 et seq.; city authority to borrow money on the credit of the city and issue bonds therefor, MCL 117.4a(1). 

10.1 - General Borrowing: 
    Subject to the applicable provisions of State law and this Charter, the Council, by proper ordinance or resolution, may authorize the borrowing of money for any purpose within the scope of the powers vested in the City and the issuance of bonds of the City or other evidences of indebtedness therefore, and may pledge the full faith, credit, and resources of the City for the payment of the obligation created therefor. 
State Law reference— City authority to borrow money on the credit of the city and issue bonds therefor, MCL 117.4a(1). 
10.2 - Limitation on Indebtedness: 
    The City may not incur indebtedness by the issue of bonds or otherwise, in any sum which, including existing indebtedness, shall exceed ten percent of the assessed valuation of the real and personal property within the city subject to taxation as shown by the last preceding assessment roll of the city; provided, however, that in the case of fire, flood or other calamity requiring an emergency fund for the relief of the inhabitants of the City or for the repairing or rebuilding of any municipal building, works, bridges or streets, the legislative body of the City may borrow money due in not more than five years and in the amount not exceeding three-eighths of one percent ( 3/8 of 1%) of the assessed valuation of all the real and personal property in the City, notwithstanding such loan may increase the indebtedness of the City beyond the limitation fixed in this Charter; provided, further, that in computing the net bonded indebtedness for the purposes hereof, bonds issued in anticipation of the payment of special assessments, even though they are also a general obligation of the City, mortgage bonds which are secured only by a mortgage on the property or franchises of the public utility, and bonds issued to refund moneys advanced or paid on special assessments for water main extensions, shall not be included and the resources of the sinking fund pledged for the retirement of any outstanding bonds shall also be deducted from the amount of the bonded indebtedness. 
State Law reference— Limitation of net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes, MCL 117.4a(2). 
10.3 - Preparation and Record: 
    Each bond or other evidence of indebtedness shall contain on its face a statement specifying the purpose for which the same is issued and it shall be unlawful for any office of the City to use the proceeds thereof for any other purpose, and any officer who shall violate this provision shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office. All bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the City shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the Clerk, under the seal of the City. Interest coupons may be executed with the facsimile signatures of the Mayor and Clerk. A complete and detailed record of all bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the City shall be kept by the Clerk. Upon payment of any bond or other evidence of indebtedness issued by the City the record of payment shall be kept by the Clerk. Upon payment of any bond or other evidence of indebtedness the same shall be marked "cancelled." 
State Law reference— Cremation or disintegration of public obligations, MCL 129.121 et seq. 
10.4 - Unissued Bonds: 
    No unissued bonds of the City shall be issued or sold to secure funds for any purpose other than that for which they were specifically authorized. 
CHAPTER 11. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Power reassessments, MCL 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4d, 117.5; notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq.; deferment of special assessment for homesteads, MCL 211.761 et seq. 

11.1 - Special Assessment Powers: 
(a) ?The Council shall have the power to provide for assessing and reassessing the costs, or any portion thereof, of any public improvement to a special assessment district. 
(b) ?The Council shall have the power to determine, by resolution, that the whole or any part of the expense of any public improvement be defrayed by special assessment upon the property especially benefited in proportion to the benefits derived or to be derived. 
(c) ?The Council shall, in the exercise of its powers of financing the whole or part of the cost of public improvements by special assessments upon districts benefited thereby, have power to provide for the following, but this list shall not be exclusive: 
(1) ?Street improvements and facilities, including constructing, grading, widening, and, but not limited to, the paving of streets and alleys, curbs and gutters, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains, and constructing and maintaining sidewalks; 
(2) ?Construction of public parking facilities as a public improvement; 
(3) ?Assessment of single lots when any expenditures is made on any separate or single lot, parcel of land, or lands, or premises which the city is authorized to charge and collect as a special assessment against the same; 
(4) ?Assessment of the cost of construction, removal or abatement of any condition which the Council determines to be a public hazard or nuisance which is in violation of any of the ordinances of the City and dangerous to the health, safety, or welfare of the inhabitants of the City; 
(5) ?Installing a boulevard lighting system on any street, as a public improvement: provided, that the property owners of a majority of the frontage on such street or part thereof to be so improved shall petition therefor. In each case, the special assessment district for a boulevard lighting system shall be limited to the frontage of the street or part of street upon which such system is placed. 
(d) ?Whenever a single parcel of land will be required to pay twenty-five percent or more of the cost of any public improvement and any portion of that property is acquired by condemnation, or otherwise, for the purpose of the public improvement, that portion of such property which is not acquired by the city may be assessed for its proportionate share of the cost of such public improvement, exclusive of that part of such cost representing damages for injury to improvements on such property and of the proceedings required to acquire such portion of property. 
(e) ?All real property, including such as is exempt from taxation by law, shall be liable for the cost of public improvements benefiting such property, unless specifically exempted from special assessment by law. 
State Law reference— Permissible that Charter provide for assessing costs of public improvements, MCL 117.4d. 
11.2 - Detailed Procedure to be Fixed by Ordinance: 
(a) ?The Council shall prescribe, by ordinance, the complete special assessment procedure governing the initiation of projects, preparation of plans and cost estimates, creation of districts, making and confirming of assessment rolls, correction of errors in special assessment rolls, collection of assessments, refunds of excess moneys and any other matters concerning the making and financing of improvements by the special assessment method. 
(b) ?Such ordinance shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1) ?No resolution finally determining to proceed with establishing any special assessment district for the making of any public improvement shall be adopted by the Council, until cost estimates have been prepared and a public hearing has been held on the advisability of so proceeding; 
(2) ?No special assessment roll shall be finally confirmed, until after a meeting of the Council has been held for the purpose of reviewing such roll; 
(3) ?Ten days' notice of each meeting of the Council for a public hearing on the advisability of proceeding with any public improvement and to review any special assessment roll shall be given prior to the date and time of such meeting, which notice shall be published and sent by first class mail to all property owners in the proposed district, as shown by the current assessment roll of the city; 
(4) ?If, prior to the public hearing on the advisability of proceeding with the making of the improvement, written objections to the proposed improvement have been filed by the owners of property in the district who will be required to bear more than fifty percent of the amount of such special assessment, the resolution determining to proceed with the improvement shall be adopted only by the affirmative vote of six or more Council members. 
Editor's note— See Code of Ordinances, ch. 34. 
11.3 - Additional Assessments: Correction of Invalid Special Assessments: 
(a) ?Additional pro rata assessments to defray the cost of any public improvement may be made when any special assessment roll proves insufficient to pay for the improvement for which it was levied and the expenses incidental thereto, or to pay the principal and interest on bonds or other evidences of obligation issued therefor: provided that the additional pro rata assessment shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the assessment as originally confirmed, unless a meeting of the Council be held to review such additional assessment, for which meeting notices shall be published and mailed as provided in the case of the review of the original special assessment roll. 
(b) ?Whenever any special assessment shall, in the opinion of the Council, be invalid by reason of irregularity or informality in the proceedings or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge such assessment to be illegal, the Council shall, whether the improvement has been made or not, or whether any part of the assessments has been paid or not, have power to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made. All proceedings on such assessment and for collection thereof shall be conducted in the same manner as provided for the original assessment, except respecting the correction of the proceedings for the purpose of making the proceedings legal. Whenever any sum or part thereof levied upon any property in the assessment so set aside, has been paid and not refunded, the payment so made shall be applied upon the reassessment or, if the payments exceed the amount of the reassessment, refunds shall be made. 
(c) ?No judgment or decree nor any act of the Council vacating a special assessment shall destroy or impair the lien of the city upon the premises assessed for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the same or as by regular mode of proceeding might have been lawfully assessed thereupon. 
11.4 - Disposition of Excessive Special Assessments: 
    The excess by which any special assessment proves larger than the actual cost of the improvement and expenses incidental thereto may be placed in the general funds of the city if such excess is five percent or less of the assessment. If the assessment should prove larger than necessary by more than five percent the entire excess shall be refunded on a pro rata basis to the owners of the property assessed as shown by the current assessment roll of the city. Such refund shall be made by credit against future unpaid installments to the extent such installments then exist and the balance of such refund shall be in cash. No refunds may be made which contravene the provisions of any outstanding evidence of indebtedness secured in whole or part by such special assessment. 
11.5 - Contested Assessments: 
    No suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of any special assessment, unless such suit or action shall be commenced within the time permitted by law. 
State Law reference— Statement of right to file written appeal, MCL 211.746. 
11.6 - Special Assessment Accounts: 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, moneys raised by special assessment for any public improvement shall be credited to a special account and shall be used to pay for the costs of the improvement for which the assessment was levied and expenses incidental thereto and to repay any money borrowed therefor. 
11.7 - Failure to Receive Notice: 
    Failure to receive any notice required to be so sent by this chapter or by ordinance shall not invalidate any special assessment or special assessment roll. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 211.744. 
11.8 - Deferred Payment of Special Assessments: 
    The Council may provide for the deferred payment of special assessments from persons who, in the opinion of the Council and Assessor, by reason of poverty are unable to contribute toward the cost thereof. In all such cases, as a condition to the granting of such deferred payments, the city shall require mortgage security on the real property of the beneficiary, payable upon his death. 
State Law reference— Deferment of special assessments on homesteads, MCL 211.761 et seq. 
CHAPTER 12. - PURCHASES, CONTRACTS, LEASES 

12.1 - Purchase and Sale of Property: 
(a) ?The City Manager shall be responsible for the purchase and sale of all city property. 
(b) ?Comparative prices shall be obtained for the purchase or sale in amount not in excess of one thousand dollars of all materials, supplies, and public improvements, except (1) in the employment of professional services and (2) when the City Council shall determine that no advantage to the city would result. 
(c) ?In all sales or purchases in excess of one thousand dollars, (1) the sale or purchase shall be approved by the Council, (2) sealed bids shall be obtained, except that where the Council shall determine by unanimous resolution of those present at the meeting that the public interest will be best served by joint purchase with, or purchase from, another unit government, or Council approved purchasing agency, and (3) shall comply with the requirement of Section 12.2. No sale or purchase shall be divided for the purpose of circumventing the dollar value limitation contained in this section. The Council may authorize the making of public improvements or the performance of any city work by any city agency, without competitive bidding. 
(d) ?Purchases shall be made from the lowest competent bidder meeting specifications, unless the Council shall determine that the public interest will be better served by accepting a higher bid. Sales shall be made to the bidder whose bid is most advantageous to the city. In any case where a bid, other than the lowest is accepted, the Council shall set forth its reasons therefor in its resolution accepting such bid. The Council shall have the right to reject all bids. 
(e) ?All purchases and sales shall be evidenced by written contract or purchase order. 
(f) ?The city may not sell any park, cemetery or any part thereof, except in accordance with restrictions placed thereon by law. 
(g) ?The city may not purchase, sell or lease any real estate or any interest therein, except by the affirmative vote of five or more members of the Council. 
12.2 - Contracts: 
    The authority to contract on behalf of the city is vested in the Council and shall be exercised in accordance with the provisions of law, provided that purchases and sales may be made by the City Manager subject to the provisions of Section 12.1. 
    Any contract or agreement in an amount of one thousand dollars or more made with form or terms other than the standard city purchase order form shall before execution be submitted to the Attorney and his opinion obtained with respect to its form and legality. A copy of all contracts or agreements requiring such opinion shall be filed in the office of the Clerk together with a copy of the opinion. 
    Before any contract, agreement or purchase order obligating the city to pay is executed the accounting officer of the city shall first have certified that an appropriation has been made for the payment thereof, or that sufficient funds will be available if it be for a purpose being financed by the issuance of bonds or by special assessments or for some other purpose not chargeable to a budget appropriation. In the case of a contract or agreement obligating the city for periodic payments in future fiscal years for the furnishing of a continuing service or the leasing of property, such certification need not cover those payments which will be due in future fiscal years, but this exception shall not apply to a contract for the purchase or construction of a public improvement unless such purchase or construction is being financed by an installment. Certification by the accounting officer of the city shall be endorsed on each contract, agreement or purchase order requiring same or shall be filed as an attachment thereto. 
    No contract or purchase order shall be subdivided for the purpose of circumventing the dollar value limitations contained in this Section. 
    No contract shall be amended after the same has been made except upon the authority of the Council, provided that the City Manager may amend or rescind contracts for those purchases and sales made by him under the authority of Section 12.1. 
    No compensation shall be paid to any contractor except in accordance with the terms of the contract. 
    No contract shall be made with any person, firm or corporation in default to the city. 
    An individual agreement of employment shall not be deemed a contract requiring opinion by the Attorney or certification by the accounting officer of the city. 
State Law reference— Restriction on making contracts with persons in default to city, MCL 117.5(f). 
12.3 - Restriction on Powers to Lease Property: 
    The Council may not rent or let public property for a period longer than three years unless such rental or lease agreement shall have been referred to the people at a regular or special election and shall have received the approval of a majority of the electors voting thereon at such election. No such lease shall be approved by the Council for presentation to the electorate before thirty days after application therefor has been filed with the Council nor until a public hearing has been held thereon. No such lease shall be submitted to the electors unless the party leasing or renting the property has filed with the Clerk his unconditional acceptance of all terms of such lease or rental agreement. 
CHAPTER 13. - MUNICIPALLY OWNED UTILITIES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Mandates relative to public utilities, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § § 24, 25; permissible that Charter provide for operation of utilities, MCL 117.4c, 117.4f. 

13.1 - General Powers Respecting Utilities: 
    The City shall possess and hereby reserves to itself all the powers granted to cities by law to acquire, construct, own, operate, improve, enlarge, extend, repair and maintain either within or without its corporate limits and the corporate limits of St. Clair County, including, but not by the way of limitation, public utilities for supplying water, light, heat, power, gas, sewage treatment, and garbage disposal facilities, or any of them, to the municipality and the inhabitants thereof; and also to sell and deliver water, light, heat, power, gas and other public utility services without its corporate limits to an amount not to exceed the limitations set by law. 
13.2 - Management of Municipal Utilities: 
    All municipally owned or operated utilities shall be administered as a regular department of the city government under the management and supervision of the City Manager. 
13.3 - Rates: 
    The Council shall have the power to fix from time to time such just and reasonable rates and other charges as may be deemed advisable for supplying the inhabitants of the city and others which [with] such public utility services as the city may provide. There shall be no discrimination in such rates within any classification of users thereof, nor shall free service be permitted. Higher rates may be charged for service outside the corporate limits of the city. 
13.4 - Utility Rates and Charges—Collection: 
(a) ?The Council shall provide by ordinance for the collection of all public utility rates and charges of the city. Such ordinance shall provide at least: 
(1) ?That, except as otherwise provided by law, the city shall have as security for the collection of such utility rates and charges a lien upon the real property supplied by such utility, which lien shall become effective immediately upon the supplying of such utility service and shall be enforced in the manner provided in such ordinance. 
(2) ?That the terms and conditions under which utility services may be discontinued in case of delinquency in paying such rates or charges. 
(3) ?That suit may be instituted by the city before a competent tribunal for the collection of such rates or charges. 
(b) ?With respect to the collection of rates charged for water, the City shall have all the powers granted to cities by Act 178 of the Public Acts of 1939 [MCL 123.161 et seq.], as amended. 
13.5 - Disposal of Utility Plants and Property: 
    Unless approved by the affirmative vote of three-fifths of the electors voting thereon at a regular or special election, the city shall not sell, exchange, lease, or in any way dispose of any property, easements, equipment, privilege, or asset belonging to and appertaining to any municipally owned public utility which is needed to continue operating such utility. All contracts, negotiations, licenses, grants, leases, or other forms of transfer in violation of this section shall be void and of no effect as against the city. The restrictions of this section shall not apply to the sale or exchange of any articles of machinery or equipment of any city owned public utility which are worn out or useless or which have been, or could with advantage to the service be, replaced by new and improved machinery or equipment, to the leasing of property not necessary for the operation of the utility, or to the exchange of property of easements for other needed property or easements. The provisions of this section shall not extend to vacation or abandonment of streets, as provided by law. 
13.6 - Utility Rates and Charges[—Finances]: 
(a) ?The rates and charges for any municipal public utility for the furnishing of water, light, heat, power, gas or sewage treatment and garbage disposal shall be so fixed as to act least meet all the costs of such utility including depreciation. 
(b) ?Transactions pertaining to the ownership and operation by the city of each public utility shall be recorded in a separate group of accounts under an appropriate fund caption, which accounts shall be classified in accordance with generally accepted utility accounting practice. Charges for all service furnished to, or rendered by, other city departments or agencies shall be recorded. An annual report shall be prepared to show fairly the financial position of each utility and the results of its operation, which report shall be available for inspection at the office of the Clerk. 
CHAPTER 14. - PUBLIC UTILITY FRANCHISES 

14.1 - Granting of Public Utility Franchises: 
(a) ?Public utility franchises and all renewals and extensions thereof and amendments thereto shall be granted only by ordinance. No exclusive franchise shall ever be granted. No franchise shall be granted for a longer period than thirty years. 
(b) ?No franchise ordinance which is not subject to revocation at the will of the Council shall be enacted nor become operative until the same shall have first been referred to the people at a regular or special election and received the affirmative vote of three-fifths of the electors voting thereon. No such franchise ordinance shall be approved by the Council for referral to the electorate before thirty days after application therefor has been filed with the Council nor until a public hearing has been held thereon, nor until the grantee named therein has filed with the Clerk his unconditional acceptance of all the terms of such franchise. No special election for such purpose shall be ordered, unless the expense of holding such election, as determined by the Council, shall have first been paid to the Treasurer by the grantee. 
(c) ?A franchise ordinance, or renewal or extension thereof, or amendment thereto, which is subject to revocation at the will of the Council may be enacted by the Council without referral to the voters, but shall not be enacted unless it shall have been complete in the form in which it is finally enacted and shall have so been on file in the office of the Clerk for public inspection for at least four weeks after publication of a notice that such ordinance is so on file. 
State Law reference— Franchises limited to thirty (30) years, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 30; submitted to electors required if irrevocable, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 25; expense of special election to be paid by grantee, MCL 117.5(i). 
14.2 - Conditions of Public Utility Franchises: 
    All public utility franchises granted after the adoption of this Charter, whether it be so provided in the granting ordinance or not, shall be subject to the following rights of the city, but this enumeration shall not be exclusive or impair the right of the Council to insert in such franchise any provision within the power of the city to impose or require: 
(a) ?To repeal the same for misuse, non-use, or failure to comply with the provisions thereof; 
(b) ?To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard of efficiency; 
(c) ?To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates; 
(d) ?To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof; 
(e) ?To use, control and regulate the use of its streets, alleys, bridges, and other public places and the space above and beneath them; 
(f) ?To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the Council to be conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public. 
14.3 - Regulation of Rates: 
    All public utility franchises shall make provision therein for fixing rates, fares, and charges and may provide for readjustments thereof at periodic intervals. The value of the property of the utility used as a basis for fixing such rates, fares, and charges shall, in no event, include a value predicated upon the franchise, goodwill or prospective profits. 
14.4 - Use of Public Places by Utilities: 
    Every public utility, whether it has a franchise or not, shall pay such part of the cost of improvement or maintenance of streets, alleys, bridges, and other public places as shall arise from its use thereof and shall protect and save the city harmless from all damages arising from said use. Every such public utility may be required by the city to permit joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys, and other public places of the city by the city and by other public utilities insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental therefor. In the absence of agreement and upon application by any public utility, the Council shall provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefor, and the arbitration award shall be final. 
CHAPTER 15. - CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Charter may provide for a system of civil service for its employees, MCL 117.4i(h). 

15.1 - Personnel Board: 
    The Council may at any time it deems necessary provide by ordinance for a civil service system under the merit principle of personnel management. Said ordinances shall be supplemented by rules and regulations based on said ordinance. The civil service system shall provide at least the following: 
(a) ?For a professional and impartial approach to all municipal personnel problems based solely on the fitness, training and experience of the individual with no discrimination on account of racial, political, or religious backgrounds or opinions; 
(b) ?For a non-salaried Personnel Board, hereinafter referred to as "Board" in this chapter, consisting of three citizens who shall be appointed by the Council. The Board members shall hold no other municipal office or position and shall be known to be in sympathy with the intents and purposes of Chapter XV [15] of this Charter. The Board shall develop its own rules of procedure; 
(c) ?That the City Manager shall serve as secretary to the Board but shall be permitted to designate a deputy to perform this work in his place for the Board; 
(d) ?That with the assistance of, but not subject to the control of the Board, the City Manager shall develop a classification and pay plan based on the most modern and accepted principles of such plan; 
(e) ?For the formulation by the Board of rules and regulations covering the selection, promotion and discharge of municipal employees. Where competitive tests are used and eligible lists created, appointments shall be made from the three candidates standing highest on such lists, or from the total number of candidates who pass such test, whichever number is less. No person covered by the system shall be suspended, demoted or discharged except for cause or without the opportunity for a hearing before the Board, but nothing shall prevent the discharge of any person when the position he holds has been abolished or consolidated with another position or when a reduction of personnel is necessary; 
(f) ?For a system of grievance and appeals to the Board by employees who have been suspended, demoted or discharged and who believe that their cases have not been given proper treatment by the City Manager or the appointing authority, the Board shall investigate each such appeal immediately after receiving from an employee a statement in writing setting forth the nature of the appeal and the reasons therefore [therefor], provided that the Board must receive the appeal within thirty days following an employee's suspension, demotion or discharge. After a full and proper hearing of the appeal, at which the employee shall have the right to be represented by counsel, the Board shall have the power to decide any of the following: (1) To uphold the City Manager's or the appointing authority's action; (2) to require by majority vote reconsideration of the suspension, demotion or discharge and a new decision of reinstatement, or a lesser penalty or confirmation of the original demotion or discharge to be made by the City Manager or the appointing authority; or (3) upon unanimous decision of the Board, to reverse the action of the City Manager or appointing authority causing the affected employee to be restored to his previous status, including payment of back pay lost by said employee, or taking such other action as the Board deems appropriate. In all employee appeal cases, the unanimous decision and order of the Board shall be final and the affected parties shall comply therewith, provided the right of appeal of an affected employee as provided by law shall be recognized; 
(g) ?That the City Manager or the appointing authority shall be required to fully advise the Board of any disciplinary action taken as soon thereafter as is practicable; 
(h) ?That any employee or official of the City of Algonac who has held a position or office included in the civil service system for a period of at least one year prior to the date of the establishment of a civil service system may be retained without preliminary or performance tests and shall thereafter be subject in all respects to the provisions of this chapter, the civil service system ordinance, and the personnel rules and regulations; 
(i) ?For the restriction of active participation in the municipal policies of the City of Algonac, it being the stated policy, however not to deny to employees and officials covered by the civil service system the rights of such persons to engage in their normal rights and responsibilities as citizens; 
(j) ?That the civil service system provisions of this Chapter, the civil service system ordinance, and the personnel rules and regulations shall apply to all employees of the city except officials holding elective offices, the administrative officers, technical consultants employed under contract by the city, members of boards and commissions of the city, and part-time officers and employees. 
15.2 - Intent of the Merit System: 
    It is the intent of this Charter [chapter] to secure the establishment of a program of a civil service system under the merit principle as an integral part of the administrative service, to the end that the administration of the city's personnel program will be done in a manner equitable to the employees without handicapping or curtailing responsible administrative officers and by increased efficiency and improved administration will be economical to the citizens. 
CHAPTER 16. - MISCELLANEOUS 

16.1 - City Liability: 
    The liability of the City shall be governed by Act 170 Public Acts of 1964 [MCL 691.1401 et seq.] as amended. 
16.2 - Records to be Public: 
    All records of the city shall be public, shall be kept in city offices except when required for official reasons or for purposes of safe-keeping to be elsewhere and shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide that all records of the municipality shall be public, MCL 117.3(l); freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq. 
16.3 - Definitions: 
    Wherever used in this Charter: 
(a) ?The word "state" shall mean the State of Michigan; 
(b) ?The word "city" shall mean the City of Algonac; 
(c) ?The word "council" shall mean the City Council; 
(d) ?Words referring to the several offices where not preceded by the word "city" shall be deemed to mean such offices of the city, unless the context implies otherwise; 
(e) ?The terms "Council" and "City Council" shall be construed as meaning "Commission," "Council," "Common Council" or "Governing Body" for the purpose of such general laws of the State as use[d] one or the other of such latter terms in referring to the legislative body of the city; 
(f) ?Words imparting the singular number only may extend to an embrace the plural number; the words imparting the plural number may be applied and limited to the singular number; words imparting the masculine gender only may extend and be applied to those of the feminine and neuter gender; 
(g) ?The word "person" may extend and be applied to bodies corporate as well as to individuals; 
(h) ?The words "written" and "in writing" may be construed to include printing, engraving, typewriting and lithographing, and telegraphic communications, except that this rule shall not apply to signatures. 
State Law reference— Definitions and rules of construction applicable to state statutes, MCL 8.3 et seq. 
16.4 - Publications and Mailing of Notices: 
    The requirement contained in this Charter for the publishing or publication of notices or ordinances shall be met by publishing an appropriate insertion in a newspaper published in the English language for the dissemination of news of a general character which newspaper shall have had a general circulation at regular intervals in the City of Algonac for at least two years immediately preceding the time that it is used for such publication purposes. The affidavit of the printer or publisher of such newspaper or of his foreman or principal clerk, annexed to a printed copy of such notice, ordinance or proceeding taken from the paper in which it was published and specifying the times of publication shall be prima facie evidence of such publication. 
    In any case in which this Charter requires the mailing of notices, the affidavit of the officer or employee responsible for such mailing [sic] that such notice was mailed shall be prima facie evidence of such mailing. 
16.5 - Trusts: 
    All trusts established for any municipal purpose shall be used and continued in accordance with the terms of such trust, subject to the cy pres doctrine. The Council may in its discretion receive and hold any property in trust for any municipal purpose and shall apply the same to the execution of such trust and for no other purposes except in cases where the cy pres doctrine shall apply. 
16.6 - Quorum: 
    Except as provided otherwise in this Charter, a quorum of any board or commissioner created by or pursuant to this Charter shall be a majority of the members of such board or commission in office at the time, but not less than two members. 
16.7 - Sundays and Holidays: 
    Whenever the date fixed by this Charter or by ordinance for the doing or completion of any act falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, such act shall be done or completed on the next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or legal holiday. 
16.8 - Penalties for Misconduct in Office: 
    Any officer of the city found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of the violation of the provisions of this Charter may be punished by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars or imprisonment for not to exceed ninety days or both in the discretion of the court. Any officer so convicted shall be deemed to be guilty of malfeasance of office and his office shall thereby be declared vacant. 
16.9 - Chapter and Section Headings: 
    The chapter, section and subsection headings used in this Charter are for convenience only and shall not be considered as part of the Charter. 
16.10 - Amendments: 
    This Charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided by law. Should two or more amendments adopted at the same election have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the largest affirmative vote shall prevail as to those provisions. 
State Law reference— Power to adopt and amend Charter, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 22; Charter amendment procedure, MCL 117.21 et seq. 
16.11 - No Estoppel: 
    No estoppel may be created against the city. 
16.12 - Processes Against City: 
    All process against the city shall run against the city in the corporate name thereof and may be served by leaving a true copy with the Mayor, Clerk or Attorney. 
16.13 - Severability of Charter Provisions: 
    If any provision, section, article or clause of this Charter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be found to be invalid by a court such invalidity shall not affect any remaining portion or application of the Charter which can be given effect without the invalid portion or application, provided such remaining portions or applications are not determined by the court to be inoperable, and to this end this Charter is declared to be severable. 
SCHEDULE 
1. ?Purpose of Schedule Chapter: The purpose of this schedule chapter is to inaugurate the government of the City of Algonac under this Charter and provide the transition from the government of the city under the charter of December 27, 1966. 
2. ?Election to Adopt Charter: 
(a) ?This Charter shall be submitted to a vote of the registered electors of the City of Algonac at the regular Primary Election to be held on August 6, 1974. This election shall be conducted by the officers under the existing charter charged with the conduct and supervision of elections, and shall follow the election procedures and be canvassed in the manner prescribed by state law. 
(b) ?If, at said election, a majority of the electors voting thereon shall vote in favor of the adoption of this Charter, then the City Clerk shall perform all other acts required by law to carry this Charter into effect. 
3. ?Form of Ballot: The form of the question of submission of this Charter shall be as follows: 
    Shall the proposed Charter of the City of Algonac drafted by the Charter Commission which was elected October 23, 1973 be adopted? 
    YES NO 
4. ?If the canvass of the votes upon the adoption of this chapter [Charter] shows it to have been adopted, it shall take effect and become law as the Charter of the city for all purposes 8:00 P.M. on the date of report submitted by the Board of Canvassers. 
5. ?Elective Officers of the City: 
(a) ?Each person who held any elective office of the City on the effective date of this Charter, shall continue in the office to which he has been elected, or appointed to fill a vacancy, for the term for which he was elected or appointed. They shall conduct their several offices subject to the provisions of this Charter. 
(b) ?At the regular city election which shall be held on Tuesday following the first Monday in November, 1974, there shall be elected four councilmen and they shall serve for terms beginning on the Monday following their election and expiring as in this Charter provided. Three councilmen whose terms do not expire this year shall continue in office until such terms expire. 
6. ?Administrative Officers: Notwithstanding any other requirements or limitations contained in this Charter, the persons who held any appointive or administrative offices of the city on the effective date of this Charter shall continue in such offices for the balance of the terms to which each was, respectively, appointed and as though appointed under the provisions of this Charter, and shall perform their several duties and, in all respects, be subject to the provisions thereof. 
7. ?Council Action: In all cases involving the transition of the city government from that under the previous charter to that under this Charter, which are not covered by this Schedule, the Council shall supply necessary details and procedures and may adopt such rules, regulations and ordinances as may be required therefor. 
8. ?Vested Rights and Liabilities: 
    After the effective date of this Charter, the city and all its agencies shall be vested with all property, moneys, contracts, rights, credits, effects and the records, files, books, and papers belonging to it under and by virtue of the previous charter. No right or liability, contract, lease, or franchise, either in favor of or against the city, existing at the time this Charter became effective, and no suit or prosecution of any character shall be affected in any manner by any change resulting from the adoption of this Charter, but the same shall stand or proceed as if no change had been made. All taxes, debts, and liabilities due to the city from any person, and all fines and penalties, imposed and existing at the time of such change, shall be collected by the city. All trusts established for any municipal purpose shall be continued in accordance with the terms thereof, subject to the cy pres doctrine. 
    The undersigned members of the Charter Commission for the City of Algonac do hereby attest and confirm that the foregoing is a true and correct copy of the proposed Charter for the City of Algonac adopted at a special meeting of the Charter Commission held on April 19, 1974. 
    Arthur J. Delonnay 
    Alexander Wnuk 
    Robert R. Moehring 
    H.R. Seaman 
    R.L. Haag 
    Allene Stewart 
    Robert L. Ford, Vice-Chairman 
    Helen M. Kane, Chairman 
STATE OF MICHIGAN 
COUNTY OF ST. CLAIR 
    At a Special Meeting of the Charter Commission of the City of Algonac held on the 19th day of April, 1974 the following members of the Charter Commission were present: Commissioners—Kane, Ford, Stewart, Delonnay, Wnuk, Moehring, Seaman, Haag and City Clerk—Nichols. 
    At such meeting the following resolution was offered by Commissioner Kane, and seconded by Commissioner Moehring: 
    "Resolved, that the Charter Commission of the City of Algonac does hereby adopt the foregoing proposed charter for the City of Algonac and the Secretary of this Commission is directed to transmit two copies of this Charter to the Governor of the State of Michigan for his approval in accordance with statute." 
Yeas: Kane, Moehring, Ford, Stewart, Seaman, Haag 
No: Wnuk, Delonnay 
Absent: Owen 
    The Chairman declared the foregoing resolution carried and requested Commission members to authenticate said resolution and also the two copies of the Charter to be presented to the Governor. 
    The meeting adjourned subject to the call of the Chairman. 
Allene Stewart, Secretary of the Charter Commission of the City of Algonac, Michigan 
    The undersigned hereby declare the above to be a true and correct copy of the resolution adopted by the Charter Commission on April 19, 1974. 
Alexander Wnuk 
Robert R. Moehring 
Robert L. Ford 
Arthur J. Delonnay 
H. R. Seaman 
R.L. Haag 
Allene Stewart 
Helen M. Kane, Chairman 
STATE OF MICHIGAN 
COUNTY OF ST. CLAIR 
    Allene Stewart, Secretary of the Charter Commission of the City of Algonac, being duly sworn says that at an election duly called and held in the City of Algonac on October 23, 1973, the following named persons were duly elected as the Charter Commission for the city, namely: Helen M. Kane, Robert L. Ford, Allene Stewart, Robert L. Haag, Arthur J. Delonnay, George E. Owen, Robert R. Moehring, Alexander Wnuk and Harold R. Seaman, and that the annexed and foregoing Charter was duly adopted by said Charter Commission for submission to the electors of the city. 
    Allene Stewart, Secretary of the Charter Commission of the City of Algonac, Michigan 
    Dated: April 19, 1974 
    Subscribed and sworn to before me this 19th day of April, 1974. 
    Fern Nichols 
    Notary Public 
    St. Clair County, Mich. 
    My commission expires: November 30, 1976 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
    This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Legislation Date Section Section 
this Charter Ref. of 10-23-1973 10-23-1973 — Preamble — Ch. 1—Ch. 16 — Schedule Amd. of 11-6-1984 11-6-1984 — 3.5 — 7.2  
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Code designated and cited. 
    This codification of ordinances shall be known and cited as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Algonac, Michigan." Such Code may be cited as the "Algonac Code." 
(Code 1988, § 1-1) 
State Law reference— Codification authority, MCL 117.5b. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with the intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Generally. When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general. All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the council may be effectuated. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words, technical phrases and words and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings. 
    Agencies, officers. Any reference to any local, state or federal agency or officer shall include any successor agency or officer. 
    Charter. The term "Charter" means the Home Rule Charter of the City of Algonac, Michigan, and includes any amendment to such Charter. 
    City. The term "city" means the City of Algonac, Michigan. 
    City council, council. The term "city council" or "council" means the city council of the City of Algonac, Michigan. 
    Code. The term "Code" or "this Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Algonac, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1, and as modified by amendment, revision and by the adoption of new chapters, articles, divisions or sections. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done, as provided in this Code or in any order issued pursuant to this Code, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday it shall be excluded. When the time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a legal holiday, from 12:00 midnight to 12:00 midnight, shall be excluded. 
    County. The term "county" means the County of St. Clair in the State of Michigan. 
    Crime. The term "crime" means an act or omission forbidden by law that is not designated as a civil infraction and that is punishable upon conviction by any one or more of the following: 
(1) ?Imprisonment. 
(2) ?Fine not designated a civil fine. 
(3) ?Other penal discipline. 
    Gender. A word importing gender extends and is applied to both genders and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well. 
    Health officer or health department. The term "health officer" or "health department" means the county health officer or the county health department. 
    MCL. The abbreviation "MCL" means the Michigan Compiled Laws, as amended or revised, and any successor statute. 
    Municipal civil infraction. The term "municipal civil infraction" means an act or omission that is prohibited by this Code or any ordinance of the city, but which is not a crime under this Code or other ordinance, and for which civil sanctions, including, without limitation, fines, damages, expenses and costs, may be ordered, as authorized by Chapter 87 of Public Act No. 236 of 1961 (MCL 600.8701 et seq.), as amended. A municipal civil infraction is not a lesser included offense of a violation of this Code that is a criminal offense. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
    Officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency. Whenever any officer, employee, department, board, commission, or other agency is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Algonac, Michigan." Whenever, by the provisions of this Code, any officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency of the city is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty, reference to such officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency shall mean and include such officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency or deputy or authorized subordinate. 
    Person. The term "person" and its derivatives and the term "whoever" includes a natural person, partnership, association, legal entity or a corporate body or any body of persons corporate or incorporate. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term "person" or "whoever" as applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof. 
    Public acts. References to public acts are references to the Public Acts of Michigan. (For example, a reference to Public Act No. 279 of 1909 is a reference to Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1909.) Any reference to a public act, whether by act number or by short title is a reference to the act as amended or revised, or any successor act. 
    Shall/may. The term "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The term "may" is permissive. 
    State. The term "the state" or "this state" means the State of Michigan. 
    Tense. Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context, all words used in this Code indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of adoption of this Code but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any act, event or requirement for which provision is made therein, either as a power, immunity, requirement or prohibition. 
(Code 1988, § 1-2; Ord. No. 96-01, § 1, 1-9-1996) 
State Law reference— Rules of construction, MCL 8.3 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Interpretation of Code. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this Code, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the interpretation of this Code as those governing the interpretation of the Public Acts of Michigan. 
(Code 1988, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Code does not affect prior offenses or rights. 
(a) ?Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code. 
(b) ?The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any city ordinance on the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-5. - Captions. 
    Headings and captions used in this Code following the chapter, article, division and section numbers, are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section. 
(Code 1988, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-6. - References and notes. 
    State law references and editor's note in this Code are explanatory only and should not be deemed a part of the text of any section. The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are intended merely to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
(Code 1988, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-7. - Application to future legislation. 
    All of the provisions of this chapter, not incompatible with future legislation, shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this Code unless otherwise specifically provided. 
(Code 1988, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-8. - Reference to other sections. 
    Whenever in one section reference is made to another section of this Code, such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision. 
(Code 1988, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-9. - Reference to offices. 
    Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of the city, exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary. 
(Code 1988, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-10. - Certain provisions saved from repeal. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code, when not inconsistent with this Code, shall affect any ordinance: 
(1) ?Levying annual taxes; 
(2) ?Appropriating money; 
(3) ?Authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money; 
(4) ?Establishing utility rates; 
(5) ?Establishing franchises or granting special rights to certain persons; 
(6) ?Authorizing public improvements; 
(7) ?Authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property; 
(8) ?Annexing or detaching territory; 
(9) ?Granting or accepting easements, plats or dedication of land to public use; 
(10) ?Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(11) ?Establishing or prescribing grades in the city; 
(12) ?Prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any city officers or employees; 
(13) ?Prescribing traffic and parking restrictions pertaining to specific streets; 
(14) ?Pertaining to rezoning; 
(15) ?Which is not of a general and permanent nature; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office. No offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of the Code shall be affected. 
(Code 1988, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-11. - Amendment procedure. 
    This Code shall be amended by ordinance. The title of each amendatory ordinance, adapted to the particular circumstances and purposes of the amendment, shall be substantially as follows, when to: 
(1) ?Amend any section: 
    An Ordinance to amend section _____ (or sections _____ and _____) of the Code of Ordinances, City of Algonac, Michigan. 
(2) ?Insert a new section or chapter: 
    An Ordinance to amend the Code of Ordinances, City of Algonac, Michigan, by adding a new section _____ (new sections _____ and _____ or a new chapter _____, as the case may be) which new section (sections or chapter) shall be designated as section _____ (sections _____ and _____) (or proper designation if a chapter is added) of said Code. 
(3) ?Repeal a section or chapter: 
    An Ordinance to repeal section _____ (sections _____ and _____, or chapter _____, as the case may be) of the Code of Ordinances, City of Algonac, Michigan. 
(Code 1988, § 1-10) 
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a) ?By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b) ?In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c) ?When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1) ?Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2) ?Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3) ?Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4) ?Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5) ?Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted in the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1988, § 1-11) 
Sec. 1-13. - Severability. 
(a) ?It is the legislative intent of the city council in adopting this Code, that all provisions and sections of this Code be liberally construed to protect and preserve the peace, health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. If any provision or section of this Code is held unconstitutional or invalid, such holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of any of the remaining provisions or sections, it being the intent that this Code shall stand, notwithstanding the invalidity of any provision or section thereof. 
(b) ?The provisions of this section shall apply to the amendment of any section of this Code whether or not the wording of this section is set forth in the amendatory ordinance. 
(Code 1988, § 1-12) 
Sec. 1-14. - General penalties and sanctions for violations of Code and city ordinances; continuing violations; injunctive relief. 
(a) ?Unless a violation of this Code or any ordinance of the city is specifically designated in the Code or ordinance as a municipal civil infraction or a civil infraction, the violation shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor. 
(b) ?The penalty for a misdemeanor violation shall be a fine not exceeding $500.00 (plus cost of prosecution), or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both, unless a specific penalty is otherwise provided for the violation by this Code or any ordinance. However, unless otherwise provided by law, a person convicted of a violation of this Code which substantially corresponds to a violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of imprisonment is 93 days shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and costs of prosecution or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 93 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(c) ?The sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil infraction shall be a civil fine as follows: 
(1) ?Unless otherwise specifically provided for a particular municipal civil infraction violation by this Code or any ordinance, the civil fine for a violation shall be not less than $50.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. 
(2) ?Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeated violations by a person of any requirement or provisions of this Code or any ordinance. As used in this section, the term "repeat offense" means a second (or any subsequent) municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision: 
a. ?Committed by a person within any six-month period (unless some other period is specifically provided by the Code or any ordinance); and 
b. ?For which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. 
(3) ?Unless otherwise specifically provided by this Code or any ordinance for a particular municipal civil infraction violation, the increased fine for a repeat offense shall be as follows: 
a. ?The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be no less than $250.00, plus costs. 
b. ?The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any subsequent repeat offense shall be no less than $500.00, plus costs. 
(d) ?A "violation" includes any act which is prohibited or made or declared to be unlawful or an offense by this Code or any ordinance; and any omission or failure to act where the act is required by this Code or any ordinance. 
(e) ?Each day on which any violation of this Code or any ordinance continues constitutes a separate offense and shall be subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate offense. 
(f) ?In addition to any remedies available at law, the city may bring an action for an injunction or other process against a person to restrain, prevent or abate any violation of this Code or any city ordinance. 
(Code 1988, § 1-13; Ord. No. 96-01, § 1, 1-9-1996; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 12-20-2011) 
State Law reference— Limitation on penalties, MCL 117.4i(k). 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Home rule city act, MCL 117.1 et seq.; standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.; open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq.; freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-19. - Compensation of mayor and councilmembers. 
    Each councilmember and the mayor shall receive $40.00 for each regular meeting and $10.00 for each special meeting attended, but the compensation shall not exceed $1,200.00 in any fiscal year. The mayor, in addition, shall receive the sum of $200.00 per year. 
(Code 1988, § 2-21; Ord. No. 2007-01, § 1, 6-5-2007) 
Secs. 2-20—2-41. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES (RESERVED) 

Secs. 2-42—2-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-71—2-98. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Michigan zoning enabling act, MCL 125.3101 et seq.; Michigan planning enabling act, MCL 125.3801 et seq. 

Sec. 2-99. - Members; number, appointment. 
    The planning commission shall consist of nine members who shall represent insofar as is possible different professions or occupations, and who shall be appointed by the mayor. An appointment shall always be subject to the approval by a majority vote of the members elect of the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 17-21; Ord. No. 107, art. II, 4-16-1962) 
Sec. 2-100. - Compensation. 
    Members of the planning commission may be compensated at a rate to be determined by the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 17-22; Ord. No. 107, art. II, 4-16-1962; Ord. No. 2011-02, § 1, 5-17-2011) 
Sec. 2-101. - Term. 
    The term of each planning commission member shall be three years, except that three members of the first planning commission to be so appointed shall serve for the term of one year, three for a term of two years, and three for a term of three years. All members shall hold office until their successors are appointed. 
(Code 1988, § 17-23; Ord. No. 107, art. II, 4-16-1962) 
Sec. 2-102. - Removal. 
    The city council may remove a member of the planning commission for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon written charges and after a public hearing. Before casting a vote on a matter on which a member may reasonably be considered to have a conflict of interest, the member shall disclose the potential conflict of interest to the planning commission. The member is disqualified from voting on the matter if so provided by the bylaws or by a majority vote of the remaining members of the planning commission. Failure of a member to disclose a potential conflict of interest as required by this subsection constitutes malfeasance in office. Unless the city council, by ordinance, defines conflict of interest for the purposes of this section, the planning commission shall do so in its bylaws. 
(Code 1988, § 17-24; Ord. No. 107, art. II, 4-16-1962) 
Sec. 2-103. - Duties. 
    The duties and responsibilities of the planning commission shall be those set forth in the Michigan zoning enabling act, Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3101 et seq.) and the Michigan planning enabling act, Public Act No. 33 of 2008 (MCL 125.3801 et seq.). 
(Code 1988, § 17-25; Ord. No. 107, art. III, 4-16-1962) 
Secs. 2-104—2-134. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HISTORICAL COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Historical records and sites, MCL 399.1 et seq.; municipal historical commissions, MCL 399.171 et seq.; local historic districts act, MCL 399.201 et seq. 

Sec. 2-135. - Created. 
    There is hereby created for the city a commission hereafter to be known as the city historical commission. 
(Code 1988, § 7-40; Ord. No. 191, 3-6-1990) 
Sec. 2-136. - Composition; appointment; terms. 
    The city historical commission shall consist of nine members to be appointed by the mayor. An appointment shall always be subject to the approval by a majority vote of the members elect of the city council. The first nine members appointed shall determine the length of their first terms by lot, so that there are originally three three-year terms, three two-year terms and three one-year terms. Subsequent terms shall be for three one-year periods. 
(Code 1988, § 7-41; Ord. No. 191, 3-6-1990) 
Sec. 2-137. - Officers. 
    The city historical commission shall each year elect one of its members as chairperson and shall elect such other officers from its membership as it may deem necessary. 
(Code 1988, § 7-42; Ord. No. 191, 3-6-1990) 
Sec. 2-138. - Meetings. 
    The city historical commission shall hold meetings regularly, at least once in each month, and shall designate the time and place thereof. 
(Code 1988, § 7-43; Ord. No. 191, 3-6-1990) 
Sec. 2-139. - Rules of procedure; records. 
    The city historical commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of its proceedings. 
(Code 1988, § 7-44; Ord. No. 191, 3-6-1990) 
Sec. 2-140. - Functions. 
    The functions of the city historical commission shall be to further public interest in all matters relating to the history of the city and its environs, and to that end it may acquire and maintain appropriate exhibits, cooperate in educational and research programs, and issue bulletins and other publications. 
(Code 1988, § 7-45; Ord. No. 191, 3-6-1990) 
Sec. 2-141. - General powers and duties. 
    The powers and duties of the city historical commission shall be as follows: 
(1) ?To acquire, collect, own and exhibit in the name of the city articles of historical interest and value which pertain to the history of the city and its environs; 
(2) ?With the approval of the city council and in the name of the city, to acquire, take and hold, by purchase, gift, devise, bequest or otherwise, such real and personal property as may be proper for carrying out the objects and functions for which it is established, and any property, real or personal, received in trust shall be held in the name of the city but in conformity with the terms of the trust; 
(3) ?To otherwise promote public interest in and to preserve the history of the city and its environs; 
provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to abridge, invade, supplant or change the powers and duties of the other commissions, departments, boards and agencies of the city. 
(Code 1988, § 7-46; Ord. No. 191, 3-6-1990) 
Sec. 2-142. - Expenditures. 
    Neither the city historical commission nor any of its members shall incur any expense or create any obligation or liability upon the city. If any expenditure of city funds may be required in connection with the functioning of the commission, prior approval of such expenditures shall first be obtained from the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 7-47; Ord. No. 191, 3-6-1990) 
Sec. 2-143. - Historical society. 
(a) ?The city historical commission may create, if it deems it necessary and convenient in achieving its objects and purposes, a historical society consisting of persons interested in discovering and preserving the history of the city and its environs. The historical society shall exist for the sole purpose of assisting the commission in achieving its aims and purposes. 
(b) ?The city historical commission, upon creating a historical society, shall determine the fees or dues to be charged for membership in the society. All dues or fees so collected shall be used and applied in conformance with the exercise of the powers and the duties enumerated in the commission for the purpose of furthering public interest in the history of the city and its environs. 
(c) ?The city historical commission shall, on the last day of each month, file with the controller and city treasurer a report giving the date of collection or receipt of all money collected or received by the commission and shall pay monthly into the city treasury all moneys so collected. 
(Code 1988, § 7-48; Ord. No. 191, 3-6-1990) 
Sec. 2-144. - Reports to city council. 
    In addition to financial reports required by this division, the commission shall make an annual report of its activities to the city council and shall make such other reports as the city council may from time to time direct. 
(Code 1988, § 7-49; Ord. No. 191, 3-6-1990) 
Secs. 2-145—2-171. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Revised municipal finance act, MCL 141.2101 et seq.; uniform budgeting and accounting act, MCL 141.421 et seq.; deposit of public moneys, MCL 211.43b. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-172—2-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COST RECOVERY FOR EMERGENCY RESPONSES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Police and fire protection, MCL 41.801 et seq.; expenses for reimbursement for emergency response, MCL 769.1f; environmental remediation, MCL 324.20101 et seq. 

Sec. 2-196. - Purpose. 
    In order to protect the city from extraordinary expenses resulting from the use of city resources in response to certain incidents involving the use of emergency resources of the city, this division authorizes the imposition of charges to recover where there is a cost incurred in responding to incidents. Authority for the enactment of these provisions is set forth in the police and fire protection act, Public Act No. 33 of 1951 (MCL 41.801 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 2-197. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bomb threat means the verbal or written threat of a bomb or other explosive device, which if discharged as threatened, would violate federal, state or local law. 
    Emergency service means a response by police, fire or public works department, or other responders on behalf of the city to an emergency incident, or to a call for assistance. 
    Emergency service fee means the cost incurred by the city as a result of providing emergency services including police, fire, or other support services to a person within the city, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1) ?Officer expenses incurred through police services, by the fire department, public services department, or other public officials, or bodies, third parties engaged by the city in responding to the incident. Costs and expenses shall include cost of equipment, operations, personnel, materials used, and all other expenses, including but not limited to, employee wages, fringe benefits, administrative overhead, and costs of equipment, including depreciation. 
(2) ?Other costs and expenses incurred by the city in providing the emergency service or attempting to collect a fee including legal and engineering fees, litigation costs and expenses, supplies used directly or indirectly in the incident. 
(3) ?Costs incurred in accounting for emergency services including billing and collection costs. 
(4) ?Costs associated with deployment, including costs associated with dispatch and return of emergency resources. 
    False alarm means any automated or manual device designed to request or summon emergency assistance which device is activated intentionally or otherwise, in the absence of an actual need for emergency assistance. The most senior person responding to a false alarm shall make the determination that there was no actual need for emergency assistance. A false alarm shall not be deemed to have occurred if: 
(1) ?Caused by an act of God (i.e., a lightning storm, power failure, etc.); 
(2) ?It originates from a motor vehicle alarm system; or 
(3) ?Has not occurred more frequently than three times in 30 days or five times in 12 months. 
    Nonresident means a person or entity that does not have a primary residence in the city, own real property in the city, or have a principal office or place of business within the city. 
    Responsible party means any individual, firm, corporation, limited liability company, or any other legal entity responsible in whole or in part for causing the need for emergency service, or any person receiving emergency services, or any owner, tenant, occupant, or party in control of real and personal property from which, onto which, or related to which, there is an emergency response incident and service provided. All the foregoing parties are jointly and severally responsible. The city may proceed against any or all such persons, or entities. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 2-198. - Duty to remove and cleanup. 
    It shall be the duty of any property owner or any person or any other entity which causes or controls leakage, spillage, or any other dissemination of dangerous or hazardous substances or materials to immediately remove such and clean up the area of such spillage in such a manner that the area involved is fully restored to its condition prior to such happening in accordance with all applicable state and federal laws. 
(Code 1988, § 8-52; Ord. No. 94-11, 7-5-1994) 
Sec. 2-199. - Liability for emergency service fee. 
    Emergency service fees may be assessed against any responsible party or parties when the city has deployed any emergency resources under this division. If more than one party is responsible for causing the expense of an emergency response under this division, all such parties shall be jointly and severally liable for the cost of the emergency response under the following circumstances: 
(1) ?Emergency services provided for any accident, or fire involving, or related to any motor vehicle, trailer, aircraft, boat, snowmobile, watercraft, or other vehicles owned or operated by a nonresident of the city. 
(2) ?Emergency response to any fire which could be set with a permit, but for which a permit was not obtained. 
(3) ?Emergency response to any fire which could be set with a permit, but which becomes uncontrolled regardless of whether a permit was obtained. 
(4) ?Emergency response provided to any nonresident of the city within the areas of the city opened to the public, such as parks, roads, highways and places of business. 
(5) ?Emergency response to an illegal fire under federal, state or local law. Charges under this subsection are payable by the responsible party causing in whole, or in part, or responsible in whole, or in part for such illegal fire. 
(6) ?Emergency response to an activity, event, or incident in violation of federal, state, or local laws involving the illegal use of fireworks, or malicious destruction of property. 
(7) ?Emergency response to an activity, event, or incident involving threats of harm to oneself, or another, or another's property which if carried out, would be a violation of federal, state, or local law. 
(8) ?Utility line failure involving disabling of any transmission or service line, cable, conduit, pipeline, wire, or the like used to provide, collect, or transport electricity, natural gas, water, sewer, communication, or electronic signals (including, but not limited to, telephone, computer, cable, television, or other electronic impulses, if the owner, or party responsible for the maintenance of such utility line does not respond, employing personnel to the scene within one hour of a request to repair, or correct such failure.) Time limitations for response shall be extended to two hours in the event of weather-related emergencies. 
(9) ?Any emergency service response to a particular location, if an emergency response has occurred at such particular location in excess of three times within 30 days or five times within 12 months. 
(10) ?Emergency response to any occurrence, incident, activity, or emergency where a release of hazardous materials occurs or is reasonably imminent and where the fire chief or his designee has so declared such activity, accident or emergency a hazardous material incident or emergency. 
(11) ?To the extent that part 201 of the Michigan natural resources and environmental protection act, Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.20101 et seq.) or any other law preempts the cost recovery provisions of this ordinance, the liability for and recovery of costs for emergency response shall be governed by the Michigan natural resources and environmental protection act or such other law, and the city may pursue collection of such costs of the emergency response in a civil action, pursuant to said laws. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 2-200. - Invoice for emergency services. 
    The city treasurer, upon recommendation of the city manager, shall prepare an invoice for emergency services pursuant to the fees as defined in the fee schedule, which shall be delivered by first class mail to any person, or persons responsible for the emergency service fee and may recover all assessable costs in connection with such emergency response. In making such a determination for total assessable costs, the city administration shall consider the following: 
(1) ?The total assessable costs. 
(2) ?The risk the public safety or emergency situation imposed upon the city, its residents, and their property. 
(3) ?Whether there was any injury or damage to person or property. 
(4) ?Whether an evacuation was required. 
(5) ?If the emergency response required an unusual or extraordinary use of city personnel, equipment, or resources. 
(6) ?Whether there was any damage to the environment as a result of the situation. 
The invoice is due and payable within 30 days of the date of mailing, or delivery. Overdue unpaid amounts shall incur interest at the rate of one percent per month. The notice shall generally identify the location of the emergency service response and provide a brief summary of the incident. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 2-201. - Fee schedule. 
    The city council from time to time may adopt and amend a schedule of costs as assessable costs which shall be available at the municipal offices for inspection by the public during regular business hours which may set forth charges established on an hour, or fractional hour basis for apparatus equipment and personnel. Actual additional costs incurred shall be chargeable, notwithstanding that the same were not expressly provided in such fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 2-202. - Appeal. 
    Any person determined to be responsible for an emergency service fee may appeal that determination by filing a written statement of appeal to the city manager setting for the reasons for the appeal, shall be filed within 21 days following the mailing of any invoice, or if not mailed, the date of delivery by other means. The appeal stays payment until a final determination by the city manager. The party appealing may present information and evidence. The city manager shall make a final determination on any appeal within 14 days of the filing of any appeal. The determination shall be in writing. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 2-203. - Other remedies. 
    The city shall be entitled to pursue any other remedy, or may institute appropriate action or proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect successful costs from a responsible party. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 2-204. - No limitation of liability. 
    The recovery of accessible cost pursuant hereto does not limit the liability of a responsible party under applicable local, state or federal law to the city, or to any other person, or entity. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 2-205. - Assessable costs, lien upon property. 
    Assessable costs when not paid, including late payment and interest shall constitute a lien upon real property which shall be payable and collectible in the same manner as real property taxes, including interest and penalties thereto as a cumulative remedy. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 7-1-2014) 
Chapter 4 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Public exhibitions and entertainment, MCL 750.463 et seq.; carnival-amusement safety act of 1966, MCL 408.651 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 4-1—4-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ARCADES AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES 

Sec. 4-19. - Determination of necessity. 
    The city council hereby determines that the operation of certain amusement devices and arcades in the city has such an effect upon the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants thereof that licensing and regulation of such amusement devices and arcades is required. 
(Code 1988, § 11-40; Ord. No. 95-03, 11-21-1995) 
Sec. 4-20. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Arcade and amusement device shall have the meanings ascribed to them in chapter 50, zoning. 
    Owner means any person, including an agent or employee, who operates, conducts or has charge or control of any place or establishment in which any amusement device is available for operation by the public. 
(Code 1988, § 11-41; Ord. No. 95-03, 11-21-1995) 
Sec. 4-21. - Licenses for operation of arcade and amusement device registration required. 
    No person shall establish or operate an arcade in the city unless a license has been issued and is conspicuously displayed at all times on the premises. No person shall operate or permit the operation of any amusement device unless a license therefor has been issued under section 4-27 and is conspicuously displayed at all times on such premises. 
(Code 1988, § 11-42; Ord. No. 95-03, 11-21-1995) 
Sec. 4-22. - Fees. 
    The fee for each license for an arcade and the fee for each amusement device registered shall be as prescribed from time to time by resolution of the city council. The city council shall conduct an annual review of the fee schedule for an arcade license and amusement device registration. 
(Code 1988, § 11-43; Ord. No. 95-03, 11-21-1995) 
Sec. 4-23. - Locational standards for arcades. 
    All arcades located in the city shall conform to the following standards: 
(1) ?They shall not be located within 500 feet in any direction from the boundaries of any public, private or parochial school building, or church building. 
(2) ?They shall not be located within 500 feet of each other. 
(3) ?They shall conform in all respects to the requirements of the applicable city or single state construction, zoning, fire and other safety codes. 
(4) ?They shall be located only in a zoning district permitted by chapter 50, zoning. 
(Code 1988, § 11-44; Ord. No. 95-03, 11-21-1995) 
Sec. 4-24. - Operational standards for arcades and amusement devices. 
    No licensee or owner of an arcade or amusement device or the servant, employee or agent of any such person shall permit any of the following: 
(1) ?Permit the operation of any amusement device by any person under 16 years of age between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., excluding Saturdays, Sundays, legal holidays, and at times when school is not in session; or to permit such persons to enter, loiter or congregate in any arcade at the times aforesaid for the purpose of operating such amusement devices. 
(2) ?Operate the arcade between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except on Fridays, Saturdays and legal holidays, when the arcade shall not be operated between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. This operational standard shall not apply to any business establishment duly licensed by the state liquor control commission. 
(3) ?Permit gambling in any form on the premises. 
(4) ?Permit any persons under the influence of alcoholic liquor or controlled substances to be on the premises. 
(5) ?Permit any intoxicating liquor or any controlled substance to be brought into, sold, given away or consumed on the premises, except that this operational standard shall not apply to any business establishment duly licensed by the state liquor control commission. 
(6) ?Permit disorderly or offensive conduct as defined under the ordinances of the city. 
(7) ?Permit any conduct or condition to exist, contributing to juvenile delinquency. 
(8) ?Permit loitering on the premises of the arcade or on sidewalks in front of the arcade, so as to obstruct a free and uninterrupted passage of the public. 
(9) ?Operate the arcade unless the owner or person at least 18 years of age who is the operator, employee, servant or agent of the owner is present on the premises. 
(10) ?Permit the operation of any amusement device containing any payoff contrivance for the return or discharge of coins, tokens, slugs, merchandise or checks to operators thereof, or to have on the premises any amusement device which according to federal or state law constitutes a gambling device; provided, however, that this operational standard shall not prohibit the operation of any amusement device which gives free play or game time to any player or user thereof who gets in excess of a specified number of points or otherwise meets a preestablished performance criteria for such free game or play time. 
(11) ?Permit the operation of any amusement device which displays, produces or emits any picture, printed matter, advertisement, writing, song recitations, speech, music or other matter that is obscene, indecent, pornographic or harmful to minors. 
(12) ?Permit any indecent or obscene conduct, or permit noise or music to emerge from licensed premises, any of which causes a disturbance of the public peace. 
(Code 1988, § 11-45; Ord. No. 95-03, 11-21-1995) 
Sec. 4-25. - Issuance of arcade licenses. 
(a) ?Application, required information. Application for an arcade license shall be made to the city clerk on forms provided by the clerk which shall include the following information: 
(1) ?The name, date of birth, address, e-mail address and telephone number of the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or other organization, then the names, ages, addresses, e-mail addresses and telephone numbers of the officers thereof, and the owners of more than the ten percent interest therein shall also be given. 
(2) ?Whether any person named or required to be named on the application has ever been convicted of a crime, and, if so, the nature of the offense, excluding minor misdemeanors not involving moral turpitude. 
(3) ?The proposed number of machines or amusement devices intended to be operated on the premises. 
(4) ?The type of machine or amusement device. 
(5) ?The name, address and location of the proposed arcade. 
(6) ?The name, address, e-mail address and telephone number of the owner of the proposed arcade. 
(7) ?The name, address, e-mail address and telephone number of the person responsible for the operation, management and maintenance of the amusement devices or machines. 
(8) ?The location and capacity of motor vehicle parking facilities which are to be provided for patrons using such gamed devices or machines at the arcade. 
(9) ?A scale diagram of the arcade floor plan shall be attached to the application, showing the permanent location of each amusement machine, including electrical outlets, all aisleways, exitway discharges and doorways. An amusement device may not be located within five feet of any exit and the following minimum aisle widths are required where amusement devices are located: 
a. ?Amusement machines on one side of aisle, 48 inches minimum width of aisle. 
b. ?Amusement machines on both sides of aisle, 60 inches minimum width of aisle. 
(b) ?Inspections. Upon receipt of the completed applications and the license fee, the clerk shall cause an inspection of the premises to be made by the city building official, fire inspector and other citgy officials to ensure that it conforms to all applicable city codes and the standards set forth in this article. 
(c) ?Withholding of license. No license shall be issued to any applicant when a person named or required to be named on the application is under the age of 18 years or has been convicted of any offense involving gambling, violation of controlled substances laws, criminal sexual conduct involving a minor, or accosting, soliciting or contributing to the delinquency of a minor. 
(d) ?Issuance upon determination of eligibility. Upon the receipt of a satisfactory report based on the information required by this section, including an occupancy permit from the building official, fire inspector and other city officials, and upon a determination that the applicant is eligible for a license, based on the criteria required by this section, the clerk shall issue a license, which shall not be transferrable and which shall expire on the following December 31, regardless of the date the license was issued. 
(e) ?Denial of license. If the clerk shall determine that the applicant is not eligible for a license under this article, then the applicant shall be advised of that determination, and the reasons therefor in writing. Upon the refusal or neglect of the city clerk to issue such license to an applicant within ten days of the receipt of the foregoing report, an applicant may appeal such refusal or neglect to the city council on a form to be provided to such applicant for that purpose, which form shall state the applicant's name and shall have attached thereto a copy of the information required under this article, together with other information deemed pertinent by the city clerk. 
(f) ?Renewal of licenses. Licenses shall be renewed by December 31 of each year upon reinspection and satisfactory report by the city building official, fire inspector and other city officials and upon payment of the annual license fee in the same manner as in the case of the original application. 
(Code 1988, § 11-46; Ord. No. 95-03, 11-21-1995) 
Sec. 4-26. - Consent to inspection by licensee. 
    Any person obtaining a license under this article, as a condition of that license, consents to an inspection by duly authorized agents of the city during the business hours of any licensed premises. Failure to allow such inspection shall be deemed grounds for the revocation of a license. 
(Code 1988, § 11-47; Ord. No. 95-03, 11-21-1995) 
Sec. 4-27. - Registration of amusement devices. 
    The number of amusement devices kept, operated or maintained in any location open to the public in the city shall be registered with the city clerk, and the owner or custodian thereof shall obtain a license identifying the number of amusement devices therein. The city clerk shall maintain a record of licensed amusement devices, which shall include the precise number of amusement devices at each location and the name, address, e-mail address and telephone number of the individual or parties responsible for such devices. A licensed arcade shall be limited to the number of amusement devices set forth in its application for a license. Licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year and shall be conspicuously displayed at all times. 
(Code 1988, § 11-48; Ord. No. 95-03, 11-21-1995) 
Sec. 4-28. - Revocation of license. 
    The city clerk shall, after a written notice to a licensee, revoke any license issued under this article when it is determined that any licensee or his agents, servants, or employees has violated any of the provisions of this article, other ordinances of the city or the laws of the state. Such notice shall specify the violation complained of and shall be delivered personally or by certified mail. A licensee under this article may appeal such revocation to the city council within ten days of the date of revocation on a form to be provided by the clerk. 
(Code 1988, § 11-49; Ord. No. 95-03, 11-21-1995) 
Sec. 4-29. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a) ?Administration of article. The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the city manager who shall, in his discretion, delegate such enforcement to such of the administrative personnel of the city as he deems proper. 
(b) ?Authority of city police. Police officers of the city shall have the power to issue citations for any violation of this article. Upon the issuance of a citation for a violation of section 4-21, the owner shall apply for a license in accordance with the requirements of section 4-25, or for the registration of the amusement devices, within three business days from the date of the citation. If such application is not made within three business days, the police officer shall obtain a warrant authorizing the seizure of such machines and confiscate the machines, which shall be returned to the owner only after he has complied with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 11-50; Ord. No. 95-03, 11-21-1995) 
Secs. 4-30—4-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPECIAL EVENTS 

Sec. 4-47. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Special event means a block party, festival, celebration, concert, or any similar occurrence or event to be conducted for a charitable, historical, educational or public or civic purpose and not for profit within any zoned district within the city, provided, however, that parades and all political activities are specifically excluded from coverage under this article. 
(Code 1988, § 14-1; Ord. No. 2008-02, §§ 1, 2, 1-22-2008) 
Sec. 4-48. - Permit required. 
    No person, firm, corporation or organization shall participate in, advertise for or in any way promote, organize, control, manage, solicit or induce participation in a special event unless a permit has first been obtained from the city administration. No person, firm, corporation or organization shall violate any of the terms issued for a special event or the terms of this article, nor join or participate in any permitted activity under this chapter over the objection of a permit holder or in any manner interfere with the progress or orderly conduct of a special event. 
(Code 1988, § 14-2; Ord. No. 2008-02, §§ 1, 2, 1-22-2008) 
Sec. 4-49. - Reimbursement for municipal expenses. 
    Applicants shall reimburse the city for the costs of city employees and for all other expenses incurred by the city in preparing for and administering the special event at rates to be periodically set by resolution of the city council. Reimbursement shall include an administrative fee of 15 percent of the total cost. The city administration may require that applicants post a surety bond or letter of credit to ensure reimbursement. 
(Code 1988, § 14-3; Ord. No. 2008-02, §§ 1, 2, 1-22-2008) 
Sec. 4-50. - Application for permit. 
    An application for a permit for the holding of a special event shall be made upon a form provided by the city manager and shall contain all of the following information: 
(1) ?The name, residence and business address, e-mail address and telephone number of each person and organization sponsoring the special event. If an organization, the application shall contain the name, residence and business addresses, e-mail addresses and telephone numbers of the president or chairman or individual who is in charge of the event; 
(2) ?Description of the activity, event or use and proposed locations; 
(3) ?The dates of and starting and ending times of the activity, event or use, including time required for setup and cleanup; 
(4) ?Whether parking is requested to be restricted or prohibited during the special event and if so, in what areas; 
(5) ?Proposed plans to provide necessary parking, security, crowd control, traffic control, refuse disposal, utility service, sanitation facilities, private property protection and restoration, noise control, staging areas, and other areas, personnel and equipment which is or may reasonably be necessary; 
(6) ?The type, nature and amount of any rate, fee, charge to be paid or donation made by anyone participating in or attending the activity event or use; 
(7) ?Copies of insurance policies naming the city and any property owners abutting the affected streets, roads, or public rights-of-way as named or additional insureds in amounts of coverage to be determined from time to time by resolution of the city council and insuring the city and abutting property owners against any and all liability for damage to property and insuring the city against any and all liability for personal injury or death as a result of the activity, event or use, as a result of participation in or attendance at the activity, event or use. The city council may, at its discretion, waive these insurance requirements; 
(8) ?A certification, acceptable to the city that the applicant will indemnify the city for and hold it harmless from and defend it against any and all claims, lawsuits or other liability arising from or as a result of the activity, event or use; 
(9) ?The signature of an authorized person on behalf of the applicant; 
(10) ?A statement of the benefit of the activity, event or use of the general public and the nonprofit organization applicant and of the reasons for the activity, event or use; 
(11) ?Such other information as the city administration deems reasonably necessary in order to carry out their duties under this article. 
(Code 1988, § 14-4; Ord. No. 2008-02, §§ 1, 2, 1-22-2008) 
Sec. 4-51. - Time of filing. 
    The application for a permit shall be filed not less than 90 days prior to the scheduled date of the special event. Failure to file on time will result in the denial of a permit. Certificates of insurance required under the terms of section 4-50 must be filed with the city no later than 45 days prior to the event. Failure to file an insurance certificate in a timely manner shall result in immediate revocation of the permit and cancellation of the event. 
(Code 1988, § 14-5; Ord. No. 2008-02, §§ 1, 2, 1-22-2008) 
Sec. 4-52. - Litter collection. 
    Applicants shall provide for the collection and removal of all trash, garbage and litter caused by or arising out of the special event and shall advise the city administration of the specific plans for same. Should the applicant fail to remove all trash, garbage and litter to the satisfaction of the city the same shall be completed by city employees and the applicant shall reimburse the city pursuant to section 4-49. 
(Code 1988, § 14-6; Ord. No. 2008-02, §§ 1, 2, 1-22-2008) 
Sec. 4-53. - Alcoholic liquors prohibited. 
    No alcoholic liquors shall be sold, possessed or consumed on public property during any special event permitted pursuant to this article unless the same be expressly approved by the city council and sanctioned by the state liquor control commission. 
(Code 1988, § 14-7; Ord. No. 2008-02, §§ 1, 2, 1-22-2008) 
State Law reference— Michigan liquor control code of 1998, MCL 436.1101 et seq. 
Sec. 4-54. - Conditions in permit. 
    Any permit granted under this article may contain conditions reasonably calculated to reduce or minimize the dangers and hazards to vehicular or pedestrian traffic and the public health, safety, tranquility, morals or welfare, including, but not limited to, changes in time, duration, number or participants or noise levels. 
(Code 1988, § 14-8; Ord. No. 2008-02, §§ 1, 2, 1-22-2008) 
Sec. 4-55. - Standards for issuance. 
    A permit shall be issued by the clerk upon order of the city manager when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, the city manager finds that all of the following circumstances exist: 
(1) ?The applicant has not knowingly and with intent to device, made any false, misleading or fraudulent statements of material fact in the application for a permit or any other document required pursuant to this article. 
(2) ?The applicant has met the standards in this article and agrees to such conditions as are imposed in the permit. 
(3) ?The time, the duration and size of the special event will not substantially disrupt the safe movement of traffic. 
(4) ?Any required or necessary street closure is of a size or nature such that it will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers so as to prevent normal police protection to the city. 
(5) ?The concentration of persons will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to that area where the special event is being held. 
(Code 1988, § 14-9; Ord. No. 2008-02, §§ 1, 2, 1-22-2008) 
Sec. 4-56. - Notice of issuance or denial. 
    Written notice of the issuance or denial of the permit shall be provided to the applicant within 30 days of receipt of an application or as soon as practicable if received less than 30 days in advance of the proposed date of the special event. If a permit is denied, such written notice shall state the reason for denial. 
(Code 1988, § 14-10; Ord. No. 2008-02, §§ 1, 2, 1-22-2008) 
Sec. 4-57. - Appeals procedure. 
    Upon the denial of a permit by the city administration, the applicant may appeal to the city council by filing the appeal within four working days, with the city clerk who shall set the appeal for hearing at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting. After holding a hearing, the city council may reverse, affirm or modify in any respect the determination of the city administration. 
(Code 1988, § 14-11; Ord. No. 2008-02, §§ 1, 2, 1-22-2008) 
Sec. 4-58. - Waiver of time limitations. 
    For good cause shown, the city administration may waive the time limitation in section 4-51 for filing an application and/or the time limitation as set forth in section 4-57 for filing an appeal. 
(Code 1988, § 14-12; Ord. No. 2008-02, §§ 1, 2, 1-22-2008) 
Sec. 4-59. - Revocation of permit. 
    Any permit for a special event issued pursuant to this article may be revoked by the city administration at any time when by reason of emergency disaster, calamity, disorder, riot, extreme traffic conditions, violation of this article or any permit conditions, or undue burden on public services, it is determined that the health, safety, tranquility, morals or welfare of the public where the safety of any property requires such revocation. Notice or revocation of the permit shall be delivered in writing to at least one person named upon the permit by personal service or by certified mail, of if the closure has commenced, orally, or in writing, by personal contact or service, or by telephone. Continuance after such notice has been delivered is unlawful. 
(Code 1988, § 14-13; Ord. No. 2008-02, §§ 1, 2, 1-22-2008) 
Sec. 4-60. - Coordinated permit applications. 
    Peddlers and transient merchants may sell goods in a city park during a special event if so authorized by the holder of the special event permit. The holder of said permit shall provide to the city the original application form for each peddler and transient merchant as required in chapter 40 along with all support documentation and applicable fees. A comprehensive list of all peddlers and transient merchants participating in the special event with all required documentation shall be submitted to the city for review not later than seven days before the special event. Upon final review by the chief of police, a blanket permit shall be issued covering the peddlers and transient merchants in compliance with the provisions of chapter 40. 
(Code 1988, § 14-14; Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, 7-5-2011) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt animal control ordinance, MCL 287.290; crimes related to animals and birds, MCL 750.49 et seq.; wildlife conservation, MCL 324.40101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cat means any animal of the species Felis catus. 
    Dangerous animal means any wild mammal, reptile or fowl which is not naturally tame or gentle but is of a wild nature or disposition and which, because of its size, vicious nature or other characteristics, could constitute danger to human life or property. The term "dangerous animal" also means and includes any domestic mammal, reptile or fowl which, because of its size or vicious propensity or other characteristics, could constitute a danger to human life or property. The term "dangerous animal" also means a dog or other animal that bites or attacks a person, or a dog that bites or attacks and causes serious injury or death to another dog while the other dog is on the property or under the control of its owner. However, a dangerous animal does not include any of the following: 
(1) ?An animal that bites or attacks a person who is knowingly trespassing on the property of the animal's owner. 
(2) ?An animal that bites or attacks a person who provokes or torments the animal. 
(3) ?An animal that is responding in a manner that an ordinary and reasonable person would conclude was designed to protect a person if that person is engaged in a lawful activity or is the subject of an assault. 
(4) ?Livestock. 
    Dog means any animal of the species Canis lupus familiaris . 
    Lot means a parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied as a dwelling, together with accessory buildings and yard. 
    Premises means an area of private property including grounds, buildings and appurtenances. For purposes of interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, any common areas of condominium property shall not be considered the premises or private property of a person residing in or having an ownership interest in a condominium unit or units. Common areas include all portions of a condominium project other than the condominium units and those areas appurtenant to condominium units. 
    Run at large means the presence of a dog at any place except upon the premises of the owner. A dog shall not be considered running at large if it is: 
(1) ?On a leash and under the control of a person physically able to control it or within an enclosed vehicle. 
(2) ?Within the confines of a city dog park, where it shall be subject to all city dog park regulations as they may be established and amended from time to time. 
(Code 1988, § 4-31; Ord. No. 179, 2-21-1989; Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 6-2. - Right of entry. 
    Authorized officers are permitted to enter upon any premises at any time for the purpose of performing their duties under this chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 4-7; Ord. No. 136, § 8, 1-26-1973) 
Sec. 6-3. - Dog license. 
    All persons owning or keeping dogs four months or older shall be required to purchase licenses for said dogs at either the city or county clerk's office. 
(Code 1988, § 4-32; Ord. No. 179, 2-21-1989) 
State Law reference— Dog license, MCL 287.266 et seq. 
Sec. 6-4. - Dogs and cats—Injury to property; waste products. 
(a) ?No person owning or possessing a dog or cat shall permit such dog or cat to go upon any sidewalk, parkway or private lands or premises and bruise, break, tear up, crush or injure any lawn, flower bed, plant, shrub, tree or garden in any manner whatsoever, or to defecate thereon unless they use a scooping device. 
(b) ?No person owning or possessing a dog or cat shall cause or permit such dog or cat to be on property, public and private, not owned or possessed by such person, unless such person has in his immediate possession an appropriate device for scooping excrement and an appropriate depository for the transmission of excrement to a receptacle located on property owned or possessed by such person. 
(c) ?This section shall not apply to a person who is physically disabled and unable to comply. 
(Code 1988, § 4-33; Ord. No. 179, 2-21-1989) 
Sec. 6-5. - Same—Running at large. 
    No person owning or possessing a dog or cat shall cause or permit such dog or cat to run at large within the city. 
(Code 1988, § 4-34; Ord. No. 179, 2-21-1989) 
Sec. 6-6. - Same—Barking, howling, etc. 
    No person shall knowingly own or possess any dog which habitually barks, howls or yelps or any cat which habitually cries or howls in such a manner as to disturb the reasonable peace and quiet of the neighborhood. Such dogs and cats are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Code 1988, § 4-35; Ord. No. 179, 2-21-1989) 
Sec. 6-7. - Fowl and livestock—Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep and maintain fowl of any kind or nature, or livestock, whether penned or otherwise, within the limits of the city. 
(Code 1988, § 4-1; Ord. No. 136, § 1, 1-26-1973) 
Sec. 6-8. - Same—Compliance with orders of officers. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police and every police officer and special officer to order the immediate removal of fowl of any kind or nature, or livestock, whether penned or otherwise, from within the limits of the city. Failure to comply with such orders shall constitute violation of the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1988, § 4-3; Ord. No. 136, § 7, 1-26-1973) 
Sec. 6-9. - Keeping of wild animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for anyone to keep or maintain any wild, ferocious or undomesticated and untamed animal, whether owned by them or not, on their premises within the city; provided that wild animals may be kept in circuses, zoos, menageries or laboratories where the care or custody is under the care of an attendant at all times, whose responsibility it shall be to see that such animals are securely confined. 
(Code 1988, § 4-4; Ord. No. 144, § 4, 5-6-1975) 
Sec. 6-10. - Keeping dangerous animals. 
(a) ?No person shall own or possess a dangerous animal within the city. 
(b) ?Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to animals under the control of a law enforcement or military agency, nor to animals which are kept for the protection of property, provided that such animals are restrained by a leash or chain, cage, fence or other adequate means from contact with the general public or with persons who enter the premises with the actual or implied permission of the owner or occupant. 
(Code 1988, § 4-36; Ord. No. 179, 2-21-1989) 
State Law reference— Dangerous animals, MCL 287.321 et seq. 
Sec. 6-11. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a) ?No person shall willfully or maliciously inflict unnecessary or needless cruelty, or torture, abuse or cruelly beat, strike or abuse any animal, or by any act, omission or neglect cause or inflict any unnecessary or unjustifiable pain, suffering, injury or death to any animal, whether such animal belongs to such person or to another, except that reasonable force may be employed to drive away vicious or trespassing animals. Any unwanted animal should be delivered to the county department of animal control of proper disposal. 
(b) ?No person owning or possessing any animal shall fail, refuse or neglect to provide such animal with food, potable water, shade or shelter, or cruelly or unnecessarily expose such animal in hot, stormy, cold or inclement weather, or carry such animal in or upon any vehicle in a cruel or inhumane manner. 
(Code 1988, § 4-37; Ord. No. 179, 2-21-1989) 
Sec. 6-12. - Transporting. 
(a) ?Safety of animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to transport animals on the streets of the city in such manner as to endanger the life or limb of any of such animals. 
(b) ?Safety of persons. It shall be unlawful for any person to transport animals on the streets of the city in such a manner as to endanger the life or limb of any person. 
(c) ?Segregating kinds and weights. Where animals of different weights, kinds or sizes are transported on the streets of the city, partitions shall be erected in the transporting vehicles so that animals of separate kinds or weights are segregated. 
(Code 1988, § 4-6; Ord. No. 144, §§ 1—3, 5-6-1975) 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, MCL 750.50. 
Sec. 6-13. - Limit on number of dogs and cats. 
    No person who shall reside within the city shall possess, keep or harbor more than three dogs of the age of six months or over or more than three cats of the age of six months or over at said premises, except where a person has obtained a kennel license from the state as provided for in Public Act. No. 339 of 1919 (MCL 287.261 et seq.), and conforms with all applicable zoning regulations of the city. 
(Code 1988, § 4-38; Ord. No. 179, 2-21-1989) 
State Law reference— Kennels, MCL 287.270 et seq. 
Sec. 6-14. - Animal bites. 
    Anyone having knowledge or reason to believe that any animal in the city has bitten a person shall report the same within 24 hours and, so far as is known, the name and address of the owner and circumstances of the animal. Such reports concerning bites shall be made to the city police department. 
(Code 1988, § 4-39; Ord. No. 179, 2-21-1989) 
State Law reference— Dogs attacking or biting persons, MCL 287.286a; rules for controlling rabies, MCL 333.5111. 
Sec. 6-15. - Parental liability. 
    The parent or guardian of any minor claiming ownership of any dog, cat or other animal, subject to this chapter, shall be deemed to be the owner of such animal and shall be charged for all penalties and fees imposed by this chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 4-40; Ord. No. 179, 2-21-1989) 
Sec. 6-16. - Penalties. 
    A violation of this chapter shall constitute a municipal civil infraction . 
(Code 1988, § 4-41; Ord. No. 179, 2-21-1989; Ord. No. 96-03, § 2, 1-9-1996) 
Secs. 6-17—6-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 6-36. - Running at large. 
    All dogs found running at large shall be impounded in such animal shelter as may be provided by the city or the county. 
(Code 1988, § 4-51; Ord. No. 186, 8-2-1989) 
Sec. 6-37. - Duty of chief of police and officers. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police and every police officer and special officer to promptly seize, take up and place in animal shelter all dogs that may be found running at large contrary to the provisions of this chapter and to enforce the provisions of this chapter by seizing, picking up and impounding any dog against which reasonable complaint has been made for violations of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 4-52; Ord. No. 186, 8-2-1989) 
Sec. 6-38. - Record. 
    The officer in charge of the animal shelter under this article shall carefully keep a record of the description of every dog impounded therein together with the date and hour of such impounding. 
(Code 1988, § 4-53; Ord. No. 186, 8-2-1989) 
Sec. 6-39. - Transient holding. 
    Dogs that are seized under the provisions of this article may be placed in a transient holding pen provided by the city and, upon notification, the animal control officer will provide for the pickup of such dogs. 
(Code 1988, § 4-54; Ord. No. 186, 8-2-1989) 
Sec. 6-40. - Disposition after impoundment. 
    All dogs impounded pursuant to this article shall be kept and fed, unless promptly and properly claimed, for a period of no less than three days nor more than five days from the hour of impounding. All dogs not claimed as provided in this article within such period of time shall be euthanized; provided, however, that, at the option of the person in charge of the animal shelter, such dogs may be sold in such manner and for such amounts as may be determined by him. 
(Code 1988, § 4-55; Ord. No. 186, 8-2-1989) 
Sec. 6-41. - Redemption. 
    Owners of all dogs impounded under the provisions of this article may claim the dogs by properly identifying themselves as the owners of such animals, showing the license tag receipts of such animals and paying such sums as may be fixed of the costs of impounding and feeding the dogs; provided, however, that it shall be unlawful for any person to claim or attempt to claim any dog under the provisions of this article when such person is not the legal owner of the dog. 
(Code 1988, § 4-56; Ord. No. 186, 8-2-1989) 
Chapter 8 - BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 8-1. - License—Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bed and breakfast establishment as defined and as permitted in chapter 50 without first having obtained a license. This chapter shall not apply to hotels, motels, motor lodges or roominghouses doing business within the city. 
(Code 1988, § 11-21; Ord. No. 172, § 1, 4-19-1988) 
Sec. 8-2. - Same—Fees; application. 
    The annual fees for a bed and breakfast license shall be prescribed by resolution of the city council for the whole or any part of a year and shall be paid at the city clerk's office. Applicants for a license to operate a bed and breakfast shall complete and submit an application and shall submit a site plan of the single-family dwelling unit that illustrates that the proposed operation will comply with chapter 50 as amended and with the terms of this chapter and any other applicable city codes and ordinances. 
(Code 1988, § 11-22; Ord. No. 172, § 2, 4-19-1988) 
Sec. 8-3. - Same—Denial; appeal. 
(a) ?If the city clerk finds that an applicant does not meet a particular requirement of the licensing or zoning requirements as provided in sections 8-1, 8-2, and 8-7, then the city clerk shall have the authority to deny the applicant a license. The denial may be appealed to the city council, which may then weigh the facts of the case and make a final decision. At no time shall the city council approve an application for a bed and breakfast license when such operation as proposed does not comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b) ?In the event a denial is appealed, a public hearing shall be conducted by the city council prior to its action on the matter. All property owners and residents of property located within 300 feet of the proposed bed and breakfast establishment shall be notified in writing of the public hearing no later than seven days before the hearing date. Fees for such appeals shall be in accordance with public hearing fees as established by city council. 
(Code 1988, § 11-23; Ord. No. 172, § 5, 4-19-1988) 
Sec. 8-4. - Same—Renewal. 
    The city clerk may renew the license for any bed and breakfast establishment provided that the licensed establishment shall meet the following conditions: 
(1) ?Annual inspection. The bed and breakfast establishment shall meet all conditions of this chapter as confirmed by an annual inspection of the premises by the city building official. 
(2) ?Lapse of license. The license for the bed and breakfast establishment shall not have lapsed for more than 30 days beyond the December 31 annual expiration date. 
(3) ?Lapse of operation. The active operation of the bed and breakfast shall not have lapsed for more than nine months. 
(Code 1988, § 11-24; Ord. No. 172, § 6, 4-19-1988) 
Sec. 8-5. - Same—Transfer. 
    A bed and breakfast license may be renewed only as provided in section 8-4. Such license shall not be transferable to any property other than the property for which it was approved. 
(Code 1988, § 11-25; Ord. No. 172, § 7, 4-19-1988) 
Sec. 8-6. - Same—Suspension; revocation. 
    The city clerk shall have the authority to refuse to renew a license or to suspend or revoke a license for continued and repeated violations of the provisions of this chapter or chapter 50. A decision to suspend, revoke or refuse renewal of a license may be appealed to the city council by the applicant. Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the city council for good cause shown after investigation and opportunity to the holder of such licenses to be heard in opposition thereto; in such investigation the compliance or noncompliance with the state law and local ordinances, the conduct of the licensee in regard to the public and other considerations shall be weighed in determination of such issues. 
(Code 1988, § 11-26; Ord. No. 172, § 8, 4-19-1988) 
Sec. 8-7. - Dwelling unit and site requirements. 
    Bed and breakfast establishments shall be confined to the single-family dwelling unit which is the principal dwelling unit on the property. No premises shall be utilized for a bed and breakfast establishment unless the following conditions are met: 
(1) ?Geographical eligibility. Such use shall conform to location requirements of chapter 50. 
(2) ?Size of sleeping rooms. The rental sleeping rooms are part of the primary residential use and are not specifically constructed or remodeled for rental purposes. The rental sleeping rooms shall have a minimum size of 100 square feet for each two occupants with an additional 30 square feet for each additional occupant, not to exceed a maximum of four occupants per room. 
(3) ?Smoke detectors. Each sleeping room used for the bed and breakfast establishment shall have a separate smoke detector alarm, installed in accordance with the applicable building codes. 
(4) ?Lavatory facilities. Lavatory and bathing facilities shall be available to all persons using any bed and breakfast establishment. 
(5) ?Minimum exits. There shall be at least two exits to the outdoors from such premises. 
(Code 1988, § 11-27; Ord. No. 172, § 3, 4-19-1988) 
State Law reference— Construction code requirements for bed and breakfasts, MCL 125.1504b. 
Sec. 8-8. - Operation. 
    The dwelling unit in which the bed and breakfast is located shall be the principal residence of the operator, and said operator shall live on the premises when the bed and breakfast establishment is active. In addition, the bed and breakfast establishment shall meet the following conditions: 
(1) ?Length of stay. The maximum stay for any occupant of the bed and breakfast sleeping rooms shall be seven consecutive days. 
(2) ?Occupancy limits. A bed and breakfast establishment shall accommodate six or fewer persons and be limited to three or fewer rental sleeping rooms. 
(3) ?Employees. No person other than the occupants of the dwelling unit may be employed in the operation of the bed and breakfast establishment. 
(4) ?Guest register. Every operator shall keep a list of the names of all persons staying at the bed and breakfast operation. The guest register shall be available for inspection by city officials at any time. 
(5) ?Change of use permit and certificate. Before a structure is occupied as a bed and breakfast establishment, a permit shall be sought and a related certificate of occupancy issued in accordance with sections 50-512 and 50-513. 
(6) ?Public nuisance. Bed and breakfast operations shall not be permitted whenever the operation endangers or offends or interferes with the safety or rights of others so as to constitute a public nuisance. 
(Code 1988, § 11-28; Ord. No. 172, § 4, 4-19-1988) 
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Stille-DeRossett-Hale single state construction code act, MCL 125.1501 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SINGLE STATE CONSTRUCTION CODE 

Sec. 10-19. - Enforcing agency designated. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan state construction code act in accordance with Section 8b of Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1508b), the building official of the city is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the city under such Act to enforce the single state construction code. The city assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said act throughout its corporate limits. 
(Code 1988, § 5-21; Ord. No. 167, § 1, 3-1-1988; Ord. No. 2000-1, § 1, 2-15-2000) 
Sec. 10-20. - Fee. 
    When an application is made for a permit required under this article, a fee shall be paid in an amount as prescribed by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 5-77; Ord. No. 134, § 2, 4-4-1972) 
Secs. 10-21—10-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SINGLE-FAMILY RENTAL HOUSING 

Sec. 10-44. - Purpose. 
    It is the declared policy of the city that the procedures set forth in this article are established in the public interest in order to control blight, maintain property values, and to protect the safety and welfare of the occupants of single-family rental housing and of the general public. 
(Code 1988, § 5-303; Ord. No. 92-03, 2-4-1992) 
Sec. 10-45. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Housing code means the single state construction code referred to in article II of this chapter and the property maintenance code of the city adopted in article V of this chapter. 
    Landlord means any person, owner, individual, firm or corporation or any combination thereof, engaged in the business of leasing or renting a dwelling unit to another person. 
(Code 1988, § 5-304; Ord. No. 92-03, 2-4-1992) 
Sec. 10-46. - Registry of owners and premises. 
(a) ?The owners of single-family rental housing which will be offered for rent or hire for more than six months of the calendar year, shall register with the city clerk. Owners of single-family rental housing units which are to become occupied shall register with the city clerk prior to the occupancy of those units. 
(b) ?Registration forms shall be available from the city clerk and shall provide for sufficient information for the efficient and effective administration of this article. 
(c) ?A registry of all owners and premises shall be maintained by the city clerk. 
(Code 1988, § 5-305; Ord. No. 92-03, 2-4-1992) 
Sec. 10-47. - Inspections. 
(a) ?The city manager and other such persons as he may designate are authorized to make inspections under this article. Failure to permit these inspections in accordance with the terms of this article and the housing code shall be deemed a violation of this article. If permission for inspection is refused, the city manager may request a warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction for such inspections. Inspections shall be performed: 
(1) ?At least once every two years; 
(2) ?Prior to the occupation of any single-family rental housing unit which has been vacated, if such inspection is deemed necessary by the city manager. It shall be the duty of the landlord to advise the city when a single-family rental housing unit is vacated; or 
(3) ?On a complaint basis when deemed necessary. 
(b) ?Any owner of a single-family rental home, whether registered pursuant to section 10-46 (a) or not, who fails to respond a request, or requests, for inspection as authorized by this section shall be assessed a late fee. The cost of late fees shall be prescribed from time to time by resolution of city council. This assessment shall be added to the registration fee prescribed by section 10-49(1). 
(Code 1988, § 5-306; Ord. No. 92-03, 2-4-1992; Ord. No. 97-02, § 2, 3-18-1997; Ord. No. 2015-01, § 1, 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 10-48. - Correction of violations; penalties. 
(a) ?Notice of violations and correction of violations under this article shall be in accordance with the housing code. 
(b) ?If violations are found in a vacant unit, the unit shall not be occupied until the violations have been corrected. 
(c) ?Failure of the landlord to comply with the provisions of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as prescribed in section 1-14. 
(Code 1988, § 5-307; Ord. No. 92-03, 2-4-1992) 
Sec. 10-49. - Fees. 
    Fees shall be prescribed to this article for the following: 
(1) ?Registration fee for each single-family rental housing unit. 
(2) ?Each required inspection. 
(3) ?Each required inspection to determine compliance with violation notices. 
(4) ?The fees which are required by this article shall be as determined from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 5-308; Ord. No. 92-03, 2-4-1992) 
Secs. 10-50—10-71. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MULTIPLE DWELLINGS AND ROOMINGHOUSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-72. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dwelling means any room or enclosed space which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided that temporary housing shall not be regarded as a dwelling. 
    Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating. 
    Housing code means the single state construction code referred to in article II of this chapter and the property maintenance code of the city adopted in article V of this chapter. 
    Multiple dwelling means any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units or rooming units. 
    Operator means any person who has charge, care, control or management of a building or part thereof in which dwelling units or rooming units are let. 
    Owner means any person alone or jointly or severally with others who has: 
(1) ?Legal title to any premises, dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(2) ?Charge, care or control of any premises, dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or the executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this article and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the actual owner. 
    Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended for living or sleeping but not for cooking purposes. 
    Roominghouse means any dwelling or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units. 
    Temporary housing means any tent, trailer, mobile home or any other structure used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to the ground, to another structure, or any utility system on the same premises. 
(Code 1988, § 5-186; Ord. No. 132, 4-4-1972) 
Sec. 10-73. - Records. 
    Every owner or operator of a licensed multiple dwelling or roominghouse shall keep, or cause to be kept, records of all requests for repair and complaints by tenants which are related to the provisions of this article and to any applicable rules and regulations, and of all corrections made in response to such requests and complaints. Such records shall be made available by the owner or operator to the representative of the city for inspections and copying on request. Such records shall be admissible in any administrative or judicial proceedings pursuant to the provisions of this article as prima facie evidence of the violation or the correction of violation of this article or applicable rules or regulations pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1988, § 5-187; Ord. No. 132, art. 4, 4-4-1972) 
Sec. 10-74. - Notice of violation. 
    Whenever, upon inspection of the licensed multiple dwelling or roominghouse, or of the records required to be kept by section 10-73, the inspector finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of the provisions of this article or of any applicable rules or regulations pursuant thereto, he shall serve the owner or operator with notice of such violations. Such notices shall be in writing and shall: 
(1) ?Set forth the alleged violations of this article or of applicable rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto; 
(2) ?Describe the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit where the violations are alleged to exist or to have existed; 
(3) ?Provide a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days, for correction of any violation alleged; and if not corrected, the operating license may be suspended; 
(4) ?Be served upon the owner, operator or agent of the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit personally or by registered mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the last known place of residence of the owner, operator or agent. If one or more persons to whom such notice is addressed cannot be found after diligent effort to do so, service may be made upon such persons by posting a notice in or about the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit described in the notice; and 
(5) ?Be served upon a resident agent for the receipt of such service of notice. 
(Code 1988, § 5-188; Ord. No. 132, art. 5, 4-4-1972) 
Sec. 10-75. - Violations; misdemeanor. 
    The owner or operator of licensed multiple dwellings or roominghouses who shall fail to comply with any notice or order to correct violations of this article, or any applicable rules or regulations of the city given by any person authorized by the city to give such notice or order, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 5-189; Ord. No. 132, art. 9, 4-4-1972) 
Secs. 10-76—10-93. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-94. - Required. 
    No person shall operate a multiple dwelling or roominghouse unless he holds a current, unrevoked operating license issued by the city clerk in his name for the specific named multiple dwelling or roominghouse. 
(Code 1988, § 5-211; Ord. No. 132, art. 1, 4-4-1972) 
Sec. 10-95. - Conditions for issuance and renewal. 
(a) ?Every operating license pursuant to this division shall be issued for a period of one year from its date of issuance unless sooner revoked, and may be renewed for successive periods not to exceed one year. 
(b) ?The city clerk is hereby authorized upon completion of application therefor to issue new operating licenses, and renewal thereof, in the names of applicant owners or operators of multiple dwellings and roominghouses. No such license shall be issued unless the multiple dwelling or roominghouse in connection with which the license is sought is found after inspection to meet all the requirements of this division and of applicable rules and regulations pursuant thereof. 
(c) ?No operating license shall be issued or renewed unless the applicant owner or operator agrees in his application to such inspections as are authorized by rules and regulations of the city and are required by the city to determine whether the multiple dwelling or roominghouse in connection with such license is sought is in compliance with the provisions of this division and with applicable rules and regulations. 
(d) ?No operating license shall be issued or renewed unless the completed application form is accompanied by the payment of a license fee as prescribed by resolution of the city council. 
(e) ?No operating license shall be issued or renewed for a nonresident applicant, unless such applicant has first designated an agent for the receipt of service of violations of the provisions of this division and for the service of process pursuant to this division, when such applicant is absent from this city for 30 days or more. Such designation shall be in writing, and shall accompany each application form. The applicant may designate any resident of the city to be his agent for this purpose. 
(f) ?No operating license shall be renewed unless an application therefor has been made within 30 days prior to the expiration of the present operating license. 
(Code 1988, § 5-212; Ord. No. 132, art. 2, 4-4-1972) 
Sec. 10-96. - Inspections. 
(a) ?The city manager and other such persons as he may designate are authorized to make inspections under this division. Failure to permit these inspections in accordance with the terms of this division and the housing code shall be deemed a violation of this division. If permission for inspection is refused, the city manager may request a warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction for such inspection. Inspections shall be performed: 
(1) ?At least once every two years; or 
(2) ?On a complaint basis when deemed necessary. 
(b) ?Late fee. Any person operating a multiple dwelling or roominghouse, with or without a license issued pursuant to section 10-95, who fails to respond a request, or requests, for inspection as authorized by this section shall be assessed a late fee. The cost of late fees shall be prescribed from time to time by resolution of the city council. This assessment shall be added to the license fee prescribed by section 10-95(d). 
(Code 1988, § 5-212.1; Ord. No. 97-02, § 1, 3-18-1997; Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 10-97. - Display, transfer. 
    Each license under this division shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the common areas of the multiple dwelling or roominghouse. No license shall be transferred to another person, or to another multiple dwelling or roominghouse. Every person holding an operating license shall give notice in writing to the city within 24 hours after having transferred or otherwise disposed of the legal control of any licensed multiple dwelling or roominghouse. Such notice shall include the name and address of the persons succeeding to the ownership or control of such multiple dwelling or roominghouse. 
(Code 1988, § 5-213; Ord. No. 132, art. 3, 4-4-1972) 
Sec. 10-98. - Suspension. 
    At the end of the time he has allowed for corrections of any violation cited, the inspector shall reinspect the multiple dwelling or roominghouse, and, if he determines that such conditions have not been corrected, he may issue an order suspending the operating license. 
(Code 1988, § 5-214; Ord. No. 132, art. 6, 4-4-1972) 
Sec. 10-99. - Appeal of suspension; revocation. 
    Any person whose license to operate a multiple dwelling or roominghouse has been suspended shall be entitled to a reconsideration of the order or a formal hearing before the building commission. If no request for reconsideration or petition for hearing reaches the city clerk within 21 days following the issuance of the order of suspension, the license shall be revoked, except that prior to revocation any person whose license has been suspended may request reinspection, upon showing that the violation cited in the notice has been corrected. 
(Code 1988, § 5-215; Ord. No. 132, art. 7, 4-4-1972) 
Sec. 10-100. - Reinstatement; extension of suspension period. 
    If, upon reinspection, the inspector finds that the multiple dwelling or roominghouse in connection with which the notice was issued under this division is now in compliance with this article and applicable rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto, he shall reinstate the license. Any request for reinspection shall not extend the suspension period, unless the construction board of appeals grants such request. 
(Code 1988, § 5-216; Ord. No. 132, art. 8, 4-4-1972) 
Secs. 10-101—10-128. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 10-129. - Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code. 
    A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk being marked and designated as "International Property Maintenance Code," as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the property maintenance code of the city for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International Property Maintenance Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article . 
(Code 1988, § 5-300; Ord. No. 196, 5-15-1990; Ord. No. 94-01, 3-1-1994; Ord. No. 96-10, 12-17-1996; Ord. No. 2001-2, § 1, 6-5-2001) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Secs. 10-130—10-156. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Dangerous buildings, MCL 125.538 et seq. 

Sec. 10-157. - Defined. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dangerous building means a building or structure that has or is in one or more of the following defects or conditions: 
(1) ?A door, aisle, passageway, stairway, or other means of exit does not conform to the approved fire code of the city. 
(2) ?A portion of the building or structure is damaged by fire, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect, abandonment, vandalism, or other cause so that the structural strength or stability of the building or structure is appreciably less than it was before the damage and does not meet the minimum requirements of the single state construction code for a new building or structure, purpose, or location. 
(3) ?A part of the building or structure is likely to fall, become detached or dislodged, or collapse and injure persons or damage property. 
(4) ?A portion of the building or structure has settled to an extent that walls or other structural portions of the building or structure have materially less resistance to wind than is required in the case of new construction by the single state construction code. 
(5) ?The building or structure, or a part of the building or structure, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the support, or for other reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning of the building or structure is likely to fall or give way. 
(6) ?The building, structure, or a part of the building or structure is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used. 
(7) ?The building or structure is damaged by fire, wind, or flood, is dilapidated or deteriorated and becomes an attractive nuisance to children who might play in the building or structure to their danger, becomes a harbor for vagrants, criminals, or immoral persons, or enables persons to resort to the building or structure for committing a nuisance or an unlawful or immoral act. 
(8) ?A building or structure used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, including the adjoining grounds, because of dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, or for other reason, is unsanitary or unfit for human habitation, is in a condition that the health officer determines is likely to cause sickness or disease, or is likely to injure the health, safety, or general welfare of people living in the dwelling. 
(9) ?A building or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and open at door or window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or accessible to entrance by trespassers. 
(10) ?A building or structure remains unoccupied for a period of 180 consecutive days or longer, and is not listed as being available for sale, lease, or rent with a real estate broker licensed under article 25 of the occupational code, Public Act No. 299 of 1980 (MCL 339.2401 et seq.). For purposes of this section, the term "building" or "structure" includes, but is not limited to, a commercial building or structure. This section does not apply to either of the following: 
a. ?A building or structure if the owner or agent does both of the following: 
1. ?Notifies the police department that the building or structure will remain unoccupied for a period of 180 consecutive days. The notice shall be given to the police department by the owner or agent not more than 30 days after the building or structure becomes unoccupied. 
2. ?Maintains the exterior of the building or structure and adjoining grounds in accordance with the single state construction code. 
b. ?A secondary dwelling of the owner that is regularly unoccupied for a period of 180 days or longer each year, if the owner notifies the police deparment that the dwelling will remain unoccupied for a period of 180 consecutive days or more each year. An owner who has given the notice prescribed by this section shall notify the police department not more than 30 days after the dwelling no longer qualifies for this exception. As used in this subsection, the term "secondary dwelling" means a dwelling, including, but not limited to, a vacation home, hunting cabin, or summer home, that is occupied by the owner or a member of the owner's family during part of a year. 
(Code 1988, § 5-241; Ord. No. 115A, § 1, 4-4-1972) 
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 125.539. 
Sec. 10-158. - Dangerous building prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any owner or agent thereof to keep or maintain any dwelling or part thereof which is a dangerous building as defined in section 10-157. 
(Code 1988, § 5-243; Ord. No. 115A, § 3, 4-4-1972) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.538. 
Sec. 10-159. - Notice of dangerous building; contents; hearing officer; service. 
(a) ?Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, if a building or structure is found to be a dangerous building, the enforcing agency shall issue a notice that the building or structure is a dangerous building. 
(b) ?The notice shall be served on the owner, agent, or lessee that is registered with the enforcing agency. If an owner, agent, or lessee is not registered, the notice shall be served on each owner of or party in interest in the building or structure in whose name the property appears on the last local tax assessment records. 
(c) ?The notice shall specify the time and place of a hearing on whether the building or structure is a dangerous building. The person to whom the notice is directed shall have the opportunity to show cause at the hearing why the hearing officer should not order the building or structure to be demolished, otherwise made safe, or properly maintained. 
(d) ?The hearing officer shall be appointed by the mayor to serve at his pleasure. The hearing officer shall be a person who has expertise in housing matters, including, but not limited to, an engineer, architect, building contractor, building inspector, or member of a community housing organization. An employee of the enforcing agency shall not be appointed as hearing officer. The enforcing agency shall file a copy of the notice that the building or structure is a dangerous building with the hearing officer. 
(e) ?The notice shall be in writing and shall be served upon the person to whom the notice is directed either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner or party in interest at the address shown on the tax records. If a notice is served on a person by certified mail, a copy of the notice shall also be posted upon a conspicuous part of the building or structure. The notice shall be served upon the owner or party in interest at least ten days before the date of the hearing included in the notice. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.540. 
Sec. 10-160. - Hearing; testimony; determination to close proceedings or order building or structure demolished, made safe, or properly maintained; failure to appear or noncompliance with order; hearing; enforcement; reimbursement and notice of cost; lien; remedies. 
(a) ?At a hearing prescribed by section 10-159, the hearing officer shall take testimony of the enforcing agency, the owner of the property, and any interested party. Not more than five days after completion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall render a decision either closing the proceedings or ordering the building or structure demolished, otherwise made safe, or properly maintained. 
(b) ?If the hearing officer determines that the building or structure should be demolished, otherwise made safe, or properly maintained, the hearing officer shall enter an order that specifies what action the owner, agent, or lessee shall take and sets a date by which the owner, agent, or lessee shall comply with the order. If the building is a dangerous building under section 10-157(10), the order may require the owner or agent to maintain the exterior of the building and adjoining grounds owned by the owner of the building, including, but not limited to, the maintenance of lawns, trees, and shrubs. 
(c) ?If the owner, agent, or lessee fails to appear or neglects or refuses to comply with the order issued under subsection (b) of this section, the hearing officer shall file a report of the findings and a copy of the order with the city council not more than five days after the date for compliance set in the order and request that necessary action be taken to enforce the order. If the city council has established a board of appeals under section 10-163, the hearing officer shall file the report of the findings and a copy of the order with the board of appeals and request that necessary action be taken to enforce the order. A copy of the findings and order of the hearing officer shall be served on the owner, agent, or lessee in the manner prescribed in section 10-159. 
(d) ?The city council or the board of appeals of the city, as applicable, shall set a date not less than 30 days after the hearing prescribed in section 10-159 for a hearing on the findings and order of the hearing officer. The city council or the board of appeals shall give notice to the owner, agent, or lessee in the manner prescribed in section 10-159 of the time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner, agent, or lessee shall be given the opportunity to show cause why the order should not be enforced. The city council or the board of appeals shall either approve, disapprove, or modify the order. If the city council or board of appeals approves or modifies the order, the city council shall take all necessary action to enforce the order. If the order is approved or modified, the owner, agent, or lessee shall comply with the order within 60 days after the date of the hearing under this subsection. For an order of demolition, if the city council or the board of appeals determines that the building or structure has been substantially destroyed by fire, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect, abandonment, vandalism, or other cause, and the cost of repair of the building or structure will be greater than the state equalized value of the building or structure, the owner, agent, or lessee shall comply with the order of demolition within 21 days after the date of the hearing under this subsection. If the estimated cost of repair exceeds the state equalized value of the building or structure to be repaired, a rebuttable presumption that the building or structure requires immediate demolition exists. 
(e) ?The cost of demolition includes, but is not limited to, fees paid to hearing officers, costs of title searches or commitments used to determine the parties in interest, recording fees for notices and liens filed with the county register of deeds, demolition and dumping charges, court reporter attendance fees, and costs of the collection of the charges authorized under this article. The cost of the demolition, of making the building safe, or of maintaining the exterior of the building or structure or grounds adjoining the building or structure incurred by the city to bring the property into conformance with this article shall be reimbursed to the city by the owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears. 
(f) ?The owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears upon the last local tax assessment records shall be notified by the assessor of the amount of the cost of the demolition, of making the building safe, or of maintaining the exterior of the building or structure or grounds adjoining the building or structure by first class mail at the address shown on the records. If the owner or party in interest fails to pay the cost within 30 days after mailing by the assessor of the notice of the amount of the cost, the city shall have a lien for the cost incurred by the city to bring the property into conformance with this article. The lien shall not take effect until notice of the lien has been filed or recorded as provided by law. A lien provided for in this subsection does not have priority over previously filed or recorded liens and encumbrances. The lien for the cost shall be collected and treated in the same manner as provided for property tax liens under the general property tax act, Public Act No. 206 of 1893 (MCL 211.1 et seq.). 
(g) ?In addition to other remedies under this article, the city may bring an action against the owner of the building or structure for the full cost of the demolition, of making the building safe, or of maintaining the exterior of the building or structure or grounds adjoining the building or structure. The city shall have a lien on the property for the amount of a judgment obtained under this subsection. The lien provided for in this subsection shall not take effect until notice of the lien is filed or recorded as provided by law. The lien does not have priority over prior filed or recorded liens and encumbrances. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.541. 
Sec. 10-161. - Enforcement of judgment against other assets; lien; effectiveness; priority. 
(a) ?A judgment in an action brought pursuant to section 10-160(g) may be enforced against assets of the owner other than the building or structure. 
(b) ?The city shall have a lien for the amount of a judgment obtained pursuant to section 10-160(g) against the owner's interest in all real property located in this state that is owned in whole or in part by the owner of the building or structure against whom the judgment is obtained. A lien provided for in this section does not take effect until notice of the lien is filed or recorded as provided by law, and the lien does not have priority over prior filed or recorded liens and encumbrances. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.541a. 
Sec. 10-162. - Noncompliance with order as misdemeanor. 
    A person who fails or refuses to comply with an order approved or modified by the city council or board of appeals under section 10-160 within the time prescribed by that section is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.541b. 
Sec. 10-163. - Board of appeals; establishment; appointment and terms of members; vacancy; election of officers; quorum; compensation; expenses; meetings; writings. 
(a) ?The city council may establish a board of appeals to hear all of the cases and carry out all of the duties of the city council described in section 10-160(c) and (d). 
(b) ?The board of appeals shall be appointed by the city council shall consist of the following members: 
(1) ?A building contractor. 
(2) ?A registered architect or engineer. 
(3) ?Two members of the general public. 
(4) ?An individual registered as a building official, plan reviewer, or inspector under the building officials and inspectors registration act, Public Act No. 54 of 1986 (MCL 338.2301 et seq.). The individual may be an employee of the enforcing agency. 
(c) ?Board of appeals members shall be appointed for three years, except that of the members first appointed, two members shall serve for one year, two members shall serve for two years, and one member shall serve for three years. A vacancy created other than by expiration of a term shall be filled for the balance of the unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointment. A member may be reappointed for additional terms. 
(d) ?The board of appeals annually shall elect a chairperson, vice-chairperson, and other officers that the board considers necessary. 
(e) ?A majority of the board of appeals members appointed and serving constitutes a quorum. Final action of the board of appeals shall be only by affirmative vote of a majority of the board members appointed and serving. 
(f) ?The city council shall fix the amount of any per diem compensation provided to the members of the board of appeals. Expenses of the board of appeals incurred in the performance of official duties may be reimbursed as provided by law for employees of the city. 
(g) ?A meeting of the board of appeals shall be held pursuant to the open meetings act, Public Act No. 267 of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq.). Public notice of the time, date, and place of the meeting shall be given in the manner required by such act. 
(h) ?A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by the board of appeals in the performance of an official function shall be made available to the public pursuant to the freedom of information act, Public Act No. 442 of 1976 (MCL 15.231 et seq.). 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.541c. 
Sec. 10-164. - Appeal to circuit court. 
    An owner aggrieved by a final decision or order of the city council or the board of appeals under section 10-160 may appeal the decision or order to the circuit court by filing a petition for an order of superintending control within 20 days from the date of the decision. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.542. 
Secs. 10-165—10-181. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Building and construction in floodplain, MCL 324.3108; soil conservation districts law, MCL 324.9301 et seq.; habitat protection, MCL 324.30101 et seq.; subdivision within or abutting floodplain, plat requirements, MCL 560.138; subdivision within floodplain, conditions for approval, MCL 560.194. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-182. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the building department's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
    Existing mobile home park or mobile home subdivision means a parcel, or contiguous parcels, of land divided into two or more mobile home lots for rent or sale for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the mobile home is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the construction of streets) is completed before January 13, 1978. 
    Expansion to an existing mobile home park or mobile home subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the mobile homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, either final site grading or pouring of concrete pads, or the construction of streets). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the: 
(1) ?Overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2) ?Unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the federal emergency management agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood hazard boundary-floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas, that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
    Habitable floor means any floor useable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or restoration, or a combination thereof. A floor used only for storage purposes is not a habitable floor. 
    Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. 
    Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. It does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers. 
    New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after January 13, 1978. 
    New mobile home park or mobile home subdivision means a parcel, or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more mobile home lots for rent or sale for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the mobile home is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the construction of streets) is completed on or after January 13, 1978. 
    Start of construction means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure, other than a mobile home, on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings or any work beyond the stage of excavation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not as part of the main structure. For a structure, other than a mobile home, without a basement or poured footings, the start of construction includes the first permanent framing or assembly of the structure or any part thereof on its piling or foundation. For mobile homes not within a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision, the term "start of construction" means the affixing of the mobile home to its permanent site. For mobile homes within mobile home parks or mobile home subdivisions, the term "start of construction" is the date on which the construction of facilities for servicing the site on which the mobile home is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the construction of streets, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and installation of utilities) is completed. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally aboveground, as well as a mobile home. 
    Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include neither any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, nor any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
    Variance means a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
(Code 1988, § 9-1; Ord. No. 149, art. 2, 1-3-1978) 
Sec. 10-183. - Statutory authorization. 
    The state legislature has in Part 323 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.32301 et seq.) delegated the responsibility to local governments to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizens. 
(Code 1988, § 9-2; Ord. No. 149, art. 1, § A, 1-3-1978) 
Sec. 10-184. - Findings of fact. 
(a) ?The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and causes safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b) ?The flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damages. 
(Code 1988, § 9-3; Ord. No. 149, art. 1, § B, 1-3-1978) 
Sec. 10-185. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1) ?Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(2) ?Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3) ?Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4) ?Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; 
(5) ?Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters of which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Code 1988, § 9-4; Ord. No. 149, art. 1, § C, 1-3-1978) 
Sec. 10-186. - Objectives. 
    The objectives of this article are to: 
(1) ?Protect human life and health; 
(2) ?Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3) ?Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4) ?Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5) ?Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6) ?Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7) ?Ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Code 1988, § 9-5; Ord. No. 149, art. 1, § D, 1-3-1978) 
Sec. 10-187. - Lands to which this article applies. 
    This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1988, § 9-6; Ord. No. 149, art. 3, § A, 1-3-1978) 
Sec. 10-188. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency through a scientific and engineering report entitled the Flood Insurance Study for Algonac, Michigan, dated December 16, 1977, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary and floodway maps and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 9-7; Ord. No. 149, art. 3, § B, 1-3-1978) 
Sec. 10-189. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Code 1988, § 9-8; Ord. No. 149, art. 3, § D, 1-3-1978) 
Sec. 10-190. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Code 1988, § 9-9; Ord. No. 149, art. 3, § E, 1-3-1978) 
Sec. 10-191. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1) ?Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2) ?Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and 
(3) ?Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Code 1988, § 9-10; Ord. No. 149, art. 3, § F, 1-3-1978) 
Sec. 10-192. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Code 1988, § 9-11; Ord. No. 149, art. 3, § G, 1-3-1978) 
Secs. 10-193—10-222. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 10-223. - Designation of flood hazard zone review official. 
    The building inspector is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1988, § 9-36; Ord. No. 149, art. 4, § A, 1-3-1978) 
Sec. 10-224. - Duties and responsibilities of the reviewing official. 
    Duties of the building inspector under this division shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1) ?Review all development permits to ensure that the permit requirements of this division have been satisfied; 
(2) ?Review permits for proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required; 
(3) ?Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; 
(4) ?Ensure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished; 
(5) ?Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(6) ?Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which the new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
(7) ?Obtain certification from a registered professional engineer or architect when floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure; 
(8) ?Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this division; 
(9) ?When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 10-188, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this article; 
(10) ?Maintain all records pertaining to the provisions of this division in the office of the building inspector which shall be open for public inspection. 
(Code 1988, § 9-37; Ord. No. 149, art. 4, § B, 1-3-1978) 
Sec. 10-225. - Development permit—Required. 
    A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 9-38; Ord. No. 149, art. 3, § C, 1-3-1978) 
Sec. 10-226. - Same—Application; information. 
    Application for a development permit pursuant to this division shall be made to the building inspector on forms furnished by him and may include, but not be limited to, the following plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, fill storage of materials; drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1) ?Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor, including basement, of all structures; 
(2) ?Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure has been floodproofed; 
(3) ?Provide a certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the floodproofing criteria in section 10-249(2); 
(4) ?Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(Code 1988, § 9-39; Ord. No. 149, art. 4, § C, 1-3-1978) 
Sec. 10-227. - Variance procedure. 
(a) ?The zoning board of appeals as established by city council shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this division. 
(b) ?The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the building inspector in the enforcement of administration of this division. 
(c) ?Any person aggrieved by the decision of the zoning board of appeals or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the circuit court, as provided in the administrative procedures act, Public Act No. 306 of 1969 (MCL 24.201 et seq.), as amended. 
(d) ?Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in this section. 
(e) ?In passing upon such applications, the zoning board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this division, and the: 
(1) ?Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(2) ?Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3) ?Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(4) ?Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5) ?Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(6) ?Availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(7) ?Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(8) ?Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(9) ?Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10) ?Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(11) ?Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(f) ?Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing subsection (e) of this section has been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g) ?Upon consideration of the factors listed in this section and the purposes of this article, the zoning board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this division. 
(h) ?Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i) ?Conditions for variances: 
(1) ?Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2) ?Variances shall only be issued upon a: 
a. ?Showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b. ?Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c. ?Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3) ?Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation two feet below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4) ?The building inspector shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the federal emergency management agency upon request. 
(Code 1988, § 9-40; Ord. No. 149, art. 4, § D, 1-3-1978) 
Secs. 10-228—10-247. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 10-248. - General standards. 
    All areas of special flood hazard require: 
(1) ?All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2) ?All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3) ?All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4) ?All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(5) ?New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(6) ?On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Code 1988, § 9-61; Ord. No. 149, art. 5, § A, 1-3-1978) 
Sec. 10-249. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 10-188 or 10-224(9), the following provisions are required: 
(1) ?Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above base flood elevation. 
(2) ?Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in section 10-226(3). 
(3) ?Mobile homes: 
a. ?No mobile home shall be placed in a floodway or coastal high hazard area, except in an existing mobile home park or existing mobile home subdivision; 
b. ?All mobile homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors. Specific requirements shall be that: 
1. ?Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the mobile home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations and mobile homes less than 50 feet long requiring one additional tie per side; 
2. ?Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points and mobile homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side; 
3. ?All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; and 
4. ?Any additions to the mobile home be similarly anchored. 
c. ?For new mobile home parks and subdivisions; for expansions to existing mobile home parks and subdivisions; for existing mobile home parks and subdivisions where the repair, reconstruction or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement has commenced; and for mobile homes not placed in a mobile home park or subdivision require: 
1. ?Stands or lots are elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the lowest floor of the mobile home will be at or above the base flood level; 
2. ?Adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler are provided; and 
3. ?In the instance of elevation on pilings: 
(i) ?Lots are large enough to permit steps; 
(ii) ?Piling foundations are placed in stable soil no more than ten feet apart; and 
(iii) ?Reinforcement is provided for pilings more than six feet above the ground level. 
(4) ?Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 10-188 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
a. ?Prohibits encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments unless certification by a professional registered engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge; 
b. ?If subsection (4)a of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division; 
c. ?Prohibit the placement of any mobile homes, except in an existing mobile home park or existing mobile home subdivision. 
(Code 1988, § 9-62; Ord. No. 149, art. 5, § B, 1-3-1978) 
Sec. 10-250. - Areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 10-188 are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1) ?All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the crown of the nearest street to or above the depth number specified on the community's FIRM. 
(2) ?All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall: 
a. ?Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the crown of the nearest street to or above the depth number specified on the FIRM; or 
b. ?Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely floodproofed to or above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
(Code 1988, § 9-63; Ord. No. 149, art. 5, § C, 1-3-1978) 
Sec. 10-251. - Subdivision proposals. 
(a) ?All subdivision proposals under this article shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b) ?All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(c) ?All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(d) ?Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres. 
(Code 1988, § 9-64; Ord. No. 149, art. 5, § D, 1-3-1978) 
Secs. 10-252—10-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - EMERGENCY MEASURES 

Sec. 10-281. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the emergency preparedness committee or the public safety director's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
    City means the City of Algonac, County of St. Clair, Michigan, and shall include its several departments, commissions, boards and agencies. 
    Declaration of flood emergency shall be created only in the following manner: by the city manager as set forth in the definition of "flood emergency," following a meeting of the emergency preparedness committee called for this purpose. Only in the absence of the city manager at such meeting can the public safety director acting through the committee make such a declaration which shall conform to the provisions of the definition of "flood emergency." 
    Emergency preparedness committee shall consist of the following city officials: public safety director, DPW superintendent, and water department superintendent and such other individuals as the city council may from time to time designate, hereafter referred to collectively as the "committee." 
    Flood control area means those areas specifically designated as flood control areas by the public safety director. 
    Flood emergency means any high water condition posing an immediate or imminent threat to persons or property as stated in a written declaration to the city council to that effect by the city manager or by the emergency preparedness committee acting through the public safety director. 
    Public safety director means the person appointed by the city manager for the purpose of execution of the terms and provisions of this article, hereafter referred to as "officer." 
(Code 1988, § 9-76; Ord. No. 97-05, § 2, 7-15-1997) 
Sec. 10-282. - Creation of emergency preparedness committee. 
    There is hereby created an emergency preparedness committee in which is vested the power and authority to administer, manage, operate and control the flood control system established by the city and to construe and make effective the provisions of this article. The committee shall consist of at least three individuals as follows: 
(1) ?Public safety director; 
(2) ?Superintendent of the water department; 
(3) ?DPW superintendent. 
All members of this committee shall continue to serve on the committee until his successor has qualified for the office of that particular committee person. 
(Code 1988, § 9-77; Ord. No. 97-05, § 3, 7-15-1997) 
Sec. 10-283. - Emergency powers. 
    During a declared flood emergency, the emergency preparedness committee, acting as committee or through the public safety director, has full power and authority to: 
(1) ?Order mobilization of community members and city employees. 
(2) ?Authorize and supervise the installation of temporary dikes, sandbags or other methods of flood prevention or protection. 
(3) ?Enter upon public or private lands and premises to supervise flood control and install, erect and/or remove temporary protective measures. 
(4) ?Issue directives barring the public from designated flood control areas during the duration of a declared flood emergency. 
(5) ?Order the evacuation of designated flood control areas and prohibit any person from occupying, walking upon or otherwise using said designated areas during the duration of a declared flood emergency. 
(6) ?Mobilize volunteers. 
(7) ?Distribute and utilize flood prevention or flood protection materials. 
(8) ?Establish a communication and distribution center at the city offices or such other alternative site or sites as may be selected in the sole discretion of the committee. 
(9) ?Coordinate local community efforts with the flood protection and flood control efforts of the county, state and United States Government. 
(10) ?Incur on behalf of the city expenses in providing flood prevention or flood protection measures. 
(11) ?Maintain appropriate accounting records relative to the expenditure of time and expense on the part of city employees and city residents during the duration of the declared flood emergency. 
(12) ?Issue such other orders or engage in such other activities as may be necessary to implement the purpose and objective of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 9-78; Ord. No. 97-05, § 4, 7-15-1997) 
Sec. 10-284. - Authority to incur expenses. 
    Specific authority is hereby granted to the emergency preparedness committee acting as a committee or through the public safety director to incur on behalf of the city expenses in providing flood prevention or flood protection measures pursuant to the provisions of this article. The actual cost to the city of providing flood prevention or protection measures pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be prorated and apportioned by the city among the lots or parcels for which flood prevention or protection has been provided and the actual costs to the city, as prorated and apportioned, shall be charged to the relevant land owner to be assessed pursuant to section 10-285. Where said prevention or protection is provided, a minimum charge of $100.00 per lot or parcel affected shall be charged to the land owner to be assessed pursuant to section 10-285. 
(Code 1988, § 9-79; Ord. No. 97-05, § 5, 7-15-1997) 
Sec. 10-285. - Collection of expenses. 
(a) ?The full amount of any charges assessed pursuant to section 10-284, with respect to each lot or parcel of land for which flood prevention control or protection has been afforded pursuant to this article, shall be a special assessment to be spread against such land and property to be assessed, levied and collected at the same time and in the same manner as other city taxes and shall be returned in the same manner for nonpayment. 
(b) ?The cost incurred by the city, if affording flood protection control or flood prevention pursuant to this article, shall be a lien against real property affected thereby and shall be reported to the assessing officer of the city who shall assess the cost against the property for which the flood protection or flood prevention has been provided. 
(c) ?The owner or party in interest in whose name the affected property appears upon the last local tax assessment records shall be notified of the amount of such costs by first class mail at the address shown on the city records. If the owner or party in interest in whose name the affected property appears upon the last local tax assessment record fails to repay the same within 30 days after mailing by the assessor of the notice of the amount thereof, the assessor shall add the same to the next tax roll of the city and the same shall be collected in the same manner as by law all other taxes are collected by the city. 
(Code 1988, § 9-80; Ord. No. 97-05, § 6, 7-15-1997) 
Sec. 10-286. - Termination of flood emergency. 
    The city manager or the emergency preparedness committee acting as a committee or through the public safety director shall declare the termination of a flood emergency by issuance of a written directive to that effect to the city council stating the effective date and the time of the termination. 
(Code 1988, § 9-81; Ord. No. 97-05, § 7, 7-15-1997) 
Sec. 10-287. - Review. 
    Any person may request a hearing before the emergency preparedness committee for the purpose of reviewing the necessity of the continued implementation by the city of the emergency flood control system and procedures described in this article. Such review may include, but not be limited to, the necessity for continued declaration of a flood emergency, the adequacy or inadequacy of the flood prevention or flood protection procedures taken, the reasonableness of the costs incurred by the committee or officer in providing flood prevention or flood protection methods and the reasonableness of the appointment of costs among the land owners affected thereby. The procedures to be followed in the processing of any application for review, including the assessment and amount of an application fee, shall be established by resolution of the city council. A copy of such resolutions shall be kept on file in the city clerk's office for public inspection. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the committee or officer may appeal the decision or order to the city council and may request a further hearing before that body. The city council is hereby specifically authorized to hear and decide any purported or alleged error in the implementation of this article by the committee or officer and the city council shall have the authority to reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order of the committee or officer in any fashion as may be deemed by the city council necessary and proper. Any person aggrieved by the final decision or order may appeal to the circuit court within 20 days from the date of decision of the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 9-82; Ord. No. 97-05, § 8, 7-15-1997) 
Sec. 10-288. - Disclaimer of liability. 
    This article shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, including, but not limited to, the emergency preparedness committee and the public safety director, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Code 1988, § 9-83; Ord. No. 98-05, § 9, 7-15-1997) 
Sec. 10-289. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any lawful order of the emergency preparedness committee or the public safety director or the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00. 
(Code 1988, § 9-84; Ord. No. 97-05, § 10, 7-15-1997) 
Secs. 10-290—10-311. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 10-312. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to designate an enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the city and to designate regulated flood hazard areas under the provisions of the Stille-DeRossett-Hale single state construction code act, Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.). 
(Code 1988, § 9-96; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 10-313. - Code appendix, enforced. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1508b(6), Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code, shall be enforced by the enforcing agency within the city. 
(Code 1988, § 9-98; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 3, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 10-314. - Designation of regulated flood prone hazard areas. 
    The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS) Entitled St. Clair Co., MI and dated May 3, 2010, and the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) (FIRMS) panel number(s) of 26147C, 0518D, 0519D, 0585D and dated May 3, 2010, are adopted by reference for the purposes of administration of the Michigan Construction Code, and declared to be a part of Section 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code, and to provide the content of the "Flood Hazards" section of Table R301.2(1) of the Michigan Residential Code. 
(Code 1988, § 9-99; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 4, 4-20-2010) 
Chapter 12 - BUSINESS LICENSING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - License required. 
    No person shall, directly or indirectly, operate, conduct, maintain or manage any business, trade, occupation or premises without first procuring the license in the manner prescribed in this chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 11-1) 
Sec. 12-2. - Evidence of doing business. 
    The fact that any person represents himself as being engaged in any business, trade or occupation for the transaction of which a license is required, or that such person exhibited a sign or advertisement indicating that he is engaged in such business, trade or occupation, shall be prima facie evidence of the liability of such person to pay the required license fee. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2) 
Sec. 12-3. - State license or permit not exemption. 
    The fact that a license or permit has been granted to any person by the state to engage in the operation, conduct, maintenance or management of any business, trade, occupation or premises shall not exempt such person from the necessity of procuring a license from the city. 
(Code 1988, § 11-3) 
Sec. 12-4. - Application. 
    Each person required to procure a license from the city shall make application for such license to the city clerk in the form and manner prescribed by the clerk and shall state, under oath, such facts as may be required for, or applicable to, the granting of such license, including the following: 
(1) ?The full names, business addresses, residence addresses, e-mail addresses and telephone numbers of all owners, proprietors, officers, managers and local employees of applicant's business; the names, address, e-mail addresses and telephone numbers of each officer, if the applicant is a corporation; 
(2) ?The places in the city where it is proposed to maintain the applicant's business, and the length of time during which it is proposed that such business shall be conducted; 
(3) ?The nature, character and quality of the goods, wares, merchandise or services to be sold or offered for sale by applicant; 
(4) ?The nature and kind of business which the applicant proposes to conduct and the manner of operating same; 
(5) ?A list of all assumed, trade or firm names under which the applicant intends to do business; 
(6) ?The nature and character of advertising done or proposed to be done in order to attract customers; 
(7) ?Whether or not the applicant or person conducting or managing the applicant's business has been convicted of a crime, misdemeanor or the violation of any municipal ordinance, and, if so, full particulars in connection therewith. 
(Code 1988, § 11-4) 
Sec. 12-5. - Compliance with state law prerequisite to issuance. 
    No license required by this chapter shall be issued to any person who is required to procure a license or permit from the state until such person shall submit evidence that the required state license or permit has been issued and that all fees pertaining thereto have been paid. 
(Code 1988, § 11-5) 
Sec. 12-6. - Compliance with city ordinances; approval of city officers or department heads. 
(a) ?No license shall be issued to any applicant until such applicant has complied with all of the provisions of this chapter and every other ordinance of the city pertaining to the business for which application for the license is made. No license shall be issued, if the approval of any officer of the city is required, until such approval is made. The term "approval," in each instance, shall mean written approval by the designated officer upon the face of the application for a license; subscribed by such officer; and the date of the approval. 
(b) ?Whenever the approval of a license is required by any city officer or department head, the criteria for approval shall be the applicant's compliance with federal, state and local laws concerning the field in which such officer or department head is involved. 
(Code 1988, § 11-6; Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 12-7. - Personal property taxes, prerequisite. 
    No license shall be issued or renewed under the provisions of this chapter until any and all personal property taxes, levied and assessed against such person by the city which may be due and payable at the time of the filing of the application for such license, shall have been paid. 
(Code 1988, § 11-8) 
Sec. 12-8. - Fees. 
(a) ?No license shall be issued until the required nonrefundable fees as prescribed by resolution of the city council shall be paid. 
(b) ?No license fee shall be required from any person exempt from payment of the fee by state or federal law. Such persons shall comply with all other provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city. The city clerk shall, in all such cases, issue to such persons, licenses which are clearly marked as to such exemption and the reason therefor. 
(c) ?Whenever any license to operate or conduct any business, trade or occupation is required, the license fee to conduct or operate such business, trade or occupation, whether it is connected or operated in conjunction with any other business or not, shall be paid unless a contrary intention is expressed. 
(d) ?Whenever any license is required to operate or conduct any business, trade or occupation, the required license fee shall be paid for each separate premises maintained by the licensee. 
(e) ?A penalty of ten percent of any required license fee shall be assessed and paid upon the failure of any licensee to renew such license on or before the expiration date thereof. 
(Code 1988, § 11-9; Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 12-9. - Insurance. 
    In all cases where public liability or property damage insurance is a prerequisite to the issuance of a license, the city may require that it be named as a coinsured or additional insured under such policy and such policy shall be in the form as approved by the city. 
(Code 1988, § 11-10) 
Sec. 12-10. - Denial, revocation, suspension; causes for termination. 
(a) ?The issuance of licenses applied for under this chapter may be denied by the city clerk, and licenses issued may be revoked or suspended by the city clerk at any time, for any of the following causes; 
(1) ?Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement made in the application for license; 
(2) ?Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement made in the operation of a business; 
(3) ?Any violation of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city reasonably related to the occupation or profession being licensed; 
(4) ?Conducting a business in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or welfare of the public; 
(5) ?Failure or inability of an applicant to meet and satisfy the requirements and provisions of this chapter and every other ordinance of the city reasonably related to the occupation or profession being licensed. 
(b) ?Written notice of suspension or revocation, stating the cause therefor, shall be delivered to the licensee personally or mailed to his address as shown in his application for a license. 
(c) ?Any person whose license is revoked or suspended, or any person whose application for a license is denied, shall have the right to a hearing before the city council, provided a written request therefor is filed with the city clerk within ten days following the delivery or mailing of the notice of revocation or suspension, or within ten days following the denial of the application for a license. The city council may reverse any determination to issue or to deny the issuance of a license or any revocation of a license, and the city council may grant or reinstate any license. No person shall operate any business during any time when his license therefor has been suspended, revoked or canceled. 
(Code 1988, § 11-11) 
Sec. 12-11. - Expiration. 
    All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall terminate on March 31 at 12:00 midnight, two years after the issuance of the license. The expiration of each license shall be indicated on the fact thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 12-12. - Renewal. 
    Unless otherwise provided, an application for renewal of a license shall be considered in the same manner as an original application. 
(Code 1988, § 11-13) 
Sec. 12-13. - Carrying, display requirements. 
(a) ?No licensee shall fail to carry any license issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city upon his person at all times when engaged in the operation, conduct or maintenance of any business for which the license was issued; except that whenever the business is operated, conducted or maintained at a fixed place or establishment, the license shall be displayed at all times in some conspicuous place in the business premises, and the licensee shall produce the same for examination when applying for a renewal thereof or when requested so to do by any city police officer. 
(b) ?No licensee shall fail to conspicuously display on each vehicle or amusement device or machine required to be licensed by this chapter, such tags or insignia as may be furnished by the city clerk and required by this chapter or any other ordinance of the city. 
(c) ?No person shall display any expired, suspended or revoked license, or any license for which a duplicate has been issued. 
(Code 1988, § 11-14) 
Sec. 12-14. - Transfer prohibited. 
    No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable. 
(Code 1988, § 11-15) 
Sec. 12-15. - Provisions complementary and supplemental. 
    The provisions of this chapter, together with other relevant provisions of any other ordinance, or the provisions hereafter authorized or required by state law, and any and all thereof relative to licenses, permits, businesses, trades, occupations, premises or anything connected therewith, shall be construed to be complementary and supplemental to each other so far as relevant, and unless otherwise prescribed or inconsistent herewith, shall constitute a part of the regulations and conditions applicable generally to any particular license in the same manner as though these provisions were fully written into each separate ordinance. 
(Code 1988, § 11-16) 
Secs. 12-16—12-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RECREATIONAL MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 12-20. - Name. 
    This article is known as the City of Algonac Prohibition of Marihuana Establishments Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 2018-07 , § 1, 12-4-2018) 
Sec. 12-21. - Purpose. 
    Pursuant to the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, Initiated law 1 of 2018, the City of Algonac elects to prohibit recreational marihuana establishments within its boundaries. 
( Ord. No. 2018-07 , § 1, 12-4-2018) 
Sec. 12-22. - Authority. 
    This article is adopted under the City of Algonac's authority to preserve the public peace, health, safety and welfare pursuant to Public Act 279 of 1909, the Home Rule City Act, MCL 117.1 et seq. and the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, Initiated law 1 of 2018. 
( Ord. No. 2018-07 , § 1, 12-4-2018) 
Sec. 12-23. - Geographic area. 
    This article shall have the regulatory effect to prohibit marihuana establishments in all geographic areas of the City of Algonac to the fullest extent allowed by law. 
( Ord. No. 2018-07 , § 1, 12-4-2018) 
Sec. 12-24. - Penalty. 
    Any person or entity that violates this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and a fine not to exceed $500.00. Nothing in this article prohibits enforcement for injunctive and declaratory relief in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
( Ord. No. 2018-07 , § 1, 12-4-2018) 
Chapter 14 - CIVIL RIGHTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Elliott-Larsen civil rights act, MCL 37.2101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Housing discrimination, MCL 37.2501 et seq. 

Sec. 14-19. - Adoption of state law. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference Article 5 of Public Act No. 453 of 1976 (MCL 37.2501 et seq.) on fair housing, as if fully set out herein. 
(Code 1988, §§ 6-21—6-24; Ord. No. 152, §§ 2.01—5.03, 6-19-1979) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt state law by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Chapter 16 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Housing and slums clearance projects, MCL 125.651 et seq.; housing cooperation law, MCL 125.601 et seq.; urban redevelopment corporations, MCL 125.901 et seq.; rehabilitation of blighted areas, MCL 125.71 et seq.; principal shopping districts and business improvement districts, MCL 125.981 et seq.; economic expansion, MCL 125.1201 et seq.; regional economic development commission, MCL 125.1231 et seq.; state housing development authority act of 1966, MCL 125.1401 et seq.; downtown development authority, MCL 125.1651 et seq.; economic development corporations, MCL 125.1601 et seq.; tax increment finance authority act, MCL 125.1801 et seq.; Michigan economic and social opportunity act of 1981, MCL 400.1101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1—16-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOUSING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to create a housing commission, MCL 125.653. 

Sec. 16-19. - Created. 
    There is hereby created in and for the city a commission to be known as the "Algonac Housing Commission," and referred to in this article as "the commission." 
(Code 1988, § 7-21; Ord. No. 124, § 1, 12-3-1968; Ord. No. 131, § 1, 4-20-1971) 
Sec. 16-20. - Membership; appointment, eligibility. 
(a) ?Subject to subsection (b) of this section, the housing commission shall consist of five members to be appointed by the official designated by a resolution adopted by the city council. 
(b) ?One member of the housing commission shall be a tenant of public or subsidized housing as provided by state law. 
(c) ?City employees and/or officials other than elected officials are hereby declared eligible for appointment to the housing commission. 
(Code 1988, § 7-22; Ord. No. 124, § 2, 12-3-1968) 
Sec. 16-21. - Term; vacancies. 
    The term of office of the members of the commission shall be five years. Members of the first commission existing shall be appointed for the terms of one year, two years, three years, four years and five years respectively, and annually thereafter one member shall be appointed for the term of five years. Any vacancy in office shall be filled by the city council for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Code 1988, § 7-23; Ord. No. 124, § 2, 12-3-1968) 
Sec. 16-22. - Compensation; removal. 
(a) ?Members of the housing commission shall serve without compensation. 
(b) ?Upon recommendation of the appointing authority to the city council, the city council may remove a member of the housing commission from office before the expiration of his term. 
(Code 1988, § 7-24; Ord. No. 124, § 2, 12-3-1968) 
Sec. 16-23. - Meetings; rules, records. 
    The commission shall meet at regular intervals, such meetings to be public. It shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of the proceedings. 
(Code 1988, § 7-25; Ord. No. 124, § 4, 12-3-1968) 
Sec. 16-24. - Quorum. 
    Three members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Code 1988, § 7-26; Ord. No. 124, § 4, 12-3-1968) 
Sec. 16-25. - Officers and employees. 
    A president and vice-president shall be elected by the commission. The commission may appoint a director who may also serve as secretary and such other employees or officers as shall be necessary. The commission shall prescribe the duties of all its officers and employees and may, with the approval of the city council, fix their compensation. The commission may from time to time as necessary employ engineers, architects and consultants. 
(Code 1988, § 7-27; Ord. No. 124, § 4, 12-3-1968) 
Sec. 16-26. - Powers and duties. 
    The commission shall have all the powers and duties vested or permitted to be vested in housing commissions by Public Act. No. 18 of the Extra Session of 1933 (MCL 125.651 et seq.), and any laws heretofore or hereafter enacted which are supplemental thereto, it being the intention of this article to vest in the commission all powers and duties permitted by law. 
(Code 1988, § 7-28; Ord. No. 124, § 3, 12-3-1968) 
Sec. 16-27. - Funds. 
    Funds for the operation of the commission may be provided by the city council but the commission shall, as soon as possible, reimburse the city for all monies expended by it for the commission from revenues received from the sale of bonds. 
(Code 1988, § 7-29; Ord. No. 124, § 5, 12-3-1968) 
Sec. 16-28. - Reports to city council. 
    The commission shall make an annual report of its activities to the city council and shall make such other reports as the city council may from time to time direct. 
(Code 1988, § 7-30; Ord. No. 124, § 6, 12-3-1968) 
Secs. 16-29—16-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Downtown development authority, MCL 125.1651 et seq. 
Note— Ord. No. 2002-4, adopted May 21, 2002, approved the development plan and tax increment financing plan of the downtown development authority. 

Sec. 16-60. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Downtown Development Authority Ordinance." 
(Code 1988, § 7-61; Ord. No. 2002-1, § 1, 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 16-61. - Definitions. 
    The terms used in this article shall have the same meaning as given to them in Act 197, as amended, or as hereafter in this section provided unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary. As used in this article: 
    Act 197 means Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.). 
    Authority means the Algonac Downtown Development Authority created by this article. 
    Board or board of directors means the board of directors of the authority, the governing body of the authority. 
    Chief executive officer means the mayor of the city. 
    Downtown development tax means the tax authorized by this article pursuant to Act 197 to be imposed by the authority in the downtown district. 
    Downtown district means the downtown district designated by this article as now existing or hereafter amended. 
(Code 1988, § 7-62; Ord. No. 2002-1, § 2, 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 16-62. - Creation of authority. 
    There is hereby created, pursuant to Act 197, a downtown development authority for the city. The authority shall be a public body corporate and shall be known and exercise its powers under the title of the "Algonac Downtown Development Authority." The authority may adopt a seal, may sue and be sued in any court of this state and shall possess all of the powers necessary to carry out the purpose of its incorporation as provided by this article and Act 197. The enumeration of a power in this article or in Act 197 shall not be construed as a limitation upon the general powers of the authority. 
(Code 1988, § 7-63; Ord. No. 2002-1, § 4, 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 16-63. - Description of downtown development district. 
    The downtown development district in which the authority shall exercise its powers as provided by Act 197 shall consist of the following described territory in the city, subject to such changes as may hereinafter be made pursuant to this article and Act 197: 
Properties on both sides of St. Clair River Drive extending from Smith Street to Pointe Aux Tremble Road (M-29); properties on both sides of Michigan Street extending from Howard to Pointe Aux Tremble Road (M-29); and properties along Pointe Aux Tremble Road (M-29) to the westerly city limits, as defined on the attached map entitled "Proposed DDA Boundary." All public or private alleys and other public rights-of-way abutting these lots are also included within the boundary of the proposed district. 
(Code 1988, § 7-64; Ord. No. 2002-1, § 5, 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 16-64. - Board of directors. 
    The authority shall be under the supervision and control of a board of directors consisting of the chief executive officer of the city and eight to 12 members, as determined from time to time by the city council, as provided in Act 197. The members shall be appointed by the chief executive officer subject to approval by the city council and shall hold office for the terms provided in Act 197. All members shall hold office until the members successor is appointed. 
(Code 1988, § 7-65; Ord. No. 2002-1, § 6, 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 16-65. - Powers of authority. 
    Except as specifically otherwise provided in this article, the authority shall have all powers provided by law subject to the limitations imposed by law and herein. 
(Code 1988, § 7-66; Ord. No. 2002-1, § 7, 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 16-66. - Fiscal year; adoption of budget. 
(a) ?The fiscal year of the authority shall begin on July 1 of each year and end on June 30 of the following year, or such other fiscal year as may hereafter be adopted by the city. 
(b) ?The board shall annually prepare a budget and shall submit it to the city council on the same date that the proposed budget for the city is required by the city Charter to be submitted to the city council. The board shall not finally adopt a budget for any fiscal year until the budget has been approved by the city council. The board may, however, temporarily adopt a budget in connection with the operation of any improvements which may have been financed by revenue bonds where required to do so by the article authorizing the revenue bonds. 
(c) ?The authority shall submit financial reports to the council at the same time and on the same basis as departments of the city are required to submit reports. The authority shall be audited annually by the same independent auditors auditing the city and copies of the audit report shall be filed with the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 7-67; Ord. No. 2002-1, § 8, 4-2-2002) 
Chapter 18 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Natural resources and environmental protection act, MCL 324.101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANTI-BLIGHT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Public nuisances and abatement, MCL 600.3801 et seq. 

Sec. 18-19. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as and may be cited as the "City of Algonac Anti-Blight Ordinance." 
(Code 1988, § 12-1; Ord. No. 2013-01, § 1, 5-21-2013) 
Sec. 18-20. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to prevent, reduce, or eliminate blight by preventing and eliminating contributing factors and causes of blight in the city. 
(Code 1988, § 12-2; Ord. No. 2013-01, § 1, 5-21-2013) 
Sec. 18-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Blighted structure means any dwelling, garage, outbuilding, factory, shop, store, office, building, warehouse, or any other structure or part of a structure which, because of fire, wind, other natural disaster, or physical deterioration, is unfit for human occupancy or the useful purpose for which it was originally intended; or any originally intended, or any partially completed structure which is not being built pursuant to a valid building permit issued by the city. 
    Building materials means lumber, bricks, concrete blocks, cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete, cement, nails, screws, or any other materials commonly used in construction. 
    Enforcement officer means the building inspector, code enforcement officer, police officer, or any other person designated by city council to enforce this article. 
    Firewood means logs, lumber, kindling, or other materials intended for burning in a wood stove, fireplace, or other heat-producing device. 
    Junk means any abandoned, discarded, unusable, or unused objects or equipment, including, but not limited to, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans, implements, parts of motor vehicles, machinery, cloth, rubber, bottles, metals, boxes, cartons, or crates. 
    Junk automobiles means any motor vehicle which is not licensed for use by the state; or any motor vehicle, whether licensed or not, which is inoperable for any reason. 
    Vacant building means any building which is unoccupied and not kept securely locked; with windows glazed or neatly boarded up; and protected from the elements, vandals, rodents, and other animals. 
(Code 1988, § 12-3; Ord. No. 2013-01, § 1, 5-21-2013) 
Sec. 18-22. - Prohibited conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee, occupant; or any agent, assignee, representative, or employee of such owner, lessee, or occupant to do any of the following upon any premises within the city owned or occupied by him: 
(1) ?Maintain or permit the existence of a blighted structure for any period in excess of 30 days. 
(2) ?Maintain or permit the existence of any vacant building. 
(3) ?Store, accumulate, or permit the storage or accumulation of junk or junk automobiles unless said items are stored within a completely enclosed building which meets with all applicable city codes and zoning ordinances. 
(4) ?Store, accumulate, or permit the storage or accumulation of any building materials for any period longer than reasonably necessary for the immediate use of such building materials, but in no event for longer than 60 days. 
(5) ?Permit or maintain any growth of weeds, grass, or rank vegetation to a greater height than ten inches on the average; or any accumulation of dead weeds, grass, or brush. 
(6) ?Permit or maintain any growth of poison ivy, ragweed, or other poisonous plants. 
(7) ?Permit any accumulation of garbage except in tightly covered containers. 
(8) ?Fail to stack firewood in an orderly fashion to a height not to exceed 64 inches; or, if stacked adjacent to a fence, to a height not to exceed the height of the fence. 
(9) ?Have, place, deposit, or cause to have placed or deposited any dead animal, putrefying carcass, carrion, animal or vegetable offal, unclean or nauseous water, any filthy or decaying matter, or any other offensive substance to the detriment of the public health. 
(10) ?Permit any excrement, unclean or nauseous water, garbage, or any filthy or offensive substance to remain on any premises to the detriment of the public health. 
(Code 1988, § 12-4; Ord. No. 2013-01, § 1, 5-21-2013) 
Sec. 18-23. - Enforcement. 
(a) ?Written notice of violation. Before commencing prosecution under this article, the enforcement officer shall notify the alleged violator of the existence of the alleged violation of this article in writing. Said written notice shall specify the alleged violation of this article; the potential for creation of a lien against the property as set forth in subsection (e) of this section; and shall be served upon the alleged violator either at the common address of the property or at the last known address of the alleged violator. 
(b) ?Time to remedy alleged violation. An alleged violator shall have ten days from the date of mailing of the written notice required by subsection (a) of this section in which to correct or remedy the alleged violation. Additional time may be granted by the enforcement officer where the alleged violator initiates good faith efforts to remove or eliminate the alleged violation. 
(c) ?Ongoing violations. Each day that a violation of this article continues to exist after the expiration of the ten-day period set forth in subsection (b) of this section shall constitute a separate violation of this article subject to the penalties established in subsection (d) of this section. 
(d) ?Penalties. A violation of this article is a misdemeanor offense subjecting the violator to the penalties set forth in section 1-14(b). 
(e) ?Lien created. If the alleged violator fails to remedy the alleged violation within the time period set forth in subsection (b) of this section, the enforcement officer shall cause the blight to be corrected, remedied, removed, or eliminated. The actual cost of this remedial effort, plus an administrative charge as set by city council resolution, shall become a lien against the premises and the property owner shall be invoiced. If by October 31, the debt is still outstanding, the fee shall become a lien against the premises and shall be placed on the December tax roll for collection. The remedial effort may be completed by the department of public works or an agent retained by the city. 
(Code 1988, § 12-5; Ord. No. 2013-01, § 1, 5-21-2013) 
Secs. 18-24—18-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPEN STORAGE OF JUNKED VEHICLES 

Sec. 18-50. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dismantled and partially dismantled motor vehicle means a motor vehicle from which some part that is ordinarily a component of such motor vehicle has been removed or is missing. 
    Dwelling means any house, building, structure, tent, shelter, trailer or vehicle or portion thereof which is occupied in whole or in part as the home, residence, living or sleeping place, or which is intended to be occupied by one or more persons, either permanently or transiently. 
    Inoperable motor vehicle means a motor vehicle that by reason of dismantling, disrepair or other cause is incapable of being propelled under its own power. 
    Motor vehicle means any wheeled vehicle that is self-propelled or intended to be self-propelled. 
    Unlicensed motor vehicle means a motor vehicle not having current state license plates or registration. 
(Code 1988, § 23-131; Ord. No. 141, § 3, 11-12-1974) 
Sec. 18-51. - Dismantled, partially dismantled or inoperable motor vehicles or parts. 
    It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to store on, place on or permit to be stored or placed on or allow to remain on any platted or unplatted parcel of land, a dismantled, partially dismantled or inoperable motor vehicle, or unlicensed motor vehicle or any parts of a motor vehicle unless located in a licensed junk or salvage yard, unless such partially dismantled motor vehicle or parts of a motor vehicle shall be kept in a wholly enclosed garage or other wholly enclosed structure. However, any bona fide owner, co-owner, tenant or co-tenant may store, permit to be stored or allow to remain on the premises of which he is the owner, co-owner, tenant or co-tenant, any one such dismantled, partially dismantled or inoperable motor vehicle, for a period of not to exceed 14 days if such motor vehicle is registered in his name, and further, any such owner, co-owner, tenant or co-tenant may, in the event of hardship, upon payment of the fee provided in this division, secure a permit from the city manager to extend such period of 14 days for an additional period of not to exceed 30 days or any one such dismantled, partially dismantled or inoperable motor vehicle if such motor vehicle is registered in his name. This article shall not be construed to permit parking or placing of dismantled or partially dismantled vehicles on any street area in the city or in any front yard, as now or hereafter defined by chapter 50. 
(Code 1988, § 23-132; Ord. No. 141, § 1, 11-12-1974) 
Sec. 18-52. - Permits. 
    Upon application duly made by the registered owner of a motor vehicle and upon showing of hardship, the city manager is hereby authorized to issue the permits pursuant to this article. A fee as prescribed by resolution of the city council for each such permit issued shall be collected and shall be paid into the general fund. 
(Code 1988, § 23-133; Ord. No. 141, § 2, 11-12-1974) 
Sec. 18-53. - Interpretation. 
    This article shall not be deemed to be in conflict with other provisions of this Code relating to rubbish, litter, garbage, refuse, trash or junk but shall be construed as supplementary to any such provisions as well as any statutes of the state relating thereto. 
(Code 1988, § 23-134; Ord. No. 141, § 4, 11-12-1974) 
Sec. 18-54. - Nuisance. 
    The presence of a dismantled, partially dismantled or inoperable motor vehicle or parts of a motor vehicle on any platted or unplatted parcel of land in violation of the terms of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Code 1988, § 23-135; Ord. No. 141, § 5, 11-12-1974) 
Secs. 18-55—18-81. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NOISE 

Sec. 18-82. - Anti-noise regulations. 
    No person, firm, or corporation shall cause or create any unreasonable or improper noise or disturbance, injurious to the health, peace or quiet of the residents and property owners of the city. 
(Code 1988, § 13-60(a); Ord. No. 200, 4-16-1991) 
Sec. 18-83. - Prohibited. 
    The following noises and disturbances are hereby declared to be a violation of this article; provided, however, that the specifications of the same are not thereby to be construed to exclude other violations of the article not specifically enumerated: 
(1) ?The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, or other vehicle for any purpose other than to avoid an accident or collision. 
(2) ?The playing of any television, stereo, or any other electronic equipment, radio, phonograph or any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of other persons. 
(3) ?Yelling, shouting, hooting or singing on the public streets between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity. 
(4) ?The keeping of any animal, bird or fowl which emanates frequent or extended noise which shall disturb the quiet, comfort and repose of any person in the vicinity. 
(5) ?The operation of any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or constructed as to cause loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, exhausting, or other noise disturbing the quiet, comfort or repose of other persons. 
(6) ?The operation of any steam whistle attached to a boiler of any type except for the purpose of giving notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or other danger, or for other purposes upon danger, or for other purposes upon special permit therefor from the city council. 
(7) ?The discharging outside of any enclosed building of the exhaust of any steam engine, internal combustion engine, motor vehicle, or motorboat engine except through a muffler or other similar device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises resulting therefrom or discharging outside of any enclosed building of any air-operated device, unless inspected and approved by the building inspector. 
(8) ?The erection, excavation, demolition, alteration, or reconstruction of any building or premises in any platted residential district or section of the city, including the streets and highways therein, in such a manner as to manage noise or disturbance unreasonably annoying to other persons, other than between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and sundown, except in the cause of urgent necessity, in the interest of public health and safety, upon receipt of a permit thereof from the building inspector of the city, which permit shall limit the period that the activity may continue. 
(9) ?The emission or creation or any excessive noises on any street which unreasonably interferes with the operation of any school or church. 
(10) ?The creation of any loud or excessive noise, unreasonably disturbing to other persons in the vicinity in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle, trailer, or other carrier, or in connection with the opening or destruction of bales, boxes, crates, or other containers. 
(11) ?The use of any drum, loudspeaker, or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show, sale or display of merchandise which, by the creation of such noise, shall be unreasonably disturbing to other persons in the vicinity. 
(12) ?The operation between 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any obstacle course or race track for motorcycles, or vehicles of any kind or nature in any area of the city not specially zoned for such an operation and/or where the noise emanating therefrom would be unreasonably disturbing and annoying to other persons in the vicinity. 
(Code 1988, § 13-60(b); Ord. No. 200, 4-16-1991) 
Sec. 18-84. - Exceptions. 
(a) ?None of the enumerated in section 18-83 shall apply to any of the following: 
(1) ?Any police vehicle, ambulance, fire engine or emergency vehicle while engaged in necessary emergency activities. 
(2) ?Excavation or repair of bridges, streets or highways by or on behalf of the city or the county between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. when the public welfare, safety and convenience render it impossible to perform such work during other hours. 
(b) ?The provisions of this section are deemed to be in addition to the noise regulations set out in sections 6-6, 26-105, 28-16, 40-10, 42-73 and 42-101 and this section shall not be held to repeal the sections enumerated herein. 
(Code 1988, § 13-60(c); Ord. No. 200, 4-16-1991) 
Chapter 20 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— State fire prevention act, MCL 29.1 et seq.; crimes related to explosives and bombs, MCL 750.200 et seq.; crimes related to fires, MCL 750.240 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Department authority. 
(a) ?Control of premises. The fire department shall have control of the premises and streets adjacent to any building which may be on fire at any time within the city and shall have authority to rope in the premises and streets or parts thereof and to lay water hose across streets and premises during such fire. 
(b) ?Interference. It shall be unlawful during such fire for any person, except members of the fire department, to enter upon such premises where such building may be located or within any area roped off, without the consent of the fire chief. 
(Code 1988, § 8-1; Ord. No. 61, §§ 1, 2, 6-2-1924) 
State Law reference— Obstructing and disobeying firefighter, MCL 750.241. 
Secs. 20-2—20-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE CODE 

Sec. 20-21. - Adoption of International Fire Code. 
    A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as "The International Fire Code, Current Edition," as published by the International Code Council (ICC), is hereby adopted as the fire prevention code for the city for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of "The International Fire Code, Current Edition," are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this article with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if any, as prescribed in section 20-22. 
(Code 1988, § 8-21; Ord. No. 171, § 1, 3-1-1988; Ord. No. 193, 5-15-1990; Ord. No. 94-02, 3-1-1994; Ord. No. 96-9, 12-17-1996; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 1, 9-18-2012) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Sec. 20-22. - Additions, insertions and changes. 
    The following sections of the code adopted in this article are hereby revised as follows: 
    Section 101.1. Insert: City of Algonac. 
    Section 105.2. Appointment: The code official shall be appointed by the chief appointing authority of the jurisdiction. 
    Section 102.3 Change of use or occupancy. The provisions of the Michigan Building Code shall apply to all buildings undergoing a change of occupancy. 
    Section 102.4 Application of Building Code. The design and construction of new structures shall comply with the Michigan Building Code. Repair, alteration and additional to existing structures shall comply with the Michigan Building Code. 
    Section 102.5 Application of residential code. The provisions of the Michigan Residential Code shall apply. 
(Code 1988, § 8-22; Ord. No. 171, § 3, 3-1-1988; Ord. No. 193, 5-15-1990; Ord. No. 94-02, 3-1-1994; Ord. No. 94-07, 7-5-1994; Ord. No. 96-9, 12-17-1996; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 1, 10-16-2012) 
Sec. 20-23. - Sprinkler systems in commercial buildings. 
(a) ?The city does hereby adopt by reference the NFPA 13 Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems, 2016 Edition. Printed copies of said standard shall be kept in the office of the city clerk for public use, inspection and distribution. 
(b) ?All new commercial buildings or structures that exceed 3,500 square feet shall have installed therein a sprinkler system in conformance with NFPA 13, 2016 Edition. 
(c) ?All existing commercial buildings that exceed 3,500 square feet and that share a common roof with an adjoining building or buildings shall have installed therein at the time of change of use, change of occupancy, or change of ownership, a sprinkler system in conformance with NFPA 13, 2016 Edition. 
(Code 1988, § 8-26; Ord. No. 98-5, 4-21-1998) 
Secs. 20-24—20-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPEN BURNING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Arson and burning, MCL 750.71 et seq.; open burning, MCL 324.11522 et seq.; prevention and suppression of forest fires, MCL 324.51501 et seq. 

Sec. 20-50. - Issuance; conditions; open burning. 
    No person shall cause or permit, except as herein stipulated, any open burning of garbage or other combustible refuse or waste material, including by way of descriptions, but not by way of limitation, paper, leaves, tree trimmings and grass. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit fires of charcoal or non-ash producing fuels when used on private property or in public recreation areas, relative to consumption of food, nor to prohibit open burning by employees of the city while in the course of their employment by the city. 
(Code 1988, § 8-46; Ord. No. 98-6, 6-16-1998) 
Sec. 20-51. - Exemptions. 
    Nothing is this article shall be held to prohibit private individuals from setting a campfire for the purpose of the preparation of food, provided such campfire is set in an adequate container or in a fire bowl of earth or other noncombustible materials no larger than 30 inches in diameter or 24 inches in depth and is set far enough away from weeds, grass or other combustible materials so as to present no hazard. Persons wishing to have a campfire for the purpose of the preparation of food are not required to obtain a written permit from the fire department. It shall be a violation of this article if such a campfire escapes or spreads and sets fire to grass, weeds, brush or any other property of any kind. 
(Code 1988, § 8-47; Ord. No. 98-6, 6-16-1998) 
Sec. 20-52. - Restrictions. 
    All fires set in accordance with this article shall be attended at all times by a reasonable number of people in relation to the extent of the area to be burned. No burning shall be carried out if wind conditions are such as to endanger life or property or on paved streets. 
(Code 1988, § 8-48; Ord. No. 98-6, 6-16-1998) 
ARTICLE IV. - FIREWORKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Michigan fireworks safety act, MCL 28.451 et seq. 

Sec. 20-53. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "2012 Fireworks Ordinance." 
(Code 1988, § 8-60; Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 6-19-2012) 
Sec. 20-54. - Statement of purpose. 
    This is an ordinance to provide for the regulation of the ignition, discharge and use of consumer fireworks, as allowed under the Michigan fireworks safety act, Public Act No. 256 of 2011 (MCL 28.451 et seq.). 
(Code 1988, § 8-61; Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 6-19-2012) 
Sec. 20-55. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    APA standard 87-1 means 2001 APA standard 87-1, standard for construction and approval for transportation of fireworks, novelties, and theatrical pyrotechnics, published by the American Pyrotechnics Association of Bethesda, MD. 
    Consumer fireworks means fireworks devices that are designed to comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States Consumer Protection Safety Commission under 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 3.5. Consumer fireworks do not include low-impact fireworks. 
    Fireworks means any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare gun, or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration or detonation. 
    Low-impact fireworks means ground and handheld sparkling devices as that phrase is defined under APA standards 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8 and 3.5. 
    Minor means an individual who is less than 18 years of age. 
    National holiday means the following legal, public holidays: 
(1) ?New Year's Day, January 1. 
(2) ?Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday, the third Monday in January. 
(3) ?President's Day, the third Monday in February. 
(4) ?Memorial Day, the last Monday in May. 
(5) ?Independence Day, July 4. 
(6) ?Labor Day, the first Monday in September. 
(7) ?Columbus Day, the second Monday in October. 
(8) ?Veteran's Day, November 11. 
(9) ?Thanksgiving Day, the fourth Thursday in November. 
(10) ?Christmas Day, December 25. 
(Code 1988, § 8-62; Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 6-19-2012) 
Sec. 20-56. - Ignition, discharge, and use of consumer fireworks. 
    A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks, except between 12:00 midnight and 1:00 a.m. and between 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight the day preceding, the day of, or the day after a national holiday. 
(Code 1988, § 8-63; Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 6-19-2012) 
Sec. 20-57. - Possession of consumer fireworks by minor. 
    A minor shall not possess consumer fireworks. 
(Code 1988, § 8-64; Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 6-19-2012) 
Sec. 20-58. - Determination of violation; seizure. 
    If a police officer determines that a violation of this article has occurred, the officer may seize the consumer fireworks as evidence of the violation. 
(Code 1988, § 8-65; Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 6-19-2012) 
Sec. 20-59. - Penalties. 
(a) ?Municipal civil infraction. A violation of this article is a municipal civil infraction. 
(b) ?Disposal of evidence. Following final disposition of a finding of responsibility for violating this article, the city may dispose of, or destroy, any consumer fireworks retained as evidence in that prosecution. 
(c) ?Costs of storage and disposal. In addition to any other penalty, a person found responsible for a violation of this article shall be required to reimburse the city for the costs of storing, disposing of, or destroying consumer fireworks that were confiscated for a violation of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 8-66; Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 6-19-2012) 
Chapter 22 - LAND DIVISIONS AND SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Michigan planning enabling act, MCL 125.3801 et seq.; condominium act, MCL 559.101 et seq.; land division act, MCL 560.101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    All terms as defined in the land division act shall control in this article unless indicated to the contrary in this section. 
    Alley means a public or private right of way shown on a plat which provides secondary access to a lot, block, or parcel of land. 
    Block means property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), or between the nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, lake, river or live stream; or between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity or development, or corporate boundary lines of the city. 
    Boulevard street means a street developed to two two-lane, one-way pavements separated by a median strip. 
    Collector street means a street used primarily to carry traffic from minor (local) streets to major thoroughfares. 
    Cul-de-sac street means a short minor street having one end permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
    Easement means a grant by the owner of the use of a strip of land by the public, a corporation, or persons, for specific uses and purposes, to be designated as a "public" or "private" easement depending on the nature of the use. 
    Engineer means the staff engineer or consulting engineer of the city. 
    Filing date means the date that the preliminary plat and other data is submitted to the clerk. 
    Final plat means a map of all or part of a subdivision providing substantial conformance to the preliminary plat (stage 2) of the subdivision prepared in conformance with the requirements of the land division act and this article, and suitable for recording by the county register of deeds. 
    Improvements means grading, street surfacing, curb and gutter, sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains and lines, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, culverts, bridges, utilities, and other additions to the natural state of land which increases its value, utility or habitability. 
    Land division act means Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
    Lot means a measured portion of a parcel or tract of land which is described or fixed in a recorded plat. 
    Major streets or thoroughfare plan means the part of the master plan which sets forth the location, alignment and dimensions of existing and proposed streets and thoroughfares. 
    Major thoroughfare means an arterial street which is intended to serve as a large volume trafficway for both the immediate municipal area and the region beyond, and is designated as a major thoroughfare, parkway, freeway, expressway or equivalent term on the major thoroughfare plan to identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the major thoroughfare plan. 
    Marginal access street means a minor street paralleling and adjacent to a major thoroughfare which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
    Master plan means the comprehensive community plan, including graphic and written proposals indicating the general location for streets, parks, schools, public buildings and all physical development of the city, and includes any unit or part of such plan, and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof. 
    Minor street means a street of limited continuity used primarily for access to abutting residential properties. 
    Parcel means a continuous area or acreage of land which can be described as provided for in the land division act. 
    Planner means the staff planner or consulting planner of the city. 
    Plat means a map or chart of a subdivision of land. 
    Preliminary plat (stage 1) means a map indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision in sufficient detail to provide an adequate basis for review and to meet the requirements and procedures set forth in this article. 
    Preliminary plat (stage 2) means a map showing the salient features of a proposed subdivision submitted to an approving authority for purposes of preliminary consideration prepared in conformance with the land division act. 
    Proprietor means a person that may hold any ownership interest in land, whether recorded or not. 
    Street means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct, alley, or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway; or a street or way shown in a plat approved pursuant to law or approved by official action; or a street or way on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the county register of deeds. A street includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas, and lawns. 
    Subdivide or subdivision means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors, or assigns for the purpose of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building development that results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and that is not exempted from the platting requirements of the land division act by sections 108 and 109 of Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.108, 560.109). The term "subdivide" or "subdivision" does not include a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel; and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of the land division act or the requirements of this article. 
    Tract means two or more parcels that share a common property line and are under the same ownership. 
    Turnaround means a short boulevard street permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
    Zoning ordinance means the city zoning ordinance, chapter 50. 
(Code 1988, § 21-1; Ord. No. 123, § 200, 12-3-1968) 
Sec. 22-20. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this article are to: 
(1) ?Provide for the orderly growth and harmonious development of the community; 
(2) ?Secure adequate traffic circulation through coordinated street systems with relation to major thoroughfares, adjoining subdivisions and public facilities; 
(3) ?Achieve individual property lots of maximum utility and livability; 
(4) ?Secure adequate provisions for water supply, drainage and sanitary sewerage, and other health requirements; 
(5) ?Secure adequate provisions for recreational areas, school sites and other public facilities; and 
(6) ?Provide logical procedures for the achievement of these purposes. 
(Code 1988, § 21-2; Ord. No. 123, § 101, 12-3-1968) 
Sec. 22-21. - Compliance standards. 
    The approvals required under the provisions of this article shall be obtained prior to the installation of any subdivision or project improvements within the city, in public streets, public alleys, public rights-of-way, and public easements, or under the ultimate jurisdiction of the city. All subdivision or project improvements within the city installed in public streets, public alleys, public rights-of-way, or public easements, or under the ultimate jurisdiction of the city shall comply with all of the provisions and requirements of this article or any related ordinance. 
(Code 1988, § 21-3; Ord. No. 123, art. VI, 12-3-1968) 
Sec. 22-22. - Interpretation. 
    The provisions of this article shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion and preservation of public health, safety and general welfare of the city. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any manner interfere with existing regulations or laws of the city, nor conflict with any statutes of the state or the county, except that these regulations shall prevail in cases where these regulations impose a greater restriction than is provided by existing statutes, laws or regulations. 
(Code 1988, § 21-4; Ord. No. 123, art. VII, 12-3-1968) 
Sec. 22-23. - Review fees. 
    Preliminary plat (stages 1 and 2) and final plat review fees, planning fees, engineering fees, attorney fees, inspection fees, water and sewer connection charges and other applicable development charges shall be paid by the proprietor as prescribed by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 21-5; Ord. No. 123, art. VIII, 12-3-1968) 
Secs. 22-24—22-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLATTING PROCEDURE 

Sec. 22-50. - Phases. 
    The preparation of a subdivision for platting shall be carried out through three phases: prepreliminary plat, preliminary plat and final plat, all in accordance with the procedures described in this division. 
(Code 1988, § 21-26; Ord. No. 123, art. III, 12-3-1968) 
Sec. 22-51. - Initial investigation. 
(a) ?Prior to the preparation of a prepreliminary plat, it is suggested that the proprietor meet informally with the city departments concerned to investigate the procedures and standards of the city with reference to this division and with the proposals of the master plan as they affect the area in which the proposed subdivision is located. The proprietor should not submit a prepreliminary plat at this time. The proprietor may request that a preapplication review meeting take place by submitting a written request to the chairperson of the county plat board and submitting copies of a concept plan for the preliminary plat to the city and to each officer or agency entitled to review the preliminary plat under MCL 560.113 to 560.118. A preapplication review meeting shall take place not later than 30 days after the written request and concept plan are received. The meeting shall be attended by the proprietor, representatives of each officer or agency entitled to review the preliminary plat under sections MCL 560.113, 560.114, and 560.118, and a representative of the city. Representatives of each agency entitled to review the preliminary plat under sections MCL 560.115 to 560.117 shall be informed of the meeting and may attend. The purpose of the meeting is to conduct an informal review of the proprietor's concept plan for the preliminary plat. 
(b) ?The proprietor should concern himself with the following factors: 
(1) ?The proprietor shall secure a copy of the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations, engineering specifications, and other similar ordinances or controls relative to the subdivision and improvement of land so as to make himself aware of the requirements of the city; 
(2) ?The area for the proposed subdivision shall be properly zoned for the intended use; 
(3) ?An investigation of adequacy of existing schools and the adequacy of public open spaces including parks and playgrounds to serve the proposed subdivision shall be made by the proprietor; 
(4) ?The relationship of the proposed subdivision with respect to major thoroughfares and plans for widening of thoroughfares shall be investigated by the proprietor; 
(5) ?Standards for sewage disposal, water supply and drainage of the city shall be investigated by the proprietor. 
(Code 1988, § 21-27; Ord. No. 123, § 300, 12-3-1968) 
Sec. 22-52. - Prepreliminary plat. 
(a) ?Generally. The procedure for preparation and submittal of a prepreliminary plat of the land area to be subdivided shall be as provided in this section. 
(b) ?Filing. 
(1) ?Ten copies of the prepreliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, together with written application in triplicate, shall be submitted to the city clerk for the planning commission. 
(2) ?Submittal with the city clerk shall be at least ten days prior to the regular planning commission meeting (which meeting shall be considered as the date of filing) at which the proprietor will be scheduled to appear. If any of the data required in this section is omitted, the city clerk shall notify the proprietor of the additional data required and planning commission action shall be delayed until the required data is received. The planning commission shall act on the prepreliminary plat within 60 days after the date of filing unless the proprietor agrees to an extension of time in writing. 
(c) ?Identification and description. The prepreliminary plat shall include: 
(1) ?Proposed name of subdivision; 
(2) ?Location by section, town and range, or by other legal description; 
(3) ?Names and addresses of the proprietor, owner proprietor, and the planner, designer, engineer or surveyor who designed the subdivision layout. The proprietor shall also indicate his interest in the land; 
(4) ?Scale of plat to be one inch equals 100 feet as the minimum acceptable scale; 
(5) ?Date; 
(6) ?North point. 
(d) ?Existing conditions. The prepreliminary plat shall include: 
(1) ?An overall area map at a scale of not less than one inch equals 2,000 feet showing the relationship of the subdivision to its surroundings such as section lines and/or major streets or collectors streets; 
(2) ?Boundary line of proposed subdivision, section or corporation lines within or adjacent to the tract and overall property dimensions; 
(3) ?Property lines of adjacent tracts of subdivided and unsubdivided land shown in relation to the tract being proposed for subdivision including those of areas across abutting roads; 
(4) ?Location, widths and names of existing or prior platted streets and private streets, and public easements within or adjacent to the tract being proposed for subdivision, including those located across abutting roads; 
(5) ?Location of existing sewers, water mains, storm drains and other underground facilities within or adjacent to the tract being proposed for subdivision; 
(6) ?Topography drawn as contours with an interval of at least two feet (topography to be based on USGS data). 
The school board or school board superintendent of the school district having jurisdiction in the area concerned shall be informed and made aware of the proposed prepreliminary plat by the proprietor. A letter or document from the school board or school board superintendent indicating awareness of the proprietor's intentions shall be submitted to the planning commission as part of the prepreliminary plat. 
(e) ?Proposed conditions. The prepreliminary plat shall include: 
(1) ?Layout of streets indicating proposed street names, right-of-way widths, and connections with adjoining platted streets and also the widths and location of alleys, easements and public walkways; 
(2) ?Layout, numbers and dimensions of lots, including building setback lines showing dimensions; 
(3) ?Indication of parcels of land intended to be dedicated or set aside for public use or for the use of property owners in the subdivision; 
(4) ?An indication of the ownership, and existing and proposed use of any parcels identified as "excepted" on the prepreliminary plat. If the proprietor has an interest or owns any parcel so identified as "excepted," the prepreliminary plat shall indicate how this property could be developed in accordance with the requirements of the existing zoning district in which it is located and with an acceptable relationship to the layout of the proposed prepreliminary plat; 
(5) ?An indication of system proposed for sewage by a method approved by the city council and the engineer; 
(6) ?An indication of system proposed for water supply by a method approved by the city council and the engineer; 
(7) ?An indication of storm drainage proposed by a method approved by the city council and the engineer and, if involving county drains, the proposed drainage shall be acceptable to the county drain commissioner; 
(8) ?The proposed general layout for the entire area, in the case where the proprietor wishes to subdivide a given area but wishes to begin with only a portion of the total area. The part which is proposed to be subdivided first shall be clearly superimposed upon the overall plan in order to illustrate clearly the method of development which the proprietor intends to follow. Each subsequent plat shall follow the same procedure until the entire area controlled by the proprietor is subdivided. 
If the subdivision is proposed to be developed under the subdivision open space plan, the subdivision shall meet the requirements of section 22-86. 
(f) ?Review by planning commission. 
(1) ?The city clerk shall receive and check for completeness the prepreliminary plat as required under subsections (b) through (e) of this section. If complete and basically in conformance with applicable municipal requirements, the city clerk shall place the proposal on the agenda of the next regular planning commission meeting. 
(2) ?The city clerk shall transmit a copy of the prepreliminary plat to the engineer and the planner for their technical review and recommendation. 
(3) ?The planning commission shall review all details of the proposed subdivision within the framework of the zoning ordinance, within the various elements of the master plan and within the standards of this article. 
(4) ?The planning commission shall approve conditionally, disapprove or approve the prepreliminary plat. 
a. ?If the approval is a conditional approval and therefore tentative, the prepreliminary plat shall not be forwarded to the city council until the conditions have been satisfied by the proprietor. 
b. ?If the planning commission disapproves the prepreliminary plat, it shall record the reasons in the minutes of the regular meeting. A copy of the minutes shall be sent to the proprietor. 
c. ?If the planning commission finds that all conditions have been satisfactorily met, it may give approval to the prepreliminary plat. The chairman shall make a notation to that effect on each copy of the prepreliminary plat and distribute such copies as follows: 
1. ?Return one copy to the proprietor; 
2. ?Retain one copy which shall become a matter of permanent record in the planning commission files; 
3. ?Forward one copy to the school board or school superintendent of the school district having jurisdiction in the area concerned; 
4. ?Forward the remaining copies to the city council via the city clerk's office with recommendations for approval. 
(g) ?Review by city council. 
(1) ?The city council will not review a prepreliminary plat until it has received the review and recommendations of the planning commission. Following the receipt of such recommendations, the city council shall consider the prepreliminary plat at such meeting that the matter is placed on the regularly scheduled agenda. The city council shall take action on the prepreliminary plat within 90 days of the date of filing, as defined in subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(2) ?If the city council approves the prepreliminary plat, it shall be deemed to confer upon the proprietor the right to proceed with the preparation of a prepreliminary plat. 
(3) ?Approval of the prepreliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the preliminary plat. It shall be deemed as approval of the layout submitted on the prepreliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of preliminary plat. 
(4) ?The approval of the city council shall be effective for a period of 12 months. If the preliminary plat in whole or in part is not submitted within this time limit, a prepreliminary plat must again be submitted to the planning commission for approval. 
(5) ?No installation or construction of any improvements shall be made at this time. 
(Code 1988, § 21-28; Ord. No. 123, § 301, 12-3-1968) 
Sec. 22-53. - Preliminary plat. 
(a) ?Generally. The procedure for the preparation and review of a preliminary plat requires tentative and final approval as provided in this section. 
(b) ?Tentative approval. 
(1) ?Filing. 
a. ?Ten copies of a valid and complete preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, together with written application in triplicate and any other information required to be submitted under the land division act shall be filed with the city clerk. 
b. ?The preliminary plat shall conform substantially to the prepreliminary plat as approved, and it may constitute only that portion of the approved prepreliminary plat which the proprietor proposed to record and develop at the time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to this article. 
c. ?The city clerk shall check the proposed plat for completeness. If any of the data required in the land division act, or section 22-52(b) through (e) is omitted, the city clerk shall be directed to inform the proprietor of the data required, and that the application will be delayed until the required data is received. 
d. ?The city clerk shall transmit a copy of the valid and complete preliminary plat to the engineer and planner for their technical review and recommendation. 
(2) ?Planning commission review. 
a. ?The city clerk shall place the preliminary plat on the next regular planning commission agenda, at which meeting the proprietor will be scheduled to appear. The planning commission shall act on the preliminary plat within 60 days after the date of filing unless the proprietor agrees to an extension, in writing, of the time required for approval by the city council and planning commission. 
b. ?It shall be the duty of the city clerk to send a notice by registered or certified mail to the owners of land immediately adjoining the property to be platted of the presentment of the preliminary plat and the time and place of the meeting of the planning commission to consider the preliminary plat; such notice shall be sent not less than five days before the date fixed therefor. 
c. ?The preliminary plat shall be reviewed by the engineer as to compliance with the approved preliminary plat and plans for utilities and other improvements. 
d. ?The engineer shall notify the planning commission of his recommendation for either approval or rejection of the preliminary plat. 
e. ?The preliminary plat documents shall be reviewed by the planning commission as to compliance with the approved prepreliminary plat. 
f. ?If the planning commission finds that the preliminary plat is in close agreement with the prepreliminary plat, it shall approve same and notify the city council of this action in its official minutes and forward the same, together with all accompanying data, to the city council for its review. 
g. ?If the planning commission finds that the preliminary plat does not conform substantially to the previously approved prepreliminary plat and that it is not acceptable, it shall record the reasons in the official minutes and forward such reasons together with all accompanying data to the city council; and recommend that the city council disapprove the preliminary plat until the objections causing disapproval have been changed to meet with the approval of the planning commission. 
(3) ?City council action. The city council will not review a preliminary plat until it has received the review and recommendations of the planning commission. Following the receipt of such recommendations, the city council shall consider the preliminary plat at such meeting that the matter is placed on the regularly scheduled agenda. The city council shall tentatively approve and note its approval on the copy of the preliminary plat, or tentatively approve it subject to conditions and note its approval and conditions on the copy of the preliminary plat, to be returned to the proprietor, or set forth in writing its reasons for rejection and requirements for tentative approval, within the following time period, as applicable: 
(4) ?Preapplication review conducted. Within 60 days after it was submitted to the clerk, if a preapplication review meeting was conducted under section 22-51. 
(5) ?Preapplication review not conducted. Within 90 days after it was submitted to the clerk, if a preapplication review meeting was not conducted under section 22-51. 
a. ?If the city council tentatively approves the preliminary plat, it shall record its approval on the plat and return one copy to the proprietor. 
b. ?Tentative approval shall not constitute final approval of the preliminary plat. 
c. ?Tentative approval of the city council shall be effective for a period of 12 months. If the preliminary plat in whole or in part is not submitted for final approval within this time limit, the preliminary plat must again be submitted to the planning commission and city council for approval unless an extension is applied for by the proprietor, and such request is granted in writing by the city council. 
(c) ?Review by city council; final approval. 
(1) ?The proprietor shall file a valid preliminary plat with the city clerk together with a certified list of all authorities required for approval in MCL 560.112 to 560.119. The proprietor shall also provide approved copies of plats from each of the required authorities. 
(2) ?The city council shall take action on the preliminary plat within 20 days of the submission of all necessary approved plats. 
(3) ?If the preliminary plat conforms substantially to the plat tentatively approved by the city council and meets all conditions laid down for tentative approval, the city council shall give final approval to the preliminary plat. 
(4) ?The city clerk shall promptly notify the proprietor of approval or rejection in writing; if rejected, reasons shall be given. 
(5) ?Final approval shall be effective for a period of two years from the date of final approval. The two-year period may be extended if applied for by the proprietor and granted by the city council in writing. 
(6) ?No installation or construction of any improvements shall be made before the preliminary plat has received final approval of the city council, engineering plans have been approved by the engineer, and any deposits required under division 4 of this article have been received by the city. 
(Code 1988, § 21-29; Ord. No. 123, § 302, 12-3-1968) 
Sec. 22-54. - Final plat. 
(a) ?Generally. The procedure for preparation and review of a final plat shall be as provided in this section. 
(b) ?Preparation. 
(1) ?The final plat shall comply with the provisions of the land division act. 
(2) ?The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved and it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the proprietor proposed to record and develop at the time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to this division. 
(3) ?The proprietor shall submit as evidence of title, an abstract of title certified to date with the written opinion of an attorney-at-law thereon, or at the option of the proprietor, a policy of title insurance for examination in order to ascertain whether the proper parties have signed the plat. 
(c) ?Review. 
(1) ?Five Mylar copies and three paper prints of the final plat shall be filed by the proprietor with the city clerk and shall deposit such sums of money as the city council may require in this division or by other ordinances. 
(2) ?The final plat shall be reviewed by the engineer as to compliance with the approved preliminary plat and plans for utilities and other improvements. 
(3) ?The engineer shall notify the city council of his recommendation for either approval or rejection of the final plat. 
(4) ?The city council shall review all recommendations and take action on the final plat within 20 days of its date of filing. 
(5) ?Upon the approval of the final plat by the city council, the subsequent approvals shall follow the procedure set forth in the land division act. The three prints of the final plat shall be forwarded; one to the city clerk, one to the planning commission, and one to the building department. The five Mylar copies shall be forwarded to the city clerk of the county plat board. 
(Code 1988, § 21-30; Ord. No. 123, § 303, 12-3-1968) 
Secs. 22-55—22-81. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DESIGN LAYOUT STANDARDS 

Sec. 22-82. - Purpose; final plans to be reviewed and approved. 
    The subdivision design layout standards set forth under this division are development guides for the assistance of the proprietor. All final plans must be reviewed and approved by the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 21-51) 
Sec. 22-83. - Streets. 
(a) ?Generally. Streets shall conform to at least all minimum requirements of the general specifications and typical cross sections as set forth in this division, and other conditions set forth by the city council. 
(b) ?Location and arrangement. 
(1) ?The proposed subdivision shall conform to the various elements of the master plan and shall be considered in relation to the existing and planned major thoroughfares and collector streets, and such part shall be platted in the location and width indicated on such plan. 
(2) ?The street layout shall provide for continuation of collector streets in the adjoining subdivisions or of the proper projection of streets when adjoining property is not subdivided; or conform to a plan for a neighborhood unit drawn up and adopted by the planning commission. 
(3) ?The street layout shall include minor streets so laid out that their use by through traffic shall be discouraged. 
(4) ?If a proposed subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed major thoroughfare, the planning commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation and reduction of traffic hazards. 
(5) ?If a proposed subdivision borders on or contains a railroad, expressway, or other limited access highway right-of-way, the planning commission may require the location of a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for the development of an appropriate use of the intervening land such as for parks in residential districts. Such distances shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for approach grades to future grade separation. 
(6) ?Half streets shall be prohibited, except where absolutely essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations, and where the planning commission finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is developed. Wherever there exists, adjacent to the tract to be subdivided, a dedicated or platted and recorded half street, the other half shall be platted. 
(c) ?Right-of-way widths. Street right-of-way widths shall conform to at least the following minimum requirements: 
Street type Right-of-way widths Major thoroughfare 100 feet Collector streets 80 feet Industrial service streets 80 feet Multiple-family residential streets where platted 60 feet Minor (single-family residential) streets 60 feet Marginal access streets 34 feet Turnaround (loop) street 120 feet Alley 20 feet Cul-de-sac streets; turnarounds: a.?Industrial 75-foot radius b.?Residential and others 60-foot radius  
Maximum length for residential cul-de-sac streets shall generally be 500 feet. Maximum length for industrial and other cul-de-sac streets may exceed 500 feet subject to the approval of the planning commission. 
(d) ?Street grades. For adequate drainage, the minimum street grade shall not be less than five-tenths percent. The maximum street grade shall be six percent except that the planning commission may make an exception to this standard on the recommendation of the engineer. 
(e) ?Street geometric. Standards for maximum and minimum street grades, vertical and horizontal street curves and sight distances shall be established by ordinance or published rules of the city council and shall in no case be less restrictive than the standards of the county road commission. 
(f) ?Street intersections. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible to 90 degrees. Curved streets, intersecting with major thoroughfares and collector thoroughfares shall do so with a tangent section of centerline 50 feet in length, measured from the right-of-way line of the major or collector thoroughfare. 
(g) ?Grading and centerline gradients. Per plans and profiles approved by the engineer. 
(h) ?Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided. 
(Code 1988, § 21-52; Ord. No. 123, § 400, 12-3-1968) 
Sec. 22-84. - Blocks. 
(a) ?Generally. Blocks within subdivisions shall conform to the standards provided in this section. 
(b) ?Sizes. 
(1) ?Maximum length for blocks shall not exceed 1,400 feet in length, except where, in the opinion of the planning commission, conditions may justify a greater distance. 
(2) ?Widths of blocks shall be determined by the condition of the layout and shall be suited to the intended layout. 
(c) ?Public walkways. 
(1) ?Location of public walkways or crosswalks may be required by the planning commission to obtain satisfactory pedestrian access to public or private facilities, such as, but not limited to, schools and parks. 
(2) ?Widths of public walkways shall be at least 12 feet and shall be in the nature of an easement for this purpose. 
(d) ?Easements. 
(1) ?Location of utility line easements shall be provided along the rear or side lot lines as necessary for utility lines. Easements shall give access to every lot, park or public grounds. Such easements shall be a total of not less than 12 feet wide, six feet from each parcel. 
(2) ?Recommendations on the proposed layout of telephone and electric company easements should be sought from all of the utility companies serving the area. It shall be the responsibility of the proprietor to submit copies of the preliminary plat to all appropriate public utility agencies. 
(3) ?Easements three feet in width shall be provided where needed along side lot lines so as to provide for streetlight dropouts. Prior to the approval of the final plat for a proposed subdivision, a statement shall be obtained from the appropriate public utility indicating that easements have been provided along specific lots. A notation shall be made on the final plat indicating: "The side lot lines between lots (indicating lot numbers) are subject to streetlight dropout rights granted to the (name of utility company)." 
(Code 1988, § 21-53; Ord. No. 123, § 401, 12-3-1968) 
Sec. 22-85. - Lots. 
(a) ?Generally. Lots within subdivisions shall conform to the standards provided in this section. 
(b) ?Sizes and shapes. 
(1) ?The lot size, width, depth and shape in any subdivision proposed for residential uses shall be appropriate for the location and the type of development contemplated. 
(2) ?Lot areas and widths shall conform to at least the minimum requirements of chapter 50 for the district in which the subdivision is proposed. 
(3) ?Building setback lines shall conform to at least the minimum requirements of chapter 50. 
(4) ?Corner lots in residential subdivisions shall be platted at least ten feet wider than the minimum width permitted by chapter 50. 
(5) ?Excessive lot depth in relation to width shall be avoided. A depth-to-width ratio of three to one shall normally be considered a maximum. 
(6) ?Lots intended for purposes other than residential use shall be specifically designed for such purposes, and shall have adequate provision for off-street parking, setbacks and other requirements in accordance with chapter 50. 
(c) ?Arrangement. 
(1) ?Every lot shall front or abut on a street. 
(2) ?Side lot lines shall be at right angles or radial to the street lines. 
(3) ?Residential lots abutting major thoroughfares or collector streets, where marginal access streets are not desirable or possible to attain, shall be platted with reverse frontage lots, or with side lot lines parallel to the major traffic streets, or shall be platted with extra depth to permit generous distances between building and such trafficway. 
(4) ?Lots shall have a front-to-front relationship across all streets where possible. 
(5) ?Where lots border upon bodies of water, the front yard may be designated as the waterfront side of such lot provided the lot has sufficient depth to provide adequate setback on the street side to maintain a setback for all structures equal to the front setback on the street side as well as on the waterfront side. 
(Code 1988, § 21-54; Ord. No. 123, § 402, 12-3-1968) 
Sec. 22-86. - Subdivision open space plan; planned unit development. 
(a) ?Generally. The requirements of this section apply in addition to all other requirements of this chapter where a preliminary plat (stage 1) is filed for approval under section 50-400. 
(b) ?Statement of principles. Consideration by the planning commission and the city council of proposed optional use of subdivision open space plan shall reflect the following basic principles: 
(1) ?Section 50-400 provides an optional method of subdividing property, and approval of any subdivision open space plan is subject to the discretion of the city council. 
(2) ?Particular attention shall be given to the effect of a subdivision open space plan upon the immediate area, where the character of that area has been established by previous development. Major attention shall be given by the planning commission and the city council to the benefits to be derived by the residents of the proposed subdivision and the city because of the subdivision open space plan with minor consideration to be given to the proprietor. 
(3) ?The objectives that shall govern the approval or disapproval of the proposed subdivision open space plan shall be to: 
a. ?Provide a more desirable living environment by preserving the natural character of the terrain features; 
b. ?Encourage developers to use a more creative approach in the development of residential areas; 
c. ?Encourage a more efficient, aesthetic and desirable use of the land while recognizing a reduction in development costs and by allowing the developer to bypass natural obstacles; 
d. ?Encourage the provision of open space so benefits may accrue directly to residents of the subdivision and to further encourage the development of recreational facilities. 
(c) ?Application. The application for approval of a subdivision open space plan, in addition to containing the information required by other sections of this division, shall contain the following: 
(1) ?A complete description of the land proposed to be dedicated to the city or to the common use of lot owners (referred to in this division as open land) shall be provided, including as a minimum the following: 
a. ?Legal description of open land; 
b. ?Topographical survey of open land; 
c. ?Type of soil in open land; 
d. ?Description of natural features on open land such as stands of trees or other vegetation, streams or other bodies of water, etc.; 
e. ?Other relevant factors. 
(2) ?The proposed plan of development of the open land shall be contained in the application and shall include as a minimum the following: 
a. ?The proposed manner in which the title to land and facilities is to be held by the owners of land in the subdivision; 
b. ?The proposed manner of collection of maintenance costs, financing costs or assessments so that nonpayment will constitute a lien on the property, thus avoiding city responsibility in the future; 
c. ?The proposed manner of regulating the use of the common facilities and areas so as to eliminate possible nuisances to other property owners and cause for enforcement by the city council; 
d. ?The proposed method of notifying the city when any change is contemplated in plans that would affect the original specifications approved by the city; 
e. ?The proposed method of setting up assessments to cover contingencies, insurance against casualty and liability and payment of taxes relating to such properties; 
f. ?The proposed uses of open land and the proposed improvements which are to be constructed by the proprietor. 
(3) ?The application shall contain a statement of the benefits to be realized by the residents of the proposed subdivision and the city by approval of the proposed subdivision open space plan with particular reference to the objectives stated in chapter 50. 
(d) ?Approval. If the planning commission is satisfied that the proposed subdivision open space plan meets the letter and spirit of chapter 50 and should be approved, it shall recommend such approval to the city council with the conditions upon which such approval should be based. Thereafter, the city council shall take action upon such application in accordance with section 22-52. 
(e) ?Disapproval; hearing. If the planning commission is not satisfied that the proposed subdivision open space plan meets the letter and spirit of chapter 50 or finds that the approval of the subdivision open space plan will be detrimental to existing development in the general area and should not be approved, it shall communicate such disapproval to the city council with the reasons therefor. The proprietor shall be entitled to a hearing upon such proposal before the city council upon written request therefor filed with the city clerk. 
(f) ?Conditions; contract. If the city council gives approval to the proposed subdivision open space plan, it shall instruct the city attorney to prepare a contract setting forth the conditions upon which such approval is based, which contract, after approval by the city council, shall be entered into between the city and the proprietor prior to the approval of any preliminary plat (stage 2) based upon the approved preliminary plat (stage 1). 
(Code 1988, § 21-55; Ord. No. 123, § 403, 12-3-1968) 
State Law reference— Planned unit development, MCL 125.3503; open space preservation, MCL 125.3506. 
Sec. 22-87. - Natural features. 
    The natural features and character of lands must be preserved wherever possible. Due regard must be shown for all natural features such as large trees, natural groves, watercourses and similar community assets that will add attractiveness and value to the property, if preserved. The preservation of drainage and natural stream channels must be considered by the proprietor and the dedication and provision of adequate barriers, where appropriate, shall be required. 
(Code 1988, § 21-56; Ord. No. 123, § 404, 12-3-1968) 
Sec. 22-88. - Floodplains. 
    Any areas of land within the proposed subdivision which lie either wholly or partly within the floodplain of a river, stream, creek or lake, or any other areas which are subject to flooding or inundation by stormwater, shall require specific compliance with the land division act and its review by the state department of environmental quality. 
(Code 1988, § 21-57; Ord. No. 123, § 405, 12-3-1968) 
Secs. 22-89—22-119. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - IMPROVEMENTS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 22-120. - Interpretation. 
    The improvements set forth under this division are to be considered as the minimum acceptable standard. All those improvements for which standards are not specifically set forth shall have such standards set by ordinance or published rules of the city council. All improvements must meet the approval of the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 21-81; Ord. No. 123, art. V, 12-3-1968) 
Sec. 22-121. - Deposit to city; release of payments. 
    Prior to the undertaking of any improvements under this division, the proprietor shall deposit with the city clerk cash, a certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit running to the city, whichever the proprietor selects, to ensure faithful completion of all improvements within the time specified. The amount of the deposit shall be set by the city council based on an estimate by the engineer. All improvements shall be constructed and approved by the city within a length of time agreed upon from the date of approval of the final plat by the city council. The city council shall release funds for the payment of work as it is completed and approved by the city. 
(Code 1988, § 21-82; Ord. No. 123, art. V, 12-3-1968) 
Sec. 22-122. - Bond. 
    Prior to the acceptance by the city of improvements under this division, a two-year maintenance bond in an amount set by the city council shall be posted by the proprietor. 
(Code 1988, § 21-83; Ord. No. 123, art. V, 12-3-1968) 
Sec. 22-123. - Conformance with standards. 
    Improvements under this division shall be provided by the proprietor in accordance with the standards and requirements established in this division and any other such standards and requirements which may from time to time be established by ordinance or published rules of the city. 
(Code 1988, § 21-84; Ord. No. 123, art. V, 12-3-1968) 
Secs. 22-124—22-144. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Standards 

Sec. 22-145. - Streets. 
(a) ?Generally. All streets and appurtenances thereto shall be constructed in accordance with details and specifications approved by the city council. All pavements, accepted as noted in this section, shall be concrete pavement with curb and gutter on each side. 
(b) ?Street pavement width standards. 
Street type Pavement width; feet 
(measured from face of curb to face of curb) Major thoroughfare In conformance with the standards and specifications established by the city council Collector streets 36 Industrial streets 40 Multiple-family residential streets a.?Dedicated streets 36 b.?Undedicated streets 31 
(asphaltic or concrete pavement with concrete curb and gutter on each side) Minor residential streets 28 Marginal access streets 24 Turnaround (loop) streets Not less than 80 diameter at terminating loop Alley 20 Cul-de-sac streets; turnarounds a.?Industrial 65 (radius) b.?Residential and other 45 (radius)  
(Code 1988, § 21-106; Ord. No. 123, § 500, 12-3-1968) 
Sec. 22-146. - Utilities. 
(a) ?Requirements for underground wiring. The proprietor pursuant to this subdivision shall make arrangements for all lines for telephone, electricity, television and other similar services distributed by wire or cable to be placed underground entirely throughout a subdivided area, except for major thoroughfare right-of-way, and such conduits or cables shall be placed within private easements provided to such service companies by the developer or within dedicated public ways, provided only that overhead lines may be permitted upon written recommendation of the engineer, planner, planning commission, and the approval of the city council at the time of final plat approval where it is determined that overhead lines will not constitute a detriment to the health, safety, general welfare, plat design and character of the subdivision. All such facilities placed in dedicated public ways shall be planned so as not to conflict with other underground utilities. All such facilities shall be constructed in accordance with standards of construction approved by the state public service commission. All drainage and underground utility installations that traverse privately owned property shall be protected by easements granted by the proprietor. 
(b) ?Sewage disposal. A sanitary sewer system, including all appurtenances, shall be required in all subdivisions which shall connect and outlet into a city sanitary sewer system. 
(c) ?Water supply. A water supply system including appurtenances shall be required in all subdivisions which shall be connected to a city water supply system. 
(d) ?Storm drainage system. An adequate storm drainage system including necessary storm sewers, catch basins, manholes, culverts, bridges and other appurtenances shall be required in all subdivisions. Adequate provision shall be made for proper drainage of stormwater runoff from residential rear yards. Each yard shall be self-contained and shall be drained from rear to front except where topography or other natural features require otherwise. 
(Code 1988, § 21-107; Ord. No. 123, § 501, 12-3-1968) 
Sec. 22-147. - Sidewalks, trees and street signs. 
(a) ?Sidewalks. 
(1) ?Major thoroughfares. A five-foot wide concrete sidewalk located one foot from the property line on the side or sides of the roadway abutting the subdivision shall be provided pursuant to this subdivision. In those instances where no good purpose would be served by the provision of sidewalks, the city council may waive this requirement. 
(2) ?Collector streets. A five-foot concrete sidewalk located one foot from the property line on each side of the roadway shall be provided. In those instances where no good purpose would be served by the provision of sidewalks, the city council may waive this requirement. 
(3) ?Minor streets. A five-foot concrete sidewalk located one foot from the property line on each side of the roadway shall be provided. In those instances where no good purpose would be served by the provision of sidewalks, the city council may waive this requirement. 
(4) ?Marginal access streets. A five-foot concrete sidewalk located one foot from the property line on the private property side of the roadway shall be provided. In those instances where no good purpose would be served by the provision of sidewalks, the city council may waive this requirement. 
(5) ?Public walkways. The surface of the walkways shall be developed in concrete. Planting pockets shall be provided in public walkways for tree and shrub planting. The planting plan and surface treatment shall meet the approval of the planning commission. Fences or other improvements may also be required if the planning commission or city council determines they are necessary to protect the adjacent property owners. 
(b) ?Trees. Existing trees near street rights-of-way shall be preserved by the proprietor. Street trees shall be provided at least one per lot, and shall be placed in the separation strip at such location as required by the planning commission. 
(c) ?Street signs. Street name signs shall be placed at all street intersections within or abutting the subdivision, and they shall be located as follows in order of preference of the proprietor: 
(1) ?Next to stop sign; 
(2) ?At northeast corner of intersection; 
(3) ?At southeast corner of intersection. 
(Code 1988, § 21-108; Ord. No. 123, § 502, 12-3-1968) 
Secs. 22-148—22-177. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 22-178. - Hardship. 
    The city council may authorize a variance from this article when, in its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance. In granting any variance, the city council shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable for the public interest. In making its findings, as required in this article, the city council shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the city council finds that: 
(1) ?There are special circumstances or conditions affecting such property such that the strict application of this article would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land; 
(2) ?The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner; 
(3) ?The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which such property is situated. 
(Code 1988, § 21-131; Ord. No. 123, § 1200, 12-3-1968) 
Sec. 22-179. - Complete neighborhood. 
(a) ?Conditions. The city council may authorize a variance from this article's regulations in case of a plan for a complete community or neighborhood where such development is permitted by chapter 50 and which, in the judgment of the city council, and after a recommendation is had from the planning commission, provides adequate public spaces and includes provisions for efficient circulation, light and air and other needs. In making its findings, as required in this article, the city council shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of and the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed development upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. The city council shall find that: 
(1) ?There is adequate acreage and population in the proposed plan so as to support at least one elementary school; 
(2) ?The standards and requirements of chapter 50 are met; 
(3) ?The planning commission has reviewed the plan and recommends its approval as having met the standards and intent of the master plan of land use as it relates to facility needs; 
(4) ?In granting the variance, it shall be valid only as long as the plan for the complete neighborhood is carried out as approved. Any departure from the plan shall immediately rescind any variance granted; 
(5) ?The city council shall establish a time schedule to be met on the various aspects of the complete neighborhood plan. 
(b) ?Application. Application for any such variance shall be submitted in writing by the proprietor at the time the preliminary plat (stage 1) is filed, stating fully and clearly all facts relied upon by the proprietor and shall be supplemented with maps, plans or other additional data that may aid in the analysis of the proposed project. The plans for such development shall include such covenants, restrictions or other legal provisions necessary to guarantee the full achievement of the plan. 
(Code 1988, § 21-132; Ord. No. 123, § 1201, 12-3-1968) 
Chapter 24 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Commission on law enforcement standards act, MCL 28.601 et seq.; uniform crime reporting system, MCL 28.251 et seq.; mutual police assistance agreements, MCL 123.811 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Issuance of appearance tickets for violations. 
    The building inspector is hereby authorized to issue appearance tickets for violations of the Building Code, Electrical Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code, Property Maintenance Code and Existing Structures Code as authorized by MCL 764.9c, as amended. 
(Code 1988, § 1-14; Ord. No. 98-3, 3-17-1998) 
Secs. 24-2—24-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal civil infractions, MCL 117.4l, 600.8701 et seq. 

Sec. 24-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means Public Act No. 236 of 1961 (MCL 600.101 et seq.). 
    Authorized city official means a police officer or other personnel of the city authorized by this Code or any ordinance to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction notices. 
    Bureau means the City of Algonac Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau as established by this article. 
    Municipal civil infraction action means a civil action in which the defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
    Municipal civil infraction citation means a written complaint or notice prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear in court regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction violation by the person cited. 
    Municipal civil infraction violation notice means a written notice prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear at the city violations bureau and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed for the violation by the schedule of civil fines adopted by the city, as authorized under sections 8396 and 8707(6) of the act (MCL 600.8396, 600.8707(6)). 
(Code 1988, 27-1; Ord. No. 96-02, § 1, 1-9-1996) 
Sec. 24-22. - Municipal civil infraction action; commencement. 
    A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by an authorized city official of: 
(1) ?A municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to appear in court; or 
(2) ?A municipal civil infraction violation notice directing the alleged violator to appear at the city violations bureau. 
(Code 1988, 27-2; Ord. No. 96-02, § 1, 1-9-1996) 
Sec. 24-23. - Municipal civil infraction citations—Issuance and service. 
    Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by authorized city officials as follows: 
(1) ?The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a reasonable time after the citation is issued. 
(2) ?The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the district court. 
(3) ?Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form approved by the state court administrator. The original citation shall be filed with the district court. Copies of the citation shall be retained by the city and issued to the alleged violator as provided by section 8705 of the act (MCL 600.8705). 
(4) ?A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized city official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the complaint and if the citation contains the following statement immediately above the date and signature of the official: 
"I declare under the penalties of perjury that the statements above are true to the best of my information, knowledge, and belief." 
(5) ?An authorized city official who witnesses a person commit a municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and as completely as possible, an original and required copies of a citation. 
(6) ?An authorized city official may issue a citation to a person if: 
a. ?Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction; or 
b. ?Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for an infraction and if the prosecuting attorney or city attorney approves in writing the issuance of the citation. 
(7) ?Municipal infraction citations shall be served by an authorized city official as follows: 
a. ?Except as provided by subsection (7)b of this section, an authorized city official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged violator. 
b. ?If the municipal civil infraction action involves the use or occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged violator, but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or structure by posting the copy on the land or attaching the copy to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first-class mail to the owner of the land, building, or structure at the owner's last known address. 
(Code 1988, 27-3; Ord. No. 96-02, § 1, 1-9-1996) 
Sec. 24-24. - Same—Contents. 
(a) ?A municipal ordinance citation shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction alleged, the place where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number of the court, and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made. 
(b) ?Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that he may do one of the following: 
(1) ?Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in person, or by representation, at or by the time specified for appearance. 
(2) ?Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction "with explanation" by mail by the time specified for appearance or, in person, or by representation. 
(3) ?Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing either of the following: 
a. ?Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is requested by the city. 
b. ?Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a judge, with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(c) ?The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of the following: 
(1) ?That if the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility "with explanation" in person or by representation, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time for an appearance. 
(2) ?That if the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing, unless a hearing date is specified on the citation. 
(3) ?That a hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing is requested by the alleged violator or the city. 
(4) ?That at an informal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(5) ?That at a formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(d) ?The citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced type that the failure of the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor and will result in entry of a default judgment against the alleged violator on the municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, 27-4; Ord. No. 96-02, § 1, 1-9-1996) 
Sec. 24-25. - Municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(a) ?Established. The city hereby establishes a Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau ("bureau") as authorized under section 8396 of the act (MCL 600.8396) to accept admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions in response to municipal civil infraction violation notices issued and served by authorized city officials, and to collect and retain civil fines and costs as prescribed by this Code or any ordinance. 
(b) ?Location; supervision; employees; rules and regulations. The bureau shall be located at city hall, and shall be under the supervision and control of the chief of police. The city manager, subject to the approval of the city council, shall adopt rules and regulations for the operation of the bureau and appoint any necessary qualified city employees to administer the bureau. 
(c) ?Disposition of violations. The bureau may dispose only of municipal civil infraction violations for which a fine has been scheduled and for which a municipal civil infraction violation notice (as compared with a citation) has been issued. The fact that a fine has been scheduled for a particular violation shall not entitle any person to dispose of the violation at the bureau. Nothing in this article shall prevent or restrict the city from issuing a municipal civil infraction citation for any violation or from prosecuting any violation in a court of competent jurisdiction. No person shall be required to dispose of a municipal civil infraction violation at the bureau and may have the violation processed before a court of appropriate jurisdiction. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the bureau shall not prejudice the person or in any way diminish the person's rights, privileges and protection accorded by law. 
(d) ?Bureau limited to accepting admissions of responsibility. The scope of the bureau's authority shall be limited to accepting admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions and collecting and retaining civil fines and costs as a result of those admissions. The bureau shall not accept payment of a fine from any person who denies having committed the offense or who admits responsibility only with explanation, and in no event shall the bureau determine, or attempt to determine the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to an alleged violation. 
(e) ?Municipal civil infraction violation notices. Municipal civil infraction violation notices shall be issued and served by authorized city officials under the same circumstances and upon the same persons as provided for citations as provided in section 24-23(6) and (7). In addition to any other information required by this Code or other ordinance, the notice of violation shall indicate the time by which the alleged violator must appear at the bureau, the methods by which an appearance may be made, the address and telephone number of the bureau, the hours during which the bureau is open, the amount of the fine scheduled for the alleged violation, and the consequences for failure to appear and pay the required fine within the required time. 
(f) ?Appearance; payment of fines and costs. An alleged violator receiving a municipal civil infraction violation notice shall appear at the bureau and pay the specified fine and costs at or by the time specified for appearance in the municipal civil infraction violation notice. An appearance may be made by mail, in person, or by representation. 
(g) ?Procedure where admission of responsibility not made or fine not paid. If an authorized city official issues and serves a municipal ordinance violation notice and if an admission of responsibility is not made and the civil fine and costs, if any, prescribed by the schedule of fines for the violation are not paid at the bureau, a municipal civil infraction citation may be filed with the district court and a copy of the citation may be served by first-class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged violator's last known address. The citation filed with the court does not need to comply in all particulars with the requirements for citations as provided by sections 8705 and 8709 of the act (MCL 600.8705, 600.8709), but shall consist of a sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the municipal ordinance violation notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond to the citation. 
(Code 1988, 27-5; Ord. No. 96-02, § 1, 1-9-1996) 
Secs. 24-26—24-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISPOSITION OF LOST, UNCLAIMED AND STOLEN PROPERTY 

Sec. 24-54. - Adoption of state law by reference. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference the procedures located in MCL 434.151 et seq. for lost, unclaimed and stolen property, as if fully set out herein. 
(Code 1988, §§ 18-21—18-24; Ord. No. 140, §§ 1—4, 9-3-1974) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt state law by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Chapter 26 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Michigan Penal Code, MCL 750.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 26-19. - Furnishing false identification to a police officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any individual to furnish to a police officer false, forged, fictitious or misleading verbal or written information identifying the person as another person if the person is detained for a violation of any city ordinance or state law. 
(Code 1988, § 13-1; Ord. No. 189, 12-5-1989) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.479c. 
Sec. 26-20. - Obstruction of a police officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, resist, hinder, oppose, or refuse to obey the lawful order of any member of the police force, or any peace officer in the discharge of his duties as such. 
(Code 1988, § 13-58; Ord. No. 188, 8-2-1989; Ord. No. 2013-04, § 1, 10-1-2013) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.479. 
Secs. 26-21—26-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 

Sec. 26-44. - Assaulting, threatening, harassing, or intimidating behavior. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully commit an assault or an assault and battery within the city, nor shall any person or group of persons intentionally place another in reasonable fear of immediate harm through assaulting, threatening, harassing, or intimidating behavior. 
(Code 1988, § 13-21; Ord. No. 98-4, § 1, 4-21-1998) 
State Law reference— Assaults, MCL 750.81 et seq. 
Sec. 26-45. - Harassing communications. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously use any service provided by a communications common carrier with intent to terrorize, frighten, intimidate, threaten, harass, molest or annoy any other person, or to disturb the peace and quiet of any other person by: 
(1) ?Threatening physical harm or damage to any person or property in the course of a telephone conversation; 
(2) ?Falsely and deliberately reporting by telephone or telegraph message that any person has been injured, has suddenly taken ill, has suffered death, or has been the victim or a crime or of an accident; 
(3) ?Deliberately refusing or failing to disengage a connection between a telephone and another telephone or between a telephone and other equipment provided for the transmission of messages by telephone, thereby interfering with any communications service; 
(4) ?Using any vulgar, indecent, obscene or offensive language or suggesting any lewd or lascivious act in the course of a telephone conversation. 
(Code 1988, § 13-22; Ord. No. 119, §§ 1, 2, 5-16-1967) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.540e. 
Secs. 26-46—26-63. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 

Sec. 26-64. - Defacing of property; graffiti. 
    For the purpose of this section, the term "deface" means the placement, without consent, of any drawing, inscription, initial, design, scribbling, motto, message, name or picture, including those commonly known as graffiti, on an object or surface. 
(1) ?Graffiti prohibited. 
a. ?It shall be unlawful for any person to use any paint, spray paint, pigment, tools, objects, or any other similar means to injure, deface, or destroy the property of another, including the making of any drawing, inscription, initial, design, scribbling, motto, name, picture, pictograph, or other marking's commonly referred to as "graffiti." 
b. ?As used in this section, the term "spray paint" means any container of paint, varnish, lacquer, stain or similar substance commonly used in painting and propelled by compressed air, aerosol or other propellant and applied by a spraying method or similar technique. 
c. ?Except as otherwise provided, a person under 18 years of age shall not possess, buy or give to another any spray paint. Except as otherwise provided, a person shall not sell or give spray paint to another person under 18 years of age. However, a person may sell or give spray paint to a person under 18 years of age for lawful uses, if the juvenile exhibits the written consent therefor of his parent or guardian. 
(2) ?It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any property marked or defaced, as defined in this section, to remove or paint over such markings within seven days after discovery or their existence so as to minimize the addition of further markings and other blight upon the property. If removal is delayed by extenuating circumstances such as infirmity, or financial inability, the property owner may petition the police for a time extension. Any owner removing markings pursuant to this section shall be entitled to restitution in an amount determined by the court for the cost of removing the markings. Restitution shall be paid by any person convicted under this section of making the markings. If the individual defacing the property is under 18 years of age, to the extent practical, the individual shall be required to restore the premises. Violations of this subsection shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 13-45; Ord. No. 98-4, § 2, 4-21-1998) 
State Law reference— Malicious and willful mischief and destruction, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 26-65. - Damaging private or public property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully destroy, remove, damage, alter, or in any manner deface any property not his own, or any public school building, or any public building, bridge, fire hydrant, alarm box, streetlight, street sign, traffic-control device, railroad sign or signal, parking meter, or shade tree belonging to the city or located in the public places of the city; or mark or post handbills on, or in any manner mar the walls of any building, fence, tree, or pole within the city; or destroy, take, or meddle with any property belonging to the city; or remove the same from the building or place where it may be kept, placed, or stored, without proper authority; or disturb, tamper with, disconnect, or damage any city water meter without proper authority. 
(Code 1988, § 13-47; Ord. No. 2009-01, §§ 1, 2, 2-3-2009) 
State Law reference— Malicious and willful mischief and destruction, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 26-66. - Posting on poles, trees and structures. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to post, fasten or cause the posting or fastening to be done with any advertisements upon any telephone pole, telephone guy pole, shade tree, fence post or upon any building, without the consent of the owner, within the corporate limits of the city. A violation of this section shall constitute a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 3-1; Ord. No. 48, § 1, 6-17-2009; Ord. No. 96-03, § 1, 1-9-1996) 
State Law reference— Highway advertising act, MCL 252.301 et seq.; crimes related to advertising, MCL 750.33 et seq. 
Sec. 26-67. - Fraud. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain money or other valuable thing in any place in the city or aid or abet or in any manner be concerned therein. 
(Code 1988, § 13-47; Ord. No. 92-B, § 1(H), 10-4-1977) 
State Law reference— False pretenses and false representation, MCL 750.217a et seq.; gross fraud and cheats, MCL 750.280. 
Sec. 26-68. - Larceny. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of larceny by stealing from any dwelling house, house trailer, automobile, truck or other vehicle, office, store, business place, gasoline service station, shop, warehouse, mill, factory, hotel, school, barn, ship, boat, vessel, church, house of worship, locker room or any building used by the public, or to commit the crime of larceny anywhere within the limits of the city. 
(Code 1988, § 13-48; Ord. No. 92-B, § 1(N), 10-4-1977) 
State Law reference— Larceny, MCL 750.356 et seq. 
Sec. 26-69. - Instruments of crime; possession. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession in the city any tool or instrument used for the commission of burglary, larceny or the picking of locks or pockets, or any articles used for obtaining money or property under false pretenses and who cannot give a good account for the possession of the same. 
(Code 1988, § 13-49; Ord. No. 92-B, § 1(O), 10-4-1977) 
State Law reference— Possession of burglar's tools, MCL 750.116. 
Sec. 26-70. - Trespassing. 
    Any person who shall willfully enter upon the lands or premises of another without lawful authority after having been forbidden to do so by the owner or occupant or agent or servant of the owner or occupant, or any person being upon the land or premises of another, upon being notified to depart therefrom by the owner or occupant or the agent or servant of either, who without lawful authority neglects or refuses to depart therefrom, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 13-50; Ord. No. 173, 6-7-1988) 
State Law reference— Trespass, MCL 750.546 et seq. 
Secs. 26-71—26-98. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 

Sec. 26-99. - Obstruction of passage. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to collect or stand or crowd in front of or about any church or place of worship in the city, during service, or the gathering or departing of the congregation, or to collect or stand in crowds or loiter about or obstruct free and uninterrupted passage of any sidewalk in the city, or in any hall, stairway, public hall or building in the city after being told to move on by a police officer or person in charge of the premises. 
(Code 1988, § 13-51; Ord. No. 92-B, § 1(G), 10-4-1977) 
State Law reference— Certain loiterers deemed disorderly persons, MCL 750.167. 
Sec. 26-100. - Disorderly intoxication. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be intoxicated in a public place and to be either endangering directly the safety of another person or of property or acting in a manner that causes a public disturbance. 
(Code 1988, § 13-52; Ord. No. 92-B, § 1(D), 10-4-1977; Ord. of 3-7-1978, § 1) 
State Law reference— Such person deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(e). 
Sec. 26-101. - Fighting or other disturbance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make any improper noise, disturbance or riot, or to engage in any illegal or improper diversion. 
(Code 1988, § 13-53; Ord. No. 92-B, § 1(B), (E), 10-4-1977) 
Sec. 26-102. - Unlawful assembly. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to collect in crowds and bodies for unlawful and mischievous purposes in any place in the city. 
(Code 1988, § 13-54; Ord. No. 92-B, § 1(D), 10-4-1977; Ord. of 3-7-1978, § 1) 
State Law reference— Riots and unlawful assemblies, MCL 752.541 et seq. 
Sec. 26-103. - Disorderly houses. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any indecent, loud, boisterous or improper noise or disturbance in or about his house, tavern, inn, saloon, cellar, shop, office or other place of residence or place of business, or permit any persons to congregate in such house, tavern, inn, saloon, cellar, shop, office or residence within this city, to the disturbance or annoyance of citizens or others, or permit drunkards, gamblers, prostitutes or other disorderly persons to resort or congregate in or about such house, tavern, inn, saloon, cellar, shop, office or residence. 
(Code 1988, § 13-55; Ord. No. 161, § 1, 4-7-1987) 
Sec. 26-104. - Curfew for minors; exceptions. 
(a) ?No minor shall be upon any of the public streets or alleys of the city, nor shall such person loiter or linger about any of the public buildings or private business places of the city after the hour of 10:00 p.m., of any day, unless such person has attained the age of 16 years. 
(b) ?No minor aged 16 years but not yet 17 years of age shall be upon any of the public streets or alleys of the city nor shall such person loiter or linger about any of the public buildings or business places of the city after the hour of 11:00 p.m., of any day. 
(c) ?No minor aged 17 years but not yet 18 years of age shall be upon any of the public streets or alleys of the city, nor shall such person loiter or linger about any of the public buildings or business places of the city after 12:00 midnight of any day. 
(d) ?No minor shall be upon any of the public streets or alleys of the city, nor shall such person loiter or linger about any of the public buildings or business places of the city before the hour of 5:00 a.m., of any day. 
(e) ?The restrictions of this section shall not apply to a minor: 
(1) ?When a minor is accompanied by such minor's parent, guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of the minor. 
(2) ?When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by such minor's parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of such minor. 
(3) ?When the minor is returning directly home from a school activity, entertainment, recreational activity or dance. 
(4) ?When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the places referenced in this section during the proscribed period of time. 
(5) ?When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of first amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion. 
(6) ?When the minor is engaged in interstate travel with the consent of his parent or guardian. 
(f) ?It shall be the duty of the parents or guardians of the minor children to restrict their children from the streets in the evening in compliance with this section. If any minor is arrested for violation of this section, the parent or guardian shall be prima facie guilty of violation of this section. 
(Code 1988, § 13-56; Ord. No. 91A, §§ 1, 2, 5-2-1973) 
State Law reference— Curfew for children, MCL 722.751 et seq. 
Sec. 26-105. - Disorderly conduct aboard vessels. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any indecent, loud, boisterous or improper noise or disturbance on any ship, vessel, or pleasure boat owned by him and located within the city, to the disturbance or annoyance of citizens or others. 
(Code 1988, § 13-57; Ord. No. 184, 6-6-1989) 
Sec. 26-106. - Prowling. 
    No person shall prowl about the private premises of any other person in the nighttime without prior authority or prior permission of the owner or occupant of such premises. 
(Code 1988, § 13-59; Ord. No. 187, 8-2-1989) 
Secs. 26-107—26-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS 

Sec. 26-126. - Prostitution. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to accost, solicit or invite another in any public place or in or from any building or vehicle by word, gesture or any other means to commit or afford an opportunity to commit prostitution or to do any act involving the touching or contacting of the genitals of another. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage or offer to engage the services of another person for an act of prostitution, or an act involving the touching or contacting of the genitals of or by another, by the payment in money or other forms of consideration. 
(b) ?This section does not apply to law enforcement officers in the performance of their duties as a law enforcement officer. 
(Code 1988, § 13-81; Ord. No. 92-13, § 1(C), 10-4-1977; Ord. of 3-7-1978, § 1) 
State Law reference— Prostitution, MCL 750.448 et seq. 
Sec. 26-127. - Indecent exposure. 
    A person shall not knowingly make any open or indecent exposure of his person or of the person of another. 
(Code 1988, § 13-82; Ord. No. 92-B, § 1(F), 10-4-1977) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.335a. 
Sec. 26-128. - Public nudity. 
(a) ?In this section, the term "public nudity" means knowingly or intentionally displaying in a public place, or from a private place in such a manner as to allow the display to be seen from a public place, or for payment or promise of payment by any person, including, but not limited to, payment or promise for payment of an admission fee, any individual's genitals or anus with less than a fully opaque covering, or a female individual's breast without less than a fully opaque covering of the nipple and areola. The term "public nudity" does not include any of the following: 
(1) ?A woman's breastfeeding of a baby, whether or not the nipple or areola is exposed during or incidental to the feeding. 
(2) ?The term "material" as defined in section 2 of Public Act No. 343 of 1984 (MCL 752.362). 
(3) ?The term "sexually explicit visual material" as defined in section 3 of Public Act No. 33 of 1978 (MCL 722.673). 
(b) ?No person shall: 
(1) ?Engage in public nudity. 
(2) ?Make any indecent exposure of his person in a public place or knowingly do so in a private place where the exhibition or exposure may be viewed by a person located in a public place. 
(3) ?Swim or bathe in the nude in any public place or on private property without the specific permission of the owner of such property. 
State Law reference— Indecent exposure, MCL 750.335a; power to punish public nudity, MCL 117.5h. 
Sec. 26-129. - Indecent conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any indecent or obscene conduct or behavior in any place in the city. 
(Code 1988, § 13-83; Ord. No. 92-B, § 1(B), 10-4-1977) 
State Law reference— Such person deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(f). 
Sec. 26-130. - Gambling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any gambling game or game of chance in the streets or public places of the city. 
(Code 1988, § 13-84; Ord. No. 92-B, § 1(I), 10-4-1977) 
State Law reference— Gambling, MCL 750.301 et seq. 
Secs. 26-131—26-158. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY 

Sec. 26-159. - Discharging firearms, air guns, etc.; penalty; transporting air guns, spring guns, and similar devices in vehicles; possessing, displaying toy guns, starter pistols, blank guns or similar devices. 
(a) ?No person shall discharge any firearm, spring gun, slingshot, bow and arrow or other device capable of or designed to discharge any shot, pellet or missile likely to inflict bodily injury, in the city, except when lawfully acting, in the defense of persons or property or the enforcement of law or at a duly established range, the operation of which has been approved by the city council. Provided also, that bow and arrow instruction will be allowed at an approved site under supervision of a qualified instructor as part of the curriculum of an accredited education system and, with appropriate indemnification of the city approved by the city legal department. This subsection shall not prohibit the discharge of pneumatic guns at authorized target ranges, on other property where firearms may be discharged, or on or within private property with the permission of the owner or possessor of that property if conducted with reasonable care to prevent a projectile from crossing the bounds of the property. 
(b) ?Transporting or possessing firearms. 
(1) ?Except as otherwise permitted by law, a person shall not transport or possess in or upon a sailboat or a motor vehicle, aircraft, motorboat, or any other vehicle propelled by mechanical means either of the following: 
a. ?A firearm, other than a pistol, that is loaded. 
b. ?A pneumatic gun that is loaded and expels a metallic BB or metallic pellet greater than .177 caliber. 
(2) ?Except as otherwise permitted by law, a person shall not transport or possess in or upon a motor vehicle or any self-propelled vehicle designed for land travel either of the following: 
a. ?A firearm, other than a pistol, unless the firearm is unloaded and is one or more of the following: 
1. ?Taken down. 
2. ?Enclosed in a case. 
3. ?Carried in the trunk of the vehicle. 
4. ?Inaccessible from the interior of the vehicle. 
b. ?A pneumatic gun that expels a metallic BB or metallic pellet greater than .177 caliber unless the pneumatic gun is unloaded and is one or more of the following: 
1. ?Taken down. 
2. ?Enclosed in a case. 
3. ?Carried in the trunk of the vehicle. 
4. ?Inaccessible from the interior of the vehicle. 
c. ?No person shall possess or show or display a gun, a toy gun, starter pistol, blank gun, or devices of similar nature in a non-threatening manner, but with the intent to convey the impression to a person that the gun, toy gun, starter pistol, blank gun or similar device is actually a lethal weapon capable of causing a reasonable person to believe that the person possessing said object is armed with a dangerous weapon. 
d. ?No person under 18 years of age shall use or possess any handgun designed and manufactured exclusively for propelling BB's not exceeding .177 caliber by means of spring, gas or air, outside the curtilage of his domicile unless he is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or their designee. 
(Code 1988, § 13-106; Ord. No. 100, § 1, 7-6-1959; Ord. No. 98-4, § 3, 4-21-1998) 
State Law reference— Firearms and weapons, MCL 28.421 et seq., 750.222 et seq.; limited preemption of local regulation of pistols, firearms, pneumatic guns and ammunition, MCL 123.1101 et seq. 
Sec. 26-160. - Toy guns and explosives. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale, expose for sale, sell, have in their possession, give, furnish, transport, use, explode or cause to explode any blank cartridge, toy pistol, toy cannon, toy cane or toy gun, fireworks or other types of explosives, except of the type and under the conditions permitted by state law. 
(Code 1988, § 13-107; Ord. No. 92-B, § 1(M), 10-4-1977) 
State Law reference— Michigan fireworks safety act, MCL 28.451 et seq. 
Sec. 26-161. - Skateboarding prohibited. 
    No person shall operate a skateboard or similar device on nonresidential property within the boundaries of the central business district of the city, or the adjacent riverfront park. This prohibition shall apply to any parking lot open to the general public but shall not apply to the existing skate park. 
Sec. 13-162. - Penalty. 
    A violation of this section shall be a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, §§ 13-108, 13-109; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 1, 1-8-2008) 
Secs. 26-163—26-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES PERTAINING TO ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Michigan liquor control code of 1998, MCL 436.1101 et seq.; controlled substances, MCL 333.7101 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-191. - Consumption on unlicensed premises. 
    No alcoholic liquors shall be consumed in any public place, street, alley, park, parking lot or place of amusement not licensed to allow such consumption by the state liquor control commission in the city. 
(Code 1988, § 13-131; Ord. No. 148A, § 1, 7-17-1979) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 436.1915. 
Sec. 26-192. - Consumption at merchant businesses. 
    No merchant operating a place of business shall permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor upon his premises unless licensed to do so by the state liquor control commission. 
(Code 1988, § 13-132; Ord. No. 148A, § 2, 7-17-1979) 
Sec. 26-193. - Use or possession of marijuana prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any individual to use or have in his possession or under his control marijuana or cannabis as defined by MCL 333.7106 unless pursuant to a valid prescription or except as otherwise authorized by Article 7 of the Public Health Code (MCL 333.7101 et seq.). 
(Code 1988, § 13-134; Ord. No. 190, 12-5-1989) 
Secs. 26-194—26-224. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - USE OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS BY UNDERAGED PERSONS 

Sec. 26-225. - Establishments. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to keep, frequent or attend any place where alcoholic liquors are sold, stored, kept or furnished in the city, other than private residences. 
(Code 1988, § 13-156; Ord. No. 92-B, § 1(J), 10-4-1977) 
State Law reference— Authority for this section, MCL 750.141. 
Sec. 26-226. - Purchase, possession, or consumption of alcohol by persons under the age of 21 years. 
(a) ?A minor shall not purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, consume, or attempt to consume alcoholic liquor, possess or attempt to possess alcoholic liquor, or have any bodily alcohol content, except as provided in this section. A minor who violates this subsection is responsible for a municipal civil infraction or guilty of a misdemeanor as follows: 
(1) ?For the first violation, the minor is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and shall be fined not more than $100.00. A court may order a minor under this subdivision to participate in substance use disorder services as defined in section 6230 of the public health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.6230, and designated by the administrator of the office of substance abuse services, and may order the minor to perform community service and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described in subsection (e). A minor may be found responsible or admit responsibility only once under this subdivision. 
(2) ?If a violation of this subsection occurs after one prior judgment, the minor is guilty of a misdemeanor. A misdemeanor under this subdivision is punishable by imprisonment for not more than 30 days if the court finds that the minor violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile adjudication, or by a fine of not more than $200.00, or both. A court may order a minor under this subdivision to participate in substance use disorder services as defined in section 6230 of the public health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.6230, and designated by the administrator of the office of substance abuse services, to perform community service, and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described in subsection (e). 
(3) ?If a violation of this subsection occurs after two or more prior judgments, the minor is guilty of a misdemeanor. A misdemeanor under this subdivision is punishable by imprisonment for not more than 60 days, if the court finds that the minor violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile adjudication, or by a fine of not more than $500.00, or both, as applicable. A court may order a minor under this subdivision to participate in substance use disorder services as defined in section 6230 of the public health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.6230, and designated by the administrator of the office of substance abuse services, to perform community service, and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described in subsection (e). 
(b) ?An individual who furnishes fraudulent identification to a minor or, notwithstanding subsection (a), a minor who uses fraudulent identification to purchase alcoholic liquor, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100.00, or both. 
(c) ?If an individual who pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation of subsection (a)(2) or offers a plea of admission in a juvenile delinquency proceeding for a misdemeanor violation of subsection (a)(2), the court, without entering a judgment of guilt in a criminal proceeding or a determination in a juvenile delinquency proceeding that the juvenile has committed the offense and with the consent of the accused, may defer further proceedings and place the individual on probation. The terms and conditions of that probation include, but are not limited to, the sanctions set forth in subsection (a)(3), payment of the costs including minimum state cost as provided for in section 18m of chapter XIIA of the probate code of 1939, 1939 PA 288, MCL 712A.18m, and section 1j of chapter IX of the code of criminal procedure, 1927 PA 175, MCL 769.1j, and the costs of probation as prescribed in section 3 of chapter XI of the code of criminal procedure, 1927 PA 175, MCL 771.3. If a court finds that an individual violated a term or condition of probation or that the individual is utilizing this subsection in another court, the court may enter an adjudication of guilt, or a determination in a juvenile delinquency proceeding that the individual has committed the offense, and proceed as otherwise provided by law. If an individual fulfills the terms and conditions of probation, the court shall discharge the individual and dismiss the proceedings. A discharge and dismissal under this section is without adjudication of guilt or without a determination in a juvenile delinquency proceeding that the individual has committed the offense and is not a conviction or juvenile adjudication for purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law on conviction of a crime. An individual may obtain only one discharge and dismissal under this subsection. The court shall maintain a nonpublic record of the matter while proceedings are deferred and the individual is on probation and if there is a discharge and dismissal under this subsection. The secretary of state shall retain a nonpublic record of a plea and of the discharge and dismissal under this subsection. These records shall be furnished to any of the following: 
(1) ?To a court, prosecutor, or police agency on request for the purpose of determining if an individual has already utilized this subsection. 
(2) ?To the department of corrections, a prosecutor, or a law enforcement agency, on the department's, a prosecutor's, or a law enforcement agency's request, subject to all of the following conditions: 
a. ?At the time of the request, the individual is an employee of the department of corrections, the prosecutor, or the law enforcement agency, or an applicant for employment with the department of corrections, the prosecutor, or the law enforcement agency. 
b. ?The record is used by the department of corrections, the prosecutor, or the law enforcement agency only to determine whether an employee has violated his or her conditions of employment or whether an applicant meets criteria for employment. 
(d) ?A misdemeanor violation of subsection (a) successfully deferred, discharged, and dismissed under subsection (c) is considered a prior judgment for the purposes of subsection (a)(3). 
(e) ?A court may order an individual found responsible for or convicted of violating subsection (a) to undergo screening and assessment by a person or agency as designated by the department-designated community mental health entity as defined in section 100a of the mental health code, 1974 PA 258, MCL 330.1100a, to determine whether the individual is likely to benefit from rehabilitative services, including alcohol or drug education and alcohol or drug treatment programs. A court may order an individual subject to a misdemeanor conviction or juvenile adjudication of, or placed on probation regarding, a violation of subsection (a) to submit to a random or regular preliminary chemical breath analysis. The parent, guardian, or custodian or a minor who is less than 18 years of age and not emancipated under 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.1 to 722.6, may request a random or regular preliminary chemical breath analysis as part of the probation. 
(f) ?The secretary of state shall suspend the operator's or chauffeur's license of an individual convicted of a second or subsequent violation of subsection (a) or of violating subsection (2) as provided in section 319 of the Michigan vehicle code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.319. 
(g) ?A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a minor has consumed alcoholic liquor or has any bodily alcohol content may request that individual to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. If a minor does not consent to a preliminary chemical breath analysis, the analysis shall not be administered without a court order, but a peace officer may seek to obtain a court order. The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis or other acceptable blood alcohol test are admissible in a state civil infraction proceeding or criminal prosecution to determine if the minor has consumed or possessed alcoholic liquor or had any bodily alcohol content. 
(h) ?A law enforcement agency, on determining that an individual who is less than 18 years of age and not emancipated under 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.1 to 722.6, allegedly consumed, possessed, or purchased alcoholic liquor, attempted to consume, possess, or purchase alcoholic liquor, or had any bodily alcohol content in violation of subsection (a) shall notify the parent or parents, custodian, or guardian of the individual as to the nature of the violation if the name of a parent, guardian, or custodian is reasonably ascertainable by the law enforcement agency. The law enforcement agency shall notify the parent, guardian, or custodian not later than 48 hours after the law enforcement agency determines that the individual who allegedly violated subsection (a) is less than 18 years of age and not emancipated under 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.1 to 722.6. The law enforcement agency may notify the parent, guardian, or custodian by any means reasonably calculated to give prompt actual notice including but not limited to, notice in person, by telephone, or by first-class mail. If an individual less than 17 years of age is incarcerated for violating subsection (a), his or her parents or legal guardian shall be notified immediately as provided in this subsection. 
(i) ?This section does not prohibit a minor from possessing alcoholic liquor during regular working hours and in the course of his or her employment if employed by a person licensed by this act, by the commission, or by an agent of the commission, if the alcoholic liquor is not possessed for his or her personal consumption. 
(j) ?The following individuals are not considered to be in violation of subsection (a): 
(1) ?A minor who has consumed alcoholic liquor and who voluntarily presents himself or herself to a health facility or agency for treatment or for observation including, but not limited to, medical examination and treatment for any condition arising from a violation of sections 520b to 520g of the Michigan penal code, 1931 PA 328, MCL 750.520b to 750.520g, committed against a minor. 
(2) ?A minor who accompanies an individual who meets both of the following criteria: 
a. ?Has consumed alcoholic liquor. 
b. ?Voluntarily presents himself or herself to a health facility or agency for treatment or for observation including, but not limited to, medical examination and treatment for any condition arising from a violation of sections 520b to 520g of the Michigan penal code, 1931 PA 328 MCL 750.520b to 750.520g, committed against a minor. 
(k) ?If a minor who is less than 18 years of age and who is not emancipated under 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.1 to 722.6, voluntarily presents himself or herself to a health facility or agency for treatment or for observation as provided under subsection (j), the health facility or agency shall notify the parent or parents, guardian, or custodian of the individual as to the nature of the treatment or observation if the name of a parent, guardian, or custodian is reasonable ascertainable by the health facility or agency. 
(l) ?This section does not limit the civil or criminal liability of a vendor or the vendor's clerk, servant, agent, or employee for a violation of this act. 
(m) ?The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor who is enrolled in a course offered by an accredited postsecondary educational institution in an academic building of the institution under the supervision of a faculty member is not prohibited by this act if the purpose of the consumption is solely educational and is a requirement of the course. 
(n) ?The consumption by a minor of sacramental wine in connection with religious services at a church, synagogue, or temple is not prohibited by this act. 
(o) ?Subsection (a) does not apply to a minor who participates in either or both of the following: 
(1) ?An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person's employer and with the prior approval of the local prosecutor's office as part of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement action. 
(2) ?An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the state police, the commission, or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action unless the initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of alcoholic liquor by the minor was not under the direction of the state police, the commission, or the local police agency and was not part of the undercover operation. 
(p) ?The state police, the commission, or a local police agency shall not recruit or attempt to recruit a minor for participation in an undercover operation at the scene of a violation of subsection (a), MCL 436.1701(1), or MCL 436.1801(2). 
(q) ?In a prosecution for the violation of subsection (a) concerning a minor having any bodily alcohol content, it is an affirmative defense that the minor consumed the alcoholic liquor in a venue or location where that consumption is legal. 
(r) ?As used in this section: 
(1) ?"Any bodily alcohol content" means either of the following: 
a. ?An alcohol content of 0.02 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine. 
b. ?Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from the consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than consumption of alcoholic liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony. 
(2) ?"Emergency medical services personnel" means that term as defined in section 20904 of the public health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.20904. 
(3) ?"Health facility or agency" means that term as defined in section 20106 of the public health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.20106. 
(4) ?"Prior judgment" means a conviction, juvenile adjudication, finding of responsibility, or admission or responsibility for any of the following, whether under a law of this state, a local ordinance substantially corresponding to a law of this state, a law of the United States substantially corresponding to a law of this state, or a law of another state substantially corresponding to a law of this state: 
a. ?Section 701, 703, or 707 of the Michigan Liquor Control Code, 1998 PA 58, MCL 436.1701, MCL 436.1703, and MCL 436.1707. 
b. ?Section 624a, 624b, or 625 of the Michigan vehicle code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.624a, 257.624b, and 257.625. 
c. ?Section 80176, 81134, or 82127 of the natural resources and environmental protection act, 1994 PA 451, MCL 324.80176, 324.81134, and 324.82127. 
d. ?Section 167a or 237 of the Michigan penal code, 1939 PA 328 MCL 750.167a and 750.237. 
(Code 1988, § 13-157; Ord. No. 48A, § 6, 7-17-1979; Ord. No. 98-1, 2-17-1998; Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 10-5-2010; Ord. No. 2018-03 , § 1, 6-5-2018) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 436.1703. 
Sec. 26-227. - Selling or furnishing alcoholic liquor to person under 21 years of age. 
(a) ?Alcoholic liquor shall not be sold or furnished to a person under 21 years of age. Subject to subsections (d), (e), and (f) of this section, a person who knowingly sells or furnishes alcoholic liquor to a person under 21 years of age, or who fails to make diligent inquiry as to whether the person is a person under 21 years of age, is guilty of a misdemeanor. A retail licensee or a retail licensee's clerk, agent, or employee who violates this subsection shall be punished in the manner provided for licensees in state law. A suitable sign describing the content of this section and the penalties for its violation shall be posted in a conspicuous place in each room where alcoholic liquor is sold. The signs shall be approved and furnished by the liquor control commission. 
(b) ?If a violation occurs in an establishment that is licensed by the commission for consumption of alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises, a person who is a licensee or the clerk, agent, or employee of a licensee shall not be charged with a violation of subsection (a) of this section unless the licensee or the clerk, agent, or employee of the licensee knew or should have reasonably known with the exercise of due diligence that a person less than 21 years of age possessed or consumed alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises and the licensee or clerk, agent, or employee of the licensee failed to take immediate corrective action. 
(c) ?If the enforcing agency involved in the violation is the state police or a local police agency, a licensee shall not be charged with a violation of subsection (a) of this section unless all of the following occur, if applicable: 
(1) ?Enforcement action is taken against the person under 21 years of age who purchased or attempted to purchase, consumed or attempted to consume, or possessed or attempted to possess alcoholic liquor. 
(2) ?Enforcement action is taken under this section against the person 21 years of age or older who is not the retail licensee or the retail licensee's clerk, agent, or employee who sold or furnished the alcoholic liquor to the person under 21 years of age. 
(3) ?Enforcement action under this section is taken against the clerk, agent, or employee who directly sold or furnished alcoholic liquor to the person under 21 years of age. 
(d) ?If the enforcing agency is the liquor control commission and an appearance ticket or civil infraction citation has not been issued, then the commission shall recommend to a local law enforcement agency that enforcement action be taken against a violator of this section or section 26-226 who is not a licensee. However, this subsection (d) does not apply if the person under 21 years of age against whom enforcement action is taken under section 703, the clerk, agent, or employee of the licensee who directly sold or furnished alcoholic liquor to the person under 21 years of age, or the person 21 years of age or older who sold or furnished alcoholic liquor to the person under 21 years of age is not alive or is not present in this state at the time the licensee is charged. Subsection (d)(1) of this section does not apply under either of the following circumstances: 
(1) ?The violation of subsection (a) of this section is the result of an undercover operation in which the person under 21 years of age purchased or received alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person's employer and with the prior approval of the local prosecutor's office as part of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement action. 
(2) ?The violation of subsection (a) of this section is the result of an undercover operation in which the person under 21 years of age purchased or received alcoholic liquor under the direction of the state police, the liquor control commission, or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action. 
(e) ?Any initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of alcoholic liquor by the person under 21 years of age under subsection (d)(1) or (2) of this section must have been under the direction of the state police, the liquor control commission, or the local police agency and must have been part of the undercover operation. 
(f) ?If a person under 21 years of age participates in an undercover operation in which the person is to purchase or receive alcoholic liquor under the supervision of a law enforcement agency, his parents or legal guardian shall consent to the participation if that person is less than 18 years of age. 
(g) ?In an action for the violation of this section, proof that the defendant or the defendant's agent or employee demanded and was shown, before furnishing alcoholic liquor to a person under 21 years of age, a motor vehicle operator's or chauffeur's license, a military identification card, or other bona fide documentary evidence of the age and identity of that person, shall be a defense to an action brought under this section. 
(h) ?The liquor control commission shall provide, on an annual basis, a written report to the department of state police as to the number of actions heard by the commission involving violations of this section. The report shall include the disposition of each action and contain figures representing the following categories: 
(1) ?Decoy operations. 
(2) ?Off-premises violations. 
(3) ?On-premises violations. 
(4) ?Repeat offenses within the three years preceding the date of that report. 
(i) ?Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Corrective action means action taken by a licensee or a clerk, agent, or employee of a licensee designed to prevent a person under 21 years of age from further possessing or consuming alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises. The term "corrective action" includes, but is not limited to, contacting a law enforcement agency and ejecting the person under 21 years of age and any other person suspected of aiding and abetting the person under 21 years of age. 
    Diligent inquiry means a diligent good faith effort to determine the age of a person, which includes at least an examination of an official state operator's or chauffeur's license, an official state personal identification card, a military identification card, or any other bona fide picture identification which establishes the identity and age of the person. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 436.1701. 
Secs. 26-228—26-247. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OPEN HOUSE PARTIES 

Sec. 26-248. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult means a person 17 years of age or older. 
    Control means any form of regulation or dominion including a possessory right. 
    Minor means a person not legally permitted by reason of age to possess alcoholic liquors pursuant to state law or this Code. 
    Open house party means a social gathering of persons at a residence other than the owner or those with rights of possession or their immediate family members. 
    Residence means a home, apartment, condominium or other dwelling unit and includes the curtilage of such dwelling unit. 
(Code 1988, § 13-186; Ord. No. 160, § 1, 6-3-1986) 
Sec. 26-249. - Responsibility of adult having control of residence. 
    No adult having control of any residence shall allow an open house party to take place at such residence if any alcoholic liquor or controlled substance is possessed or consumed at the residence by any minor where the adult knew or reasonably should have known that an alcoholic liquor or controlled substance was in the possession of or being consumed by a minor at the residence, and where the adult failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the possession or consumption of the alcoholic liquor or controlled substance at such residence. 
(Code 1988, § 13-187; Ord. No. 160, § 2, 6-3-1986) 
Sec. 26-250. - Exception. 
    The provisions of this division shall not apply to legally protected religious observances. 
(Code 1988, § 13-188; Ord. No. 160, § 3, 6-3-1986) 
Secs. 26-251—26-278. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DRUG PARAPHERNALIA[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Drug paraphernalia, MCL 333.7451 et seq. 

Sec. 26-279. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Drug paraphernalia means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of state or local law. The term "drug paraphernalia" includes, but is not limited to: 
(1) ?Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived; 
(2) ?Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled substance; 
(3) ?Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in increasing the potency of any pieces of plant that is a controlled substance; 
(4) ?Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances; 
(5) ?Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances; 
(6) ?Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose used, intended for use or designed for use in cutting controlled substances; 
(7) ?Separation gins and sitters used, intended for use or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana; 
(8) ?Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances; 
(9) ?Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances; 
(10) ?Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances; 
(11) ?Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in parenterally injected controlled substances in the human body; 
(12) ?Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
a. ?Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls; 
b. ?Water pipes; 
c. ?Carburetion tubes and devices; 
d. ?Smoking and carburetion mask; 
e. ?Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning materials such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
f. ?Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials; 
g. ?Chamber pipes; 
h. ?Carburetor pipes; 
i. ?Electric pipes; 
j. ?Air-driven pipes; 
k. ?Chillums; 
l. ?Bongs; 
m. ?Ice pipes or chillers. 
(Code 1988, § 13-211; Ord. No. 165, § 1(A), 1-5-1988) 
Sec. 26-280. - Determination. 
    In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider in addition to all the other logically relevant factors, the following: 
(1) ?Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the objects concerning its use; 
(2) ?Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone in control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substances; 
(3) ?The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of state law; 
(4) ?The proximity of the object to controlled substances; 
(5) ?The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object; 
(6) ?Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he knows, intends to use the object to facilitate a violation of state or local law; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of state law shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia; 
(7) ?Instruction, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use; 
(8) ?Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use; 
(9) ?National and local advertising concerning its use; 
(10) ?The manner in which the object is displayed for sale; 
(11) ?Whether those owners, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products; 
(12) ?Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the objects to the total sales of the business enterprise; 
(13) ?The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community; 
(14) ?Expert testimony concerning its use. 
(Code 1988, § 13-212; Ord. No. 165, § 1(B), 1-5-1988) 
Sec. 26-281. - Possession. 
    It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of state or local law. 
(Code 1988, § 13-213; Ord. No. 165, § 2, 1-5-1988) 
Sec. 26-282. - Illegal use or possession of marijuana prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any individual to use or have in his possession or under his control marijuana or cannabis as defined by MCL 333.7106 unless pursuant to a valid prescription or except as otherwise authorized by Article 7 of the Public Health Code (MCL 333.7101 et seq.). 
(Code 1988, § 13-213a; Ord. No. 2012-05, § 1, 12-4-2012) 
Sec. 26-283. - Manufacture, delivery or sale. 
    It is unlawful for any person to deliver, sell, possess with intent to deliver or sell, or manufacture with intent to deliver or sell drug paraphernalia, knowing that it will be used to plant, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of state law. 
(Code 1988, § 13-214; Ord. No. 165, § 3, 1-5-1988) 
Sec. 26-284. - Advertisement. 
    It is unlawful for any person to place any newspaper, magazine, handbill, sign, poster or other publication any advertisement, knowing that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(Code 1988, § 13-215; Ord. No. 165, § 4, 1-5-1988) 
Sec. 26-285. - Exceptions. 
    This division shall not apply to manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers, licensed medical technicians, technologists, nurses, hospitals, research teaching institutions, clinical laboratories, medical doctors, osteopathic physicians, dentists, chiropodists, veterinarians, pharmacists and embalmers in the normal legal course of their respective business or profession, nor to persons suffering from diabetes, asthma or any other medical condition requiring self-injection. 
(Code 1988, § 13-216; Ord. No. 165, § 5, 1-5-1988) 
Sec. 26-286. - Civil forfeiture. 
    Any drug paraphernalia used, sold, possessed with intent to use or sell, or manufactured with intent to sell in violation of this division shall be seized and forfeited to the city. 
(Code 1988, § 13-217; Ord. No. 165, § 6, 1-5-1988) 
Sec. 26-287. - Delivery or sale to a minor. 
    An individual 18 years of age or over who violates section 26-283 by delivering or selling drug paraphernalia to an individual under 18 years of age, knowing that it will be used to plant, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of state law, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not less than $250.00, nor more than $500.00, and by imprisonment of not less than three days nor more than 90 days, in the discretion of the court. 
(Code 1988, § 13-218; Ord. No. 165, § 8, 1-5-1988) 
Secs. 26-288—26-307. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - OFFENSES PERTAINING TO PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Contributing to neglect or delinquency of a minor, MCL 750.145. 

Sec. 26-308. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Delinquent acts means those acts which violate the laws of the United States, or the statutes of the state or the ordinances of the city or those acts which would cause or tend to cause the minor to come under the jurisdiction of the juvenile division of the probate court as defined by MCL 712A.2, but does not include traffic violations. 
    Illegal drugs means controlled substances obtained without a legal prescription. 
    Juvenile delinquent means those minors whose behavior interferes with the rights of others or menaces the welfare of the community. 
    Minor means any person under the age of 18 years residing with a parent. 
    Parent means mother, father, legal guardian and any other person having the care or custody of a minor or any person acting in the parents' stead who has custody or control of the minor. 
(Code 1988, § 13-219; Ord. No. 96-06, § 3, 10-1-1996) 
Sec. 26-309. - Parental duties. 
(a) ?It is the continuous duty of the parent of any minor to exercise reasonable control to prevent the minor from committing any delinquent act. 
(b) ?Included (without limitation) in this continuous duty of reasonable parental control are the following parental duties: 
(1) ?To keep illegal drugs or illegal firearms out of the home and legal firearms locked in places that are inaccessible to the minor. 
(2) ?To know the curfew ordinances of the city and to require the minor to observe the curfew ordinance. 
(3) ?To require the minor to attend regular school sessions and to forbid the minor to be absent from class without parental or school permission. 
(4) ?To arrange proper supervision for the minor when the parent must be absent. 
(5) ?To take the necessary precautions to prevent the minor from maliciously or willfully destroying real, personal or mixed property which belongs to the city, or is located in the city. 
(6) ?To forbid the minor from keeping stolen property, illegally possessing firearms or illegal drugs, or associating with known juvenile delinquents, and to seek help from appropriate governmental authorities or private agencies in handling or controlling the minor when necessary. 
(Code 1988, § 13-220; Ord. No. 96-06, § 4, 10-1-1996) 
Sec. 26-310. - Notification of parents; record of notification. 
(a) ?Whenever a minor is arrested or detained for the commission of any delinquent act within the city, the parent of the minor shall be immediately notified by the city police department, advising the parent of such arrest or detention, the reason therefor, and the parent's responsibility under this article. 
(b) ?A record of such notifications shall be kept by the youth bureau of the city police department. 
(Code 1988, § 13-221; Ord. No. 96-06, § 5, 10-1-1996) 
Sec. 26-311. - Parental violation and penalty. 
(a) ?No parent or guardian of any minor under the age of 18 years shall fail to exercise reasonable parental control over such minor. An adjudication that said minor has violated a provision of this Code which is a misdemeanor or a finding that such minor is responsible for a violation of this Code which is deemed a civil infraction shall be prima facie evidence that said parent or guardian failed to exercise reasonable parental control. 
(b) ?Pursuant to the violation of this Code, the parent/guardian of minor shall be held civilly responsible for the damages caused by the commission of any delinquent act within the city. 
(c) ?Upon the first conviction of a violation of this article, the parent shall be subject to a fine of not less than $75.00, nor more than $100.00. 
(d) ?Upon the second conviction of a violation of this article, the parent shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100.00, nor more than $500.00, and in addition, shall be sentenced to probation with the condition that the parent participate in, through completion, a court approved community-based treatment program (such as parenting skills, family services, employment and training, etc.) or, at the discretion of the court, be imprisoned for a period of up to 30 days. 
(e) ?Upon the third or subsequent violation and conviction, the parent shall be subject to a fine of not less than $200.00, nor more than $500.00 and, at the discretion of the court, imprisoned for a period of up to 90 days. 
(Code 1988, § 13-222; Ord. No. 96-06, § 6, 10-1-1996) 
Secs. 26-312—26-339. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND VAPOR PRODUCTS BY MINORS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-02 , § 1, adopted April 17, 2018, amended article X in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article X, §§ 26-341 and 26-342, pertained to possession of tobacco products by minors, and derived from the Code of 1988, §§ 13-240, 13-241 and Ord. No. 2000-7, adopted December 19, 2000. 
State Law reference— Youth tobacco act, MCL 722.641 et seq. 

Sec. 26-340. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose and construction of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Minor means an individual who is less than 18 years of age. 
    Public place means a public street, sidewalk, or park, or any area open to the general public in a publicly owned or operated building or premises, or in a public place of business. 
    Tobacco product means any product made from the tobacco plant for the purpose of smoking, chewing, inhaling, and other personal use including cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, hookah, snuff, and cigarettes in any form. 
    Use a tobacco or vapor product means to chew, smoke, suck, inhale, or otherwise consume a tobacco or vapor product. 
    Vapor product means a noncombustible product that employs a heating element, power source, electronic circuit, or other electronic, chemical or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size that can be used to produce vapor in a solution or other form. Vapor product includes an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device and a vapor cartridge or other container in a solution or other form that is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device. Vapor product does not include a product regulated as a drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration. 
( Ord. No. 2018-02 , § 1, 4-17-2018) 
Sec. 26-341. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a) ?Subject to subsection (c), a minor shall not do any of the following: 
(1) ?Purchase or attempt to purchase a tobacco or vapor product. 
(2) ?Possess or attempt to possess a tobacco or vapor product. 
(3) ?Use a tobacco or vapor product in a public place. 
(4) ?Present or offer to an individual a purported proof of age that is false, fraudulent, or not actually his or her own proof of age for the purpose of purchasing, attempting to purchase, possessing, or attempting to possess a tobacco product or vapor product. 
(b) ?Subsection (a) does not apply to a minor participating in any of the following: 
(1) ?An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives a vapor product under the direction of the minor's employer and with the prior approval of the local prosecutor's office as part of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement action. 
(2) ?An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives a vapor product under the direction of a police agency as part of an enforcement action. 
(3) ?Compliance checks in which the minor attempts to purchase tobacco products for the purpose of satisfying federal abuse block grant youth tobacco access requirements, if the compliance checks are conducted under the direction of a substance abuse coordinating agency as defined in section 6103 of the public health code, Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.6103), and with the prior approval of the state police or a local police agency. 
(c) ?Subsection (a) does not apply to the handling or transportation of a vapor product by a minor under the terms of that minor's employment. 
( Ord. No. 2018-02 , § 1, 4-17-2018) 
Sec. 26-342. - Penalties for violation. 
    Any person who violates section 26-341 shall be liable for a municipal civil infraction. 
( Ord. No. 2018-02 , § 1, 4-17-2018) 
Sec. 26-343. - Furnishing tobacco or vapor products to minors prohibited. 
    Tobacco or vapor products shall not be sold or furnished to a minor. Any person who knowingly sells or furnishes tobacco or vapor products to a minor, or who fails to make diligent inquiry as to whether the person is a minor is guilty of a misdemeanor as more fully described in section 1-14(b). 
( Ord. No. 2018-02 , § 1, 4-17-2018) 
Chapter 28 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to operate recreation areas and playgrounds, MCL 123.51 et seq.; the playground equipment safety act, MCL 408.681 et seq. 

Sec. 28-1. - Damaging and defacing. 
    No person shall injure, mar or damage in any manner any monument, ornament, fence, tree, seat, shrub, flower, playground equipment, within or belonging to parks in the city. Nor shall any person paste, affix or inscribe and handbills, signs, posters or inscriptions upon or against any tree, structure or property of or in such parks without the permission of the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 15-1; Ord. No. 147, § 1, 4-19-1977) 
State Law reference— Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 28-2. - Gatherings. 
    No person shall hold any public or private gathering in the public parks unless permission in writing is obtained from the city council or city manager. 
(Code 1988, § 15-2; Ord. No. 147, § 2, 4-19-1977) 
Sec. 28-3. - Restricted areas for sports; hours of use determined by city manager. 
    No baseball, football or softball throwing, or other violent or rough exercises or play shall be engaged in, in any public park or other public place, except in areas designated therefor by the city manager who is also authorized to designate hours when city parks and recreation areas shall be closed to public use. 
(Code 1988, § 15-3; Ord. No. 147, § 3, 4-19-1977) 
Sec. 28-4. - Alcoholic liquor and controlled substances. 
    No person shall bring into or drink in the city park any alcoholic liquor. Nor shall any controlled substance be used or sold at any time. 
(Code 1988, § 15-4; Ord. No. 147, § 4, 4-19-1977) 
State Law reference— Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, MCL 436.1101 et seq.; controlled substances, MCL 333.7101 et seq. 
Sec. 28-5. - Domestic animals. 
    No person shall allow any domestic animal to run at large, lead or ride within city parks, nor shall any person allow any dog therein except when led by a chain or cord. A dog shall not be considered running at large if it is within the confines of a city dog park, where it shall be subject to all city dog park regulations as they may be established and amended from time to time. 
(Code 1988, § 15-5; Ord. No. 147, § 5, 4-19-1977; Ord. No. 2017-02, § 1, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 28-6. - Firearms. 
    No person other than an officer of the law shall carry any firearms of any kind or description within the city parks, except when authorized by state law. 
(Code 1988, § 15-6; Ord. No. 147, § 5, 4-19-1977) 
Sec. 28-7. - Threatening or disturbing behavior. 
    No person shall use any threatening language in a city park, or be guilty of any disorderly or indecent conduct, such as disrobing, removing one's clothing in view of the public. No person shall do any act in a park which is calculated to unreasonably disturb any visitor thereto. 
(Code 1988, § 15-7; Ord. No. 147, § 6, 4-19-1977) 
Sec. 28-8. - Loitering. 
    No persons shall gather, congregate or loiter in any public park in any manner as to create a nuisance or create an improper diversion. 
(Code 1988, § 15-7a; Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 12-18-2012) 
Sec. 28-9. - Littering. 
    No person shall place or deposit any garbage, glass, tin cans, paper or miscellaneous waste in any park or playground except in containers provided for that purpose. 
(Code 1988, § 15-8; Ord. No. 147, § 7, 4-19-1977) 
State Law reference— Littering, MCL 324.8901 et seq. 
Sec. 28-10. - Conveyances and vehicles. 
    No person shall ride any motor vehicle in a city park, except when needed by a disabled person unable to walk in a normal manner. 
(Code 1988, § 15-9; Ord. No. 147, § 8, 4-19-1977) 
Sec. 28-11. - Swimming. 
    No swimming is permitted in the river adjacent to the city park except in those areas designated by the city council "swim at your own risk." 
(Code 1988, § 15-10; Ord. No. 147, § 9, 4-19-1977; Ord. of 4-3-1979; Ord. of 10-4-1983) 
Sec. 28-12. - Fishing. 
    No person shall engage in fishing for profit in city park waters. No person shall engage in sport fishing by any means except in those areas designated by the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 15-11; Ord. No. 147, § 10, 4-19-1977) 
State Law reference— Hunting and fishing, MCL 324.43701 et seq. 
Sec. 28-13. - Fires. 
    No person shall start or maintain any outdoor fire in city parks. 
(Code 1988, § 15-12; Ord. No. 147, § 11, 4-19-1977) 
Sec. 28-14. - Camping. 
    No camping or overnight sleeping shall be permitted in city parks. 
(Code 1988, § 15-13; Ord. No. 147, § 11, 4-19-1977) 
Sec. 28-15. - Soliciting. 
    No person shall solicit contributions in a city park for any purpose. 
(Code 1988, § 15-14; Ord. No. 147, § 12, 4-19-1977) 
Sec. 28-16. - Amplifiers. 
    No person having the control of any device producing amplified sound shall operate or permit such device to be operated in a city park without permission from the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 15-15; Ord. No. 147, § 13, 4-19-1977) 
Sec. 28-17. - Authority to close. 
    Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by the park manager or chief of police at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals as the park manager or chief of police shall find reasonably necessary. 
(Code 1988, § 15-16; Ord. No. 147, § 14, 4-19-1977) 
Sec. 28-18. - Violators. 
    Any person found violating any provision of this chapter or any other city prohibition may be arrested or ejected from the city park. 
(Code 1988, § 15-17; Ord. No. 147, § 15, 4-19-1977) 
Chapter 30 - SECONDHAND GOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Junkyards near highways, MCL 252.201 et seq.; licensing of secondhand and junk dealers, MCL 445.401 et seq.; precious metal and gem dealer act, MCL 445.481 et seq.; licensing of pawnbrokers, MCL 446.201 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GARAGE SALES 

Sec. 30-19. - License required; number permitted. 
    A license issued by the city clerk, as hereinafter provided, shall be obtained by any person proposing to conduct a garage sale, before selling or offering to sell any tangible personal property at a garage sale. No more than two such licenses shall be issued to any one individual, or, for any one location, in any calendar year. 
(Code 1988, § 11-30; Ord. No. 92-02, 1-21-1992; Ord. No. 2014-01, § 1, 2-4-2014) 
Sec. 30-20. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Garage sale means any sale of tangible personal property of any description whatsoever, which is advertised by any means whereby the public is, or can be made, aware of such, and includes all such sales commonly known as attic, lawn or rummage sales. The term "garage sale" shall not include business or trade sales which are regulated by any other ordinance of the city. 
    Tangible personal property means any goods, wares, merchandise or other personal property. 
(Code 1988, § 11-31; Ord. No. 92-02, 1-21-1992) 
Sec. 30-21. - Application for license; conditions. 
(a) ?The city clerk shall grant a license to conduct a garage sale to the applicant therefor, upon receipt of the fee as hereinafter required and upon receipt of an application containing the following: 
(1) ?The name, address, e-mail address and telephone number of the person conducting the sale. 
(2) ?The dates during which the proposed sale is to be conducted and the location of the same. 
(3) ?The nature of the sale, including a general description of the type of tangible personal property proposed to be sold. 
(4) ?The date, nature and location of any garage sales conducted by the applicant within the preceding 12 months. 
(5) ?The relationships which applicant has with any other person conducting a garage sale within the preceding 12 months and the date or dates thereof, if known. 
(6) ?The number and location of any signs which are proposed to be erected advertising such sale, subject to the restrictions hereinafter provided. 
(b) ?No license shall be issued authorizing any person to conduct a garage sale for a period exceeding three consecutive days. The license authorizing such sale shall be displayed in a front window or other prominent place, visible from the street, at each location where a sale is being conducted. No signs advertising a garage sale shall be placed on private or public property without express consent of the owner thereof, and only in compliance with chapter 50. After the conclusion of any garage sale, all such signs shall be removed by the licensee. 
(Code 1988, § 11-32; Ord. No. 92-02, 1-21-1992) 
Sec. 30-22. - Exception. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1) ?Persons selling tangible personal property pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2) ?Persons selling tangible personal property in accordance with the exercise of an official public duty or power. 
(3) ?Persons selling or advertising for sale tangible personal property which is specifically named or described in the advertisement. 
(4) ?Any such sale conducted by a bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, educational or governmental institution or organization; provided, however, that the burden of establishing entitlement to an exemption under this section shall be on the institution or organization claiming the same. 
(Code 1988, § 11-33; Ord. No. 92-02, 1-21-1992) 
Sec. 30-23. - Fees. 
    The fee which shall be required for a license to conduct a garage sale within the city shall be determined from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 11-34; Ord. No. 92-02, 1-21-1992) 
Sec. 30-24. - Penalties. 
    A violation of this article shall constitute a municipal civil infraction as defined in section 1-2. 
(Code 1988, § 11-35; Ord. No. 92-02, 1-21-1992; Ord. No. 96-03, § 4, 1-9-1996) 
Chapter 32 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Garbage disposal act, MCL 123.361 et seq.; solid waste facilities, MCL 324.4301 et seq.; hazardous waste management act, MCL 324.11101 et seq.; hazardous materials transportation act, MCL 29.417 et seq.; solid waste management act, MCL 324.11501 et seq.; waste reduction assistance act, MCL 324.14501 et seq.; clean Michigan fund act, MCL 324.19101 et seq.; low-level radioactive waste authority act, MCL 333.26201 et seq.; litter control, MCL 324.8901 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - Polluting public places. 
(a) ?Litter. It shall be unlawful for any person to litter or permit to be littered on any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places within the city by throwing, depositing, tracking, dropping, dumping or spilling any trash, paper, dirt, mud, ashes, sand, glass, leaves, garbage, debris or other materials or to deposit or cause the same to be deposited upon or permit the same to be accumulated upon any premises other than those designated as the official county sanitary landfill. A violation of this section shall constitute a municipal civil infraction as defined in section 1-2. 
(b) ?Commercial waste. It shall be unlawful to discharge any commercial or industrial water or any polluted or contaminated waste upon the sidewalks, streets, alleys or gutters within the city at any time. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1; Ord. No. 102, §§ 1, 2, 11-2-1959; Ord. No. 96-03, § 3, 1-9-1996) 
State Law reference— Littering, MCL 324.8901 et seq. 
Secs. 32-2—32-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 32-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City approved means any city-licensed contractor. 
    Commercial/industrial businesses includes apartment complexes with four or more units. 
    Commercial receptacle means a waste container normally used for commercial/industrial businesses or apartment complexes and is built of metal. 
    Garbage means rejected food wastes including waste accumulation of animal, fruit, or vegetable matter used or intended for food or that results from the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in, or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit, or vegetable matter. 
    Receptacles means either a commercially sold container built of metal, rubber or plastic, having a content volume no greater than 30 gallons and used for the disposal of dry waste matter or a plastic bag/liner having a content volume no greater than 30 gallons and constructed to a thickness sufficient enough to hold its contents within itself during normal movement. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste, including paper, cardboard, metal containers, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, demolished building materials, or litter of any kind that may be a detriment to the public health and safety. 
    Unit means an identifiable residential living unit. 
(Code 1988, § 10-21; Ord. No. 164, art. I, § (1), 1-5-1988) 
Sec. 32-22. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the intent of the city council that this article be liberally construed for the purpose of providing a sanitary and satisfactory method of collecting and disposing of residential and commercial wastes for the community's residents. 
(Code 1988, § 10-22; Ord. No. 164, art. II, § (1), 1-5-1988) 
Sec. 32-23. - License required. 
(a) ?No person shall operate a rubbish or garbage removal service within the city unless he holds a current, unrevoked operating license, issued by the city, in his name. 
(b) ?Every operating license shall be issued for a period of one year from its date of issuance or renewal unless sooner revoked. 
(c) ?No operating license shall be issued or renewed unless the completed application is accompanied by a license fee as established by city council resolution. 
(d) ?The city's representative may revoke or suspend the license of any contractor who fails to comply with those reasonable rules and regulations implemented by them as authorized in section 32-29. 
(Code 1988, § 10-23; Ord. No. 164, art. VIII, § (4), 1-5-1988) 
Sec. 32-24. - General regulations. 
(a) ?Every owner, occupant or lessor, or any agent thereof of any unit or commercial or industrial business where garbage or rubbish accumulates shall arrange with the city or city-approved contractor for garbage and rubbish collection. 
(b) ?No person shall disturb the contents of any garbage or rubbish receptacle or bundle or leave the receptacles or contents in a condition other than this article provides. 
(Code 1988, § 10-24; Ord. No. 164, art. VI, § (2), 1-5-1988) 
Sec. 32-25. - Depositing and burning restricted. 
    No person shall bury or burn any garbage or deposit garbage or rubbish upon any public way or upon any property owned by another or in any body of water within the city, Great Lakes or tributary waters, nor shall any person deposit or place any garbage upon any premises owned or occupied by him, unless the garbage is enclosed in a suitable receptacle as required under this article. 
(Code 1988, § 10-25; Ord. No. 164, art. VII, § (2), 1-5-1988) 
Sec. 32-26. - Collection. 
    Garbage and rubbish shall be collected by city-approved contractors at such times and pursuant to rules and regulations established by the city council. Such rules and regulations shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least once before such rules and regulations become effective. 
(Code 1988, § 10-26; Ord. No. 164, art. III, § (1), 1-5-1988) 
Sec. 32-27. - Requirements—Residential. 
    The requirements for residential waste collection are as follows: 
(1) ?The city shall pickup and remove from each unit within the city up to ten receptacles or one cubic yard of garbage and rubbish (not to include yard waste) each calendar week of the year; 
(2) ?The owner, occupant or lessor, or any agent thereof, of every premises where garbage and rubbish accumulate shall cause to be provided for the premises sufficient and proper receptacles as prescribed by this article. Receptacles that are broken, without handles or which otherwise fail to comply with the requirements of this article may be classed as rubbish and, after due notice to the user, may be collected as rubbish; 
(3) ?The receptacles for garbage and rubbish shall be kept on the premises out of sight of public view and shall be stored no closer to a neighboring residence than to the residence of the owner of the garbage and rubbish. The owner, occupant or lessor shall take all necessary measures to eliminate any offensive odor emanating from the garbage and rubbish. Receptacles shall be placed out for pickup no earlier than 8:00 p.m. on the night preceding the scheduled pickup and must be securely bound and closed. Receptacles shall be placed beside the premises' driveway at the curb or street's edge where the driveway is connected to the street no later than 8:00 a.m. on the day of the scheduled pickup and shall be readily accessible to the collectors; 
(4) ?Receptacles shall be of substantial approved construction, free of holes, with proper handles and fitting covers, of a quality to withstand weather and handling and no single receptacle shall more than 35 pounds when full. Receptacles shall be adequate in size and number to hold one week's accumulation. Receptacles shall be maintained in a sanitary condition; 
(5) ?All garbage and rubbish must be placed in receptacles except for boxes. Boxes shall be broken down, tied and neatly piled. Plastic bags may be placed at the curb, provided that the owner, occupant or lessor shall be responsible for cleaning up any debris remaining after pickup; 
(6) ?Special pickups will be required when a unit would like to discard materials such as concrete blocks, roofing materials and other building materials as well as tree stumps or any time when the garbage or rubbish exceeds ten receptacles or one cubic yard. In such cases the individual will have to make personal contact with the city approved contractors; 
(7) ?Empty receptacles shall not be left at curb or street's edge more than 24 hours after pickup. 
(Code 1988, § 10-27; Ord. No. 164, art. IV, § (7), 1-5-1988; Ord. No. 93-02, 9-7-1993; Ord. No. 95-2, 10-17-1995) 
Sec. 32-28. - Same—Commercial and industrial. 
    The requirements for commercial and industrial waste collection are as follows: 
(1) ?Owners or renters of commercial and industrial business shall make arrangements with the city-approved contractors for disposal of their garbage and rubbish; 
(2) ?Commercial receptacles shall be adequate in size and number to hold accumulations from one pickup to another and shall be maintained in a sanitary condition; 
(3) ?Commercial receptacles must be kept closed and no garbage or rubbish shall be allowed to accumulate at the base of commercial receptacles or within the enclosed area where it is placed; 
(4) ?Effective January 1, 1989, all commercial and industrial receptacles shall be located within an enclosed area in which the height shall be a minimum of six feet to keep the receptacle from public view and such enclosure shall be kept in good repair. 
(Code 1988, § 10-28; Ord. No. 164, art. V, § (4), 1-5-1988) 
Sec. 32-29. - Enforcement. 
    Persons appointed by the city shall be charged with the duty of enforcing this article, and they may, with the approval of the city council, promulgate such rules and regulations as may be reasonable and necessary to implement the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 10-29; Ord. No. 164, art. XI, § (1), 1-5-1988) 
Sec. 32-30. - Violations. 
(a) ?Violations of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(b) ?Individuals not properly complying with all provisions of this article, and for which reasons their garbage, rubbish and trash was not removed, may also, after due notice and an opportunity to be heard by the city council, when notified, be penalized by having subsequent removal by process of special pickup and charges accordingly at current rates for a period of up to three months, and if not payed a lien shall be placed against the premises. 
(Code 1988, § 10-30; Ord. No. 164, art. IX, § (2), 1-5-1988) 
Sec. 32-31. - Rates, payment, collection. 
(a) ?The city council shall by resolution at the time of the adoption of the annual budget establish the annual rates for municipal garbage, rubbish, and waste collection effective July 1 through June 30 for the ensuing fiscal year. Rates shall be set for each dwelling unit or for each business unit receiving service from the city. 
(b) ?Any person shall have the right to opt out of city garbage collection, provided that they provide evidence to the city that they have secured collection services for the course of the city's ensuing fiscal year. Such collection company shall be properly licensed in accordance with this Code. 
(c) ?The rates established by the city council shall be borne by the owners of any building or premises connected to a water or a sanitary sewer system to the city, and shall be assessed against the owner of such premises on the city's tax bill. Such charges shall be due and payable in the same manner as the city's taxes. No free service shall be provided. 
(Code 1988, § 10-31; Ord. No. 2007-02, § 1, 6-5-2007) 
Chapter 34 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Power re special assessments, MCL 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4d, 117.5; notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq.; deferment for older persons, MCL 211.761 et seq. 

Sec. 34-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cost includes, when referring to the cost of any public improvement, the cost of services, plans, condemnation, spreading of rolls, notices, advertising, financing, construction and legal fees and all other costs incident to the making of such improvement, the special assessments therefor and the financing thereof. 
    Public improvement means any public work or public improvements for which any part of the cost is to be assessed against one or more lots or parcels to be specially benefited thereby. 
(Code 1988, § 19-1; Ord. No. 138, § 1, 6-7-1973) 
Sec. 34-2. - To defray cost of public improvements. 
    The entire cost and expense or any part thereof of all public improvements may be defrayed by special assessment upon the lands specially benefited by the improvement in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 19-2; Ord. No. 138, § 2, 6-7-1973) 
Sec. 34-3. - Initiation of public improvement by petition. 
    Initiation of public improvements may be by petition to the city council signed by property owners whose property is subject to be benefited. The petition shall be printed on forms approved by the city attorney and shall set forth the location, extent and character of the desired public improvement. All petitions for public improvements shall be referred to the city manager for report and recommendation. After receiving the city manager's report and recommendation, the city council shall proceed in the same manner as provided in this chapter for public improvements initiated by the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 19-3; Ord. No. 138, § 3, 6-7-1973) 
Sec. 34-4. - Initiation of public improvements by city council. 
    Proceedings for making public improvements and defraying the entire cost or any part thereof by special assessment may be initiated by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 19-4; Ord. No. 138, § 4, 6-7-1973) 
Sec. 34-5. - Referred for report. 
    Whenever the city council shall determine to make any public improvement and defray the entire cost and expense thereof or any part thereof by special assessment, the city council shall by resolution direct the city manager to make an investigation of the proposed public improvement and report findings to the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 19-5; Ord. No. 138, § 5, 6-7-1973) 
Sec. 34-6. - City manager's report. 
(a) ?The city manager's report under this chapter shall include an analysis of the following: 
(1) ?The estimated cost of the proposed public improvement; and 
(2) ?Plans and specifications for the public improvement. 
(b) ?There shall also be included in the report recommendations as to the following: 
(1) ?The portion of the cost to be borne by the special assessment district and the portion, if any, to be borne by the city at large; 
(2) ?The extent of the improvement and boundaries of the district; 
(3) ?The number of installments in which assessments may be paid; and 
(4) ?Any other facts or recommendations which will aid the city council in determining whether the improvement shall be made and how the improvement shall be financed. 
(Code 1988, § 19-6; Ord. No. 138, § 6, 6-7-1973) 
Sec. 34-7. - Tentative determination. 
    Upon receipt of the report of the city manager under this chapter, if the city council shall determine to proceed with the improvement, they shall, by resolution, order the report prepared by the city manager filed with the city clerk. In addition, by the resolution, the city council shall tentatively determine to proceed with the public improvement, tentatively determine the necessity thereof and set forth the nature thereof, tentatively designate the limits of the special assessment district to be affected and describe the lands to be assessed, tentatively determine the part or proportion of the cost of the public improvements to be paid by the lands specially benefited thereby and the part or proportion, if any, to be paid by the city at large for benefit to the city at large, shall direct the city assessor to make a special assessment roll of the part or proportion of the cost to be borne by the lands specially benefited according to the benefits received and to report the same to the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 19-7; Ord. No. 138, § 7, 6-7-1973) 
Sec. 34-8. - Notice of public hearing. 
    When the special assessment roll has been reported to the city council pursuant to this chapter, they shall order the same filed in the office of the city clerk for public examination along with the report of the city manager required to be made pursuant to this chapter, and shall fix a date, time and place when the city council shall meet to finally determine the necessity of the improvement, composition of the district and to review the roll and to hear complaints. The city manager's report and the assessment roll shall be open to public inspection for a period of seven days before the hearing required by this section. The city clerk shall give notice of the hearing by the city council to determine necessity for the improvement, composition of the district and review the special assessment roll and to hear complaints by publication at least once in a newspaper printed and circulated in the city at least ten days prior to the time of the meeting, and shall further cause notice of the meeting to be mailed by first class mail to each property owner in the special assessment district as shown by the current assessment rolls of the city at least ten days prior to the time of the hearing, the notice to be mailed to the addresses shown on the current assessment rolls of the city. Such notice shall state that the plans, estimates of cost and special assessment rolls are on file with the city clerk. 
(Code 1988, § 19-8; Ord. No. 138, § 8, 6-7-1973) 
State Law reference— Special assessment notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq. 
Sec. 34-9. - Public hearing. 
    The city council shall meet and hear objections to the public improvement to the special assessment district pursuant to this chapter, and the special assessment roll therefor at the time and place appointed or at an adjourned meeting thereof and shall consider any objections thereto. The city council may revise, correct or amend the plans, estimate of cost, special assessment district and special assessment roll. If any changes shall be made which result in additions to the special assessment district or increases in the special assessment roll, then a second hearing shall be held with respect to the changes and notice of such hearing shall be given in the same manner as required for the first hearing. After the hearing, or second hearing if required, the city council may by resolution determine to proceed with the public improvement, determine the necessity thereof and set forth the nature thereof, designate the limits of the special assessment district to be affected and describe the lands to be assessed, finally determine the part or proportion of the cost of the public improvement to be paid by the lands specially benefited thereby and the part or portion, if any, to be paid by the city at large for benefit to the city at large. The city council may also confirm the special assessment roll with such corrections as it may have made, if any, or may refer it back to the city assessor for revision, or may annual it or any proceedings in connection therewith. The city clerk shall endorse the date of confirmation upon each special assessment roll. Such roll shall be, upon ratification and confirmation, final and conclusive. 
(Code 1988, § 19-9; Ord. No. 138, § 9, 6-7-1973) 
State Law reference— Special assessment notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq. 
Sec. 34-10. - Objections to assessment. 
    If, prior to the public hearing on the advisability of proceeding with the making of the improvement, written objections to the proposed improvement have been filed by the owners of property in the district who will be required to bear more than 50 percent of the amount of such special assessment, the resolution determining to proceed with the improvement shall be adopted only by the affirmative vote of six or more council members. 
(Code 1988, § 19-10; Ord. No. 138, § 10, 6-7-1973) 
Sec. 34-11. - Creation of lien and installment payments. 
    All special assessments contained in any special assessment roll, including any part thereof to be paid in installments, shall, from the date of confirmation of such roll, constitute a lien upon the respective lots or parcels of land assessed and, until paid, shall be a charge against the respective owners of the several lots and parcels of land and a debt to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as the lien created by the city Charter for city taxes and shall include accrued interest and fees. No judgment or decree nor act of the city council vacating a special assessment shall destroy or impair the lien of the city upon the premises assessed for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the same or as by a regular mode of proceeding might be lawfully assessed thereon. All special assessments shall become due upon confirmation of the special assessment roll or in annual installments, not to exceed 20, as the city council may determine at the time of confirmation, and, if in annual installments, the city council may determine the first installment to be due upon confirmation or upon any other date the city council may prescribe, and the subsequent installments annually thereafter. Deferred installments shall bear interest at such rate as the city council may prescribe. 
(Code 1988, § 19-11; Ord. No. 138, § 11, 6-7-1973) 
Sec. 34-12. - Collection. 
    Whenever any special assessment roll shall be confirmed and be payable, the city council shall direct the city clerk to transmit the assessment roll to the city treasurer for collection. The city treasurer shall mail statements of the several assessments to the respective owners of the several lots and parcels of land assessed, as indicated by the records of the city assessor, stating the amount of the assessment and the manner in which it may be paid; provided, however, that failure to mail any such statement shall not invalidate the assessment or entitle the owner to an extension of time within which to pay the assessment. The whole or any part of such assessment may be paid in full at any time after the date of confirmation of the special assessment roll until such time as the city council shall prescribe without interest or penalty. Each special assessment shall be collected by the city treasurer with the same rights and remedies as provided in the charter for the collection of taxes, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. All collection fees shall belong to the city and be collectible in the same manner as the collection fee for city taxes. 
(Code 1988, § 19-12; Ord. No. 138, § 12, 6-7-1973) 
Sec. 34-13. - Fees and interest. 
    After the expiration of the period provided in section 34-12 for payment without interest or fees, any installment may be discharged by paying the face amount thereof together with fees and interest thereon from the date of confirmation to the date of payment. 
(Code 1988, § 19-13; Ord. No. 138, § 13, 6-7-1973) 
Sec. 34-14. - Additional assessments. 
    Additional pro rata assessments to defray the cost of any public improvement may be made when any special assessment roll proves insufficient to pay for the improvement for which it was levied and the expenses incidental thereto, or to pay the principal and interest on bonds or other evidences of obligation issued therefor, provided that the additional pro rata assessment shall not exceed 25 percent of the assessment as originally confirmed, unless a meeting of the council be held to review such additional assessment, for which meeting notices shall be published and mailed as provided in the case of the review of the original special assessment roll. 
(Code 1988, § 19-14; Ord. No. 138, § 14, 6-7-1973) 
Sec. 34-15. - Refunds. 
    If the special assessment or the proceeds of sale of any special assessment bonds prove larger than necessary to meet the costs of the improvements or to meet the principal and interest requirements of any special assessment bonds and expenses incidental thereto, the excess shall be placed in the city treasury. If more than five percent, the excess shall be returned pro rata according to assessments; except as otherwise provided in section 34-20. No refunds may be made which contravene the provisions of any evidence of indebtedness secured in whole or in part by such special assessments. 
(Code 1988, § 19-15; Ord. No. 138, § 15, 6-7-1973) 
Sec. 34-16. - Lot splits. 
    If any lots or lands are divided after a special assessment thereon has been confirmed and divided into installments, the city assessor shall apportion the uncollected amounts upon the several lots and lands so divided, and shall enter the several amounts as amendments upon the special assessment roll. The city treasurer shall, within ten days after such apportionment, send notice of such action to the persons concerned at their last known address by first class mail. Such apportionment shall be final and conclusive on all parties unless protest in writing is received by the city treasurer within 20 days of the mailing of the notice. 
(Code 1988, § 19-16; Ord. No. 138, § 16, 6-7-1973) 
Sec. 34-17. - Assessment defects. 
(a) ?Whenever any special assessment shall, in the opinion of the council, be invalid by reason of irregularity or informality in the proceedings or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge such assessment to be illegal, the council shall, whether the improvement has been made or not, or whether any part of the assessments has been paid or not, have power to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made. All proceedings on such assessment and for collection thereof shall be conducted in the same manner as provided for the original assessment, except respecting the correction of the proceedings for the purpose of making the proceedings legal. Whenever any sum or part thereof levied upon any property in the assessment so set aside, has been paid and not refunded, the payment so made shall be applied upon the reassessment or, if the payments exceed the amount of the reassessment, refunds shall be made. 
(b) ?No judgment or decree nor any act of the council vacating a special assessment shall destroy or impair the lien of the city upon the premises assessed for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the same or as by regular mode of proceeding might have been lawfully assessed thereupon. 
(Code 1988, § 19-17; Ord. No. 138, § 17, 6-7-1973) 
Sec. 34-18. - Hazards and nuisances. 
    When any lot, building or structure, because of accumulation of refuse or debris, the uncontrolled growing of weeds, or age or dilapidation, or because of any other condition or happening, becomes a public hazard or nuisance which is detrimental to the health or safety of the inhabitants of the city, or of those residing or habitually going near such lot, building or structure, the city council may order such hazard or nuisance abated and the cost of such abatement assessed against the lot, premises or description of real property upon which such hazard or nuisance was located as a single lot assessment. 
(Code 1988, § 19-18; Ord. No. 138, § 18, 6-7-1973) 
Sec. 34-19. - Single lot assessments. 
    When any expense shall be incurred by the city upon or in respect to any separate or single lot, parcel of land or premises, which by the provisions of this chapter, the city council is authorized to charge and collect as a single lot special assessment against the same and which is not of that class of special assessments required to be made pro rata upon several lots or parcels of land in a special assessment district, an account of the labor or services for which such expense was incurred, verified by the officer or person performing the labor or services or causing the same to be done, shall be reported to the city council in a manner it prescribes. The accounting reported to the city council shall include a description of the lot or premises on or in respect to which the expense was incurred, the name of the owner or person chargeable therewith, and the cost of labor or services performed. The provisions of this chapter with reference to pro rata special assessments generally, and the proceedings necessary to be had before making the improvement, shall not apply to single lot assessments contemplated in this section. 
(Code 1988, § 19-19; Ord. No. 138, § 19, 6-7-1973) 
Sec. 34-20. - Determination of amount. 
    The city council, after review of the single lot assessment account, shall determine what amount or part of every such reported expense shall be charged, and the premises upon which the charge shall be levied as a single lot special assessment. As often as the city council may deem it expedient, they shall require all of the several amounts so reported and determined and the several lots or premises chargeable therewith respectively to be reported by the city clerk to the city assessor who shall spread such amounts against the real property chargeable therewith on the next tax roll for the collection of general city taxes. 
(Code 1988, § 19-20; Ord. No. 138, § 20, 6-7-1973) 
Sec. 34-21. - Additional procedure. 
    In any case where the provisions of this chapter may prove to be insufficient to carry into full effect the making of any improvement or the special assessment therefor, the city council shall provide any additional steps or procedures required to effect the improvement by special assessment in the resolution declaring the determination of the city council to make such improvement in the first instance. 
(Code 1988, § 19-21; Ord. No. 138, § 21, 6-7-1973) 
Chapter 36 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— City control of highways, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 29; city authority to acquire, own, establish and maintain boulevards, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 23; obstructions and encroachments on public highways, MCL 247.171 et seq.; closing of highway for repairs, MCL 247.291 et seq.; driveways, banners, events and parades, MCL 247.321 et seq.; liability of local government for injury from the result of not keeping highway in reasonable repair, MCL 691.1402; MISS DIG underground facility damage prevention and safety act, MCL 460.721 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 36-1. - Restrictions on use of public places. 
(a) ?The term "public place," as used in this section, means a street, plaza, pedestrian mall, park, parking lot, recreational facility, or other like facility open to use by the public generally, or a facility, building structure, park, recreation area or golf course, parking lot or land owned, leased or operated by a public agency. 
(b) ?Upon application of the owner or agent thereof, of a public place, or upon a determination by the city council that regulation of its city owned public places is necessary, the city council may determine that certain restrictions upon the use of a public place are reasonably necessary for the protection of the health, safety or welfare of the public using such places and, upon such determination by resolution of the city council, regulation may be promulgated thereunder. 
(c) ?Regulations promulgated under this section may include any of the following, if upon due deliberation they are deemed necessary for the protection of the public: 
(1) ?Prohibition of bicycles, skateboards, scooters, roller skates, sleds and sleighs, and the like, in public places. 
(2) ?Prohibition or regulation of animals in public places. 
(3) ?Restrictions upon the parking of vehicles; prohibition of certain types of vehicles in parts or all of public places and speed restrictions on vehicles. 
(4) ?Limitations upon pedestrian traffic. 
(5) ?Such other and further regulations which are in harmony with this section. 
(d) ?Whenever regulations under this section are promulgated by the city council, the city shall cause to be prepared signs containing such regulations, and such signs shall be posted in conspicuous places in public places so as to give notice of the regulations. The resolution enacting the regulations shall be published in the same fashion as ordinances of the city are published. All actual costs of signs, the replacement of signs and publication shall be borne by the applicant. 
(Code 1988, § 15-18; Ord. No. 99-3, § 1, 8-17-1999) 
Secs. 36-2—36-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 36-21. - Petition; order by resolution. 
    Whenever it is deemed necessary by the city council for the safety and convenience of the public that a new sidewalk be built, or whenever a majority of the taxpayers, meaning those owning property fronting or abutting on any street liable for such new sidewalk, petition for the sidewalk, the city council shall, by resolution, order that such new sidewalk be built. Unless otherwise provided for in the resolution, such sidewalks shall, in regard to location, width, grade and material entering into the construction thereof conform with the provisions of this article and the department of state highways' standard plan for sidewalk ramps for the disabled. 
(Code 1988, § 20-21; Ord. No. 145, § 1, 4-6-1976) 
Sec. 36-22. - Notice of resolution. 
    Whenever the city council has, by resolution, ordered that a new sidewalk be constructed or an old sidewalk be replaced by a new one, the city manager shall at once serve a written or printed, or partly written and partly printed notice upon the owners or occupants of property adjacent to or abutting the streets where such new sidewalk has been ordered to construct the same. The notice shall state the time when the sidewalk was ordered built by the city council and the time when the sidewalk shall be completed. When the owners of any piece of property cannot be found the city manager shall serve the notice upon the occupant. In cases where the owners cannot be found and the premises are not occupied he shall serve the notice by posting the notice in some conspicuous place on the premises. 
(Code 1988, § 20-22; Ord. No. 145, § 2, 4-6-1976) 
Sec. 36-23. - Preparation by city. 
    Immediately after having served notice upon the owner or occupant of property to build a new sidewalk, the city manager shall proceed to locate and stake out such new sidewalk in accordance with the rules prescribed in this article, and he shall, without further notice, proceed to build the crosswalks and approaches necessary to make proper connections with other sidewalks. 
(Code 1988, § 20-23; Ord. No. 145, § 3, 4-6-1976) 
Sec. 36-24. - Owner responsibility. 
    When a new sidewalk has been ordered built by the city council it shall be the duty of any and all persons responsible for any portion of such sidewalk and who have been duly notified thereof to construct the sidewalk in front of their respective lots or premises in accordance with the rules, and within the limits of time specified in the notice. Persons owning or responsible for corner lots shall build their portion of such sidewalk far enough past the corner so that the outside corner intersects with the outside edge of the sidewalk of the street intersected. 
(Code 1988, § 20-24; Ord. No. 145, § 4, 4-6-1976) 
Sec. 36-25. - Owner to maintain; failure to comply, penalty. 
(a) ?The owner or occupant of any lot or premises adjacent to or abutting on any sidewalk, whether the sidewalk already exists or may hereafter be built, shall keep the sidewalk at all times in good repair and remove all snow, ice and filth from the sidewalk and keep the sidewalk free obstructions, encroachments, encumbrances and other nuisances. If the owner or occupant fails to comply for a period of 24 consecutive hours or more, he shall be guilty of a violation of this article. 
(b) ?If the owner or occupant of any lot or premises fails to remove snow, ice or filth from sidewalks pursuant to this article within 24 hours of its accumulation, the city manager shall, under the direction of the city council, remove the snow, ice or filth from the sidewalk at the expense of the owner or occupant, and all such expense, together with a penalty of ten percent, shall be assessed and collected in the manner described in chapter 11 of the city Charter and chapter 34 of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 20-25; Ord. No. 145, §§ 5, 6, 4-6-1976) 
Sec. 36-26. - Specifications. 
(a) ?All sidewalks in the city shall be built of concrete made of the proper material and a minimum of four inches thick. All sidewalks in the city, unless otherwise ordered by the city council, shall be not less than four feet wide from the edges. All walks shall be built in workmanlike manner and subject to approval of the city manager. 
(b) ?All four-foot walks shall be so located or placed that the outside edge will be five feet from the property line, or as near that as shade trees and other circumstances will permit. All sidewalks five feet and over in width shall be kept to the property line or as near as may be and be straight. The grade for sidewalks shall be such that the top of the walk shall be six inches above the general average of the street where the sidewalk is located or consistent with the finished grade of the property. 
(Code 1988, § 20-26; Ord. No. 145, §§ 7, 8, 4-6-1976) 
Sec. 36-27. - Sidewalk ramp details. 
    The state department of transportation's "Sidewalk Ramp Details" is hereby adopted as fully set out in this section. 
(Code 1988, § 20-27; Ord. No. 145, § 11, 4-6-1976) 
Sec. 36-28. - Time limit. 
    All sidewalks, unless otherwise ordered by the city council, shall be completed within 30 days after they have been ordered built by the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 20-28; Ord. No. 145, § 9, 4-6-1976) 
Secs. 36-29—36-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OBSTRUCTIONS 

Sec. 36-60. - Restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or encumber, in any manner whatsoever, any sidewalk, street, park, alley or public place of the city except as provided for in this article. 
(Code 1988, § 20-51; Ord. No. 88, § 1, 9-21-1953) 
Sec. 36-61. - Conditions for exhibiting goods from adjoining premises. 
    It shall be lawful for persons owning or occupying premises located within the city to exhibit goods and wares upon the sidewalks immediately adjoining their premises, provided that: 
(1) ?If such goods or wares consist of edibles, they shall be placed in racks or containers not less than 16 inches above the sidewalk level; 
(2) ?No goods or wares of any nature whatsoever shall be placed upon the sidewalks or in racks or containers to extend farther than 24 inches from the front of the building located upon their premises, or not to extend more than 24 inches onto the public sidewalk. 
(Code 1988, § 20-52; Ord. No. 88, § 2, 9-21-1953) 
Sec. 36-62. - Depositing rubbish. 
    It shall be unlawful to deposit any rubbish of any nature upon the sidewalks, streets, parks, alleys or other public place of the city except for the purpose of collection by the city and then only on the days and at the times set forth by the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 20-53; Ord. No. 88, § 3, 9-21-1953) 
Sec. 36-63. - Storing merchandise for delivery. 
    It shall be unlawful to place, or permit to be placed, upon the sidewalks, streets, parks, alleys or other public place of the city any merchandise or materials being delivered to the owner or occupant of the premises, or to place thereon any merchandise or materials for pickup by any person, for a period in excess of two hours. 
(Code 1988, § 20-54; Ord. No. 88, § 4, 9-21-1953) 
Sec. 36-64. - Violation. 
    If any owner or occupant of premises shall encumber or obstruct the sidewalks, streets, parks, alleys or other public place of the city in violation of this article, the chief of police, under the direction of the city council, shall cause encumbrance or obstruction to be removed at the expense of the owner or occupant in the manner prescribed by law, and, in addition, any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 20-55; Ord. No. 88, § 6, 9-21-1953) 
Secs. 36-65—36-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 36-96. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City engineer means the city engineer or designated representative. 
    Department means the department of public works of the city. 
    Director means the director of public works of the city or any person who holds the position as head of the public works department. 
    Facility means any manmade objects. 
    Right-of-way (ROW) means the land owned or controlled by the city, or other governmental agency or entity that has been designated for public use which shall include, but not be limited to, streets, curbs, sidewalks, shoulders, utilities, landscape areas and other public uses. 
    Street means the paved or designated area for vehicular travel within the right-of-way. 
    Superintendent means the superintendent of streets or the designated representative. 
(Code 1988, § 20-61; Ord. No. 97-03, § 1, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 36-97. - Damage and obstruction prohibited. 
    No person shall make any excavation or fill in, or cause any damage to any ROW in the city, except under the conditions and in the manner permitted in this article. No person shall place any article, thing or obstruction in the ROW, except under the conditions used in the manner permitted in this article, but this provision shall not prohibit temporary obstructions as incidental to the expeditious movement of articles and things to and from abutting premises, nor to the lawful parking of vehicles within the part of the street reserved for vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1988, § 20-62; Ord. No. 97-03, § 2, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 36-98. - Permits. 
(a) ?Where permits are authorized in this article, they shall be obtained upon application to the city engineer upon such forms as he shall prescribe. Permit fees will be established by resolution by the city council. Such permit shall be revocable by the city engineer for failure to comply with this article, rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto, and the lawful orders of the city engineer or the duly authorized representative, and shall be valid only for the period of time endorsed thereon. 
(b) ?Application for a permit under the provisions of this article is an agreement by the applicant to promptly complete the work permitted, observe all pertinent laws and regulations of the city, repair all damage done to the street surface and installations on, over, or within such street, including trees, and protect and save harmless the city from all damages or actions at law that may arise or may be brought on account of injury to person or property resulting from the work done under the permit or in connection therewith. Where liability insurance policies are required to be filed in making application for a permit, they shall be for the amounts established by the city manager. 
(c) ?A properly executed certificate of insurance containing evidence that the pertinent policy of insurance or endorsement applies to the provisions under which the permit is issued, and approved as to form by the city attorney, shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(d) ?Where cash deposits are required with the application for any permit, each deposit shall be in the amount as determined by the city engineer, and the deposit shall be used to defray all expenses to the city arising out of the granting of the permit and work done under or in connection with the permit. Six months after acceptance of the work done under the permit, by the city engineer, any balance of each cash deposit unexpended shall be refunded. In any case, where the deposit does not cover all costs and expenses of the city, the deficit shall be paid by the applicant. 
(Code 1988, § 20-63; Ord. No. 97-03, § 3, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 36-99. - ROW operations. 
(a) ?No person, public utility company, franchisee or licensee shall conduct any construction, repair or maintenance operations in the ROW without first obtaining a written permit or annual permit from the city engineer. No permit shall be granted until the applicant has filed a liability insurance policy as required by this article and posted a cash deposit to defray the cost of repairing all damage done to the street surface and installation on, over, or within the street, as estimated by the city engineer. A permit shall expire after 30 days of the date specified on the permit unless work has commenced on the project covered by the permit. 
(b) ?Annual permits may be issued, for emergency repairs, maintenance, small alterations and small service connections, at the discretion of the city engineer, with permit fees and cash deposits established by resolution of the city council and with liability insurance policies in amounts established by the city manager. 
(c) ?Permits for excavation of less than six inches are not required if located outside of the street and are for the purpose of restoration and/or repair to landscaping or irrigation systems. 
(d) ?Routine operations conducted by a public utility company, franchisee, or licensee will not require a permit if no excavation is made in the right-of-way. 
(Code 1988, § 20-64; Ord. No. 97-03, § 4, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 36-100. - Emergency operations. 
    Permits are not required for emergency work, provided that an annual permit has been obtained and that the city engineer is notified of the location and nature of the emergency work on the following business day and the provisions of this article will be complied with. However, the city engineer will review each emergency operation to assure such operations are not casual. Upon such review, the city engineer may require a public utility, franchisee or licensee to get verbal permission before doing any work in a right-of-way if the city engineer finds that use of this section is not being used for bona fide emergencies. 
(Code 1988, § 20-65; Ord. No. 97-03, § 5, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 36-101. - Backfilling. 
    All trenches in a public ROW, except by special permission, shall be backfilled in accordance with regulations adopted pursuant to this article. Any settlement shall be corrected within eight hours after notification to do so. 
(Code 1988, § 20-66; Ord. No. 97-03, § 6, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 36-102. - Underground structures. 
    All new or upgraded underground structures located within the public ROW shall conform to the city engineering design standards and specifications or to the standards and specifications prescribed or approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1988, § 20-67; Ord. No. 97-03, § 7, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 36-103. - Utility poles and structures. 
    When utility poles, overhead equipment and structures are permitted to be placed in the public ROW, placement shall be as prescribed by the city engineer. Such poles, overhead equipment and structures shall be removed, relocated or placed underground as the city engineer shall direct when such facilities need to be relocated as a result of new road construction/road widening or other similar project as required by the rules of the state public service commission and this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 20-68; Ord. No. 97-03, § 8, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 36-104. - Mailbox supports. 
    Mailbox supports may be placed in the ROW and shall not be considered obstructions unless any portion of the mailbox or mailbox support extends over any portion of the traveled street or curb. If any portion of a mailbox or mailbox support extends over the traveled street or curb, the mailbox or mailbox support shall be considered an obstruction and prohibited. 
(Code 1988, § 20-69; Ord. No. 97-03, § 8a, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 36-105. - Maintenance of facilities in public ROW. 
    Every owner of, and every person in control of, any facility located in the public ROW shall maintain the facilities in good repair and condition at all times and shall indemnify and save harmless the city against all damages or actions of law that may arise or be brought by reason of such facilities being located and operated within public right-of-way. 
(Code 1988, § 20-70; Ord. No. 97-03, § 9, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 36-106. - ROW improvements. 
    Whenever the city decides to make improvements to the ROW involving the relocation of facilities belonging to public utilities, licensees and other franchisees, the city engineer shall, not less than 120 days prior to commencement of construction, serve notice upon all public utilities, requiring them to install or relocate all necessary underground work in advance of the ROW improvement. 
(Code 1988, § 20-71; Ord. No. 97-03, § 10, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 36-107. - Sewer and water connections. 
    When paving or resurfacing shall have been ordered or declared necessary by the city council, such sewer and water connections as are necessary, shall be installed in advance of such paving or resurfacing, and the cost shall be charged against the premises adjacent, or to be served, and against the owner of such premises. Where such paving or resurfacing is financed in whole or in part by special assessment, the cost of such sewer and water connections may be chargeable against the premises served or adjacent, as a part of the special assessment for such paving or resurfacing. Where such paving or resurfacing is financed other than by special assessment, the cost of the sewer and water connections so installed, shall be a lien on the premises adjacent, or to be served, and shall be collected as provided for assessments on single lots pursuant to the provisions of the city Charter. 
(Code 1988, § 20-72; Ord. No. 97-03, § 11, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 36-108. - Determination of necessity. 
    The necessity for sewer and water connections shall be determined by the director which determination shall be based upon the size, shape, and area of each abutting lot or parcel of land, the lawful use of such land under the zoning regulations of the city, the character of the locality and the probable future development of each abutting lot or parcel of land. The director shall give written notice of the intention to install such sewer and water connections and to charge the cost to the premises, to each owner of land abutting the street, to be furnished with such connections, as shown by the records of the city assessor in accordance with this Code. Any owner objecting to the installation of sewer or water connection shall file his objections in writing within seven days after service of the notice, with the director who shall, after considering the objection made in writing, make a final determination of the sewer and water connections to be installed. 
(Code 1988, § 20-73; Ord. No. 97-03, § 12, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 36-109. - Prohibited openings or excavations. 
    No permit to make any opening or excavation in or under a paved street, except for emergency repairs indicated in section 36-100, shall be granted to any person within a period of two years after the completion of the paving or resurfacing. If a street opening is necessary as a public safety measure, the city engineer may suspend the operation of this section, as to such street opening. 
(Code 1988, § 20-74; Ord. No. 97-03, § 13, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 36-110. - Utility placement zone. 
(a) ?A designated zone for the placement of new or relocated underground facilities, such as gas, electric, communication and other franchised or licensed facilities, shall be determined by the city engineer. This area shall be a nine-foot horizontally measured space at the outside edge of the right-of-way. This zone shall not be located on the side of the street where a water main is situated. If water mains are on both sides of the street, the south or east side of the street is to be used. If, due to technical reasons, the south or east side cannot be used nor is the placement zone practical, the placement shall be at the discretion of the city engineer. In all cases, the utilities are to be placed within the designated zone unless authorized by the city engineer. The city engineer shall expand the utility placement zone, when necessary, to provide adequate space for placement. Utilities constructed of non-metallic material are required to have a traceable metallic wrap or accompanying wire for the purpose of tracing and locating with conventional locating equipment. 
(b) ?When placed in the ROW, utilities or other franchised or licensed facilities constructed of material susceptible to breakage (i.e., fiber optic, wire, plastic line) must be encased in a protective plastic conduit, when determined by the city engineer. 
(c) ?Plastic gas lines are excluded from the requirement for a protective plastic conduit. 
(d) ?Except for emergency repairs indicated in section 36-100, no opening or excavation may take place in the utility placement zone for a period of 18 months following construction of new pavement or new utility in the zone. The city manager may waive this time period if in his opinion it is in the best interests of the city. 
(Code 1988, § 20-75; Ord. No. 97-03, § 14, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 36-111. - Road oiling and dust control. 
    No person shall apply any liquid dust control material or other liquid surface treatment to any street without first obtaining a permit for said work as required by this article. The permit fee shall be as established by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 20-76; Ord. No. 97-03, § 15, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 36-112. - Curb cuts. 
    No opening in or through any street curb shall be made without first obtaining a written permit from the city engineer. Driveway approaches, including curb cuts and sidewalk driveway crossings to provide access to private property, shall comply with the following, except planned commercial and industrial buildings which require separate site plan approval: 
(1) ?No single curb cut or driveway approach shall exceed 80 feet in width, nor be less than 12 feet in width, except, where joint driveway openings are permitted on either side of a common property line, the maximum curb cut shall be 40 feet per lot. 
(2) ?The minimum distance between any curb cut or driveway approach and a public crosswalk shall be five feet. 
(3) ?Where sidewalks are required, no single sidewalk driveway approach crossing shall exceed 30 feet in width. 
(4) ?The maximum number of linear feet of sidewalk driveway approach crossing permitted for any lot, parcel of land, business or enterprise, shall be 45 percent of the total abutting street frontage up to and including 200 lineal feet of street frontage plus 20 percent of the lineal feet of street frontage in excess of 200 feet. 
(5) ?The necessary adjustments to utility poles, light standards, fire hydrants, catch basins, underground structures, street or railway signs, signals, or other public improvements or installations shall be accomplished without cost to the city. 
(6) ?All new driveway approaches along paved streets shall be paved between the curb cut and the property line with concrete or asphalt in accordance with regulations established by the city engineer. 
(7) ?All construction shall be in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1988, § 20-77; Ord. No. 97-03, § 16, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 36-113. - Obstructions. 
(a) ?No person shall occupy any ROW with any materials or machinery incidental to the construction, maintenance, demolition or repair of any facilities adjacent to the ROW, or for any other purpose, without first obtaining a permit or annual permit from the city engineer and posting a cash deposit and filing an insurance policy as required by this article. 
(b) ?Pedestrian passage. At least five feet of sidewalk space shall be kept clean and clear for the free passage of pedestrians, and if the operations are such that free passageway is impracticable, a temporary plank sidewalk, meeting the approval of the city engineer, shall be provided around such obstruction. 
(Code 1988, § 20-78; Ord. No. 97-03, §§ 17, 18, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 36-114. - Safety requirements. 
(a) ?Safeguards. All temporary openings, excavations and obstructions located in a street or within 12 feet of a street shall be provided with traffic control devices in conformance with the state manual of uniform traffic control devices. All temporary openings, excavations and obstructions located in a sidewalk or driveway approach shall be surrounded with lighted barricades. All unattended openings and excavations, located anywhere in the public ROW, greater than five feet in depth shall be completely surrounded by fencing, securely mounted in place as directed by the city engineer. 
(b) ?Shoring excavations. All openings and excavations shall, where necessary, be properly and substantially sheeted and braced as a safeguard to workmen and to prevent cave-ins or washouts which may injure the thoroughfare or subsurface structure of the street. 
(Code 1988, § 20-79; Ord. No. 97-03, §§ 19, 20, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 36-115. - Unloading construction equipment. 
    No person shall unload from any vehicle or trailer power shovel, ditch digger, trencher, bulldozer, tractor, or any similar construction or excavating equipment having a weight of one ton or more or which moves about by any means other than rubber tires, onto or upon any hard-surfaced street without first obtaining a permit therefor from the street superintendent and posting a cash deposit. Such deposit shall be available for the repair and reconstruction of any street or its appurtenances damaged as a result of the permitted operation. 
(Code 1988, § 20-80; Ord. No. 97-03, § 21, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 36-116. - Additional regulations. 
(a) ?The city manager may make additional regulations pertaining to openings and excavations in the streets, curb cuts, street obstructions, and house moving, which shall be subject to the approval of the city council. 
(b) ?Removal of encroachment. Encroachments and obstructions in the ROW may be removed and excavations refilled by the city. The expense of such removal or refilling shall be charged to the abutting land owner when made or permitted by them or suffered to remain by them, otherwise than in accordance with the terms and conditions of this article. The procedure for collection of such expenses shall be as prescribed in the city Charter. 
(Code 1988, § 20-81; Ord. No. 97-03, §§ 22, 23, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 36-117. - Temporary row closings. 
    The director shall have authority to temporarily close any portion of the ROW, when any portion is deemed to be unsafe or temporarily unsuitable for use for any reason. The director shall cause suitable barriers and signs to be erected in the ROW indicating that any portion of the ROW is closed to public travel. When any street or portion thereof shall have been closed to public travel, no person shall drive any vehicle upon or over the ROW, or portion, except as the same may be necessary incidentally to any street repair or construction work being done in the area closed to public travel. No person shall move or interfere with any sign or barrier erected pursuant to this section without authority from the director. 
(Code 1988, § 20-82; Ord. No. 97-03, § 24, 6-3-1997) 
Secs. 36-118—36-147. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VACATION OF HIGHWAYS, STREETS, LANES, ALLEYS OR OTHER PUBLIC GROUNDS 

Sec. 36-148. - Public ways; vacation; discontinuation; abolition. 
    When the city council considers it advisable to vacate, discontinue, or abolish a highway, street, lane, alley, or public ground, or a part of a highway, street, lane, alley, or public ground, it shall, by resolution, declare its intent and appoint a time, not less than four weeks after the date of the resolution, when it shall meet and hear public comment on the resolution. If to be done at a special meeting, notice of the meeting, with a copy of the resolution, shall be given in the manner prescribed by the open meetings act, Public Act No 267 of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq.). If it is to be done at a regular meeting of the city council, the copy of such resolution shall appear on the agenda. Following the public hearing the city council may, by resolution, vacate the property in question if it deems said vacation to be in the best interest of the city. The resolution shall state the legal description of the property so affected. The city clerk within 30 days shall record a certified copy of the resolution or ordinance with the register of deeds and file a certified copy with the department of consumer and industry services. 
(Code 1988, § 20-201; Ord. No. 2008-03, § 1, 12-2-2008) 
Chapter 38 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Michigan telecommunications act, MCL 484.2101 et seq.; metropolitan extension telecommunications rights-of-way oversight act, MCL 484.3101 et seq.; Michigan broadband development authority act, MCL 484.3201 et seq.; uniform video services local franchise act, MCL 484.3301 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1—38-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - METROPOLITAN EXTENSION TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHTS-OF-WAY OVERSIGHT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Metropolitan extension telecommunications rights-of-way oversight act, MCL 484.3101 et seq. 

Sec. 38-19. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this article are to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the metropolitan extension telecommunications rights-of-way oversight act, Public Act No. 48 of 2002 (MCL 484.3101 et seq.) ("act") and other applicable law, and to ensure that the city qualifies for distributions under the act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the act. 
(Code 1988, § 20-100; Ord. No. 2002-5, § 1, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 38-20. - Conflict. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict with the act or other applicable law. 
(Code 1988, § 20-101; Ord. No. 2002-5, § 1, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 38-21. - Terms defined. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the metropolitan extension telecommunications rights-of-way oversight act, Public Act No. 48 of 2002 (MCL 484.3101 et seq.). 
    Authority means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to section 3 of the act (MCL 484.3103). 
    City council means the city council of the City of Algonac or its designee. This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the city council. 
    MPSC means the state public service commission in the department of consumer and industry services, and shall have the same meaning as the term "commission" in the act. 
    Permit means a non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to the act and this article to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities. 
    Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. Public right-of-way does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way. 
    Telecommunication facilities or facilities means the equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals. The term "telecommunication facilities" does not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of title III of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 stat. 1064, 47 USC 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3 and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. 
    Telecommunication provider, provider and telecommunications services means those terms as defined in section 102 of the Michigan telecommunications act, Public Act No. 179 of 1991 (MCL 484.2102). The term "telecommunication provider" does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 stat. 1064, 47 USC 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of the act and this article only, a provider also includes all of the following: 
(1) ?A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service. 
(2) ?Except as otherwise provided by the act, a person who owns telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way. 
(3) ?A person providing broadband internet transport access service. 
(Code 1988, § 20-102; Ord. No. 2002-5, § 1, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 38-22. - Permit. 
(a) ?Required. Except as otherwise provided in the act, a telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit pursuant to this article. 
(b) ?Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with section 6(1) of the act (MCL 484.3106(1)). A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the application with the city clerk, one copy with the city manager, and one copy with the city attorney. Upon receipt, the city clerk shall make three copies of the application and distribute a copy to city engineer, zoning administrator, and department of public works. Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the act, including without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with section 6(5) of the act (MCL 484.3106(5)). 
(c) ?Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is exempt from the freedom of information act Public Act No. 442 of 1976 (MCL 15.231 et seq.), pursuant to section 6(5) of the act (MCL 484.3106(5)), the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map. 
(d) ?Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the act, the application shall be accompanied by a one-time nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $500.00. 
(e) ?Additional information. The city manager may request an applicant to submit such additional information which the city manager deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the city manager. If the city and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested by the city, the city or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in section 6(2) of the act (MCL 484.3106(2)). 
(f) ?Previously issued permits. Pursuant to section 5(1) of the act (MCL 484.3105(1)), authorizations or permits previously issued by the city under section 251 of the Michigan telecommunications act, Public Act No. 179 of 1991 (MCL 484.2251) and authorizations or permits issued by the city to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of section 251 of the Michigan telecommunications act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this article. 
(g) ?Existing providers. Pursuant to section 5(3) of the act (MCL 484.3105(3)), within 180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the act, a telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the city as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under section 251 of the Michigan telecommunications act, Public Act No. 179 of 1991 (MCL 484.2251), shall submit to the city an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this article. Pursuant to section 5(3) of the act (MCL 484.3105(3)), a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is not required to pay the $500.00 application fee required under subsection (d) of this section. A provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional 180 days to submit the permit application if allowed by the authority, as provided in section 5(4) of the act (MCL 484.3105(4)). 
(Code 1988, § 20-103; Ord. No. 2002-5, § 1, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 38-23. - Issuance of permit. 
(a) ?Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for a permit is hereby delegated to the city manager. Pursuant to section 15(3) of the act (MCL 484.3115(3)), the city manager shall approve or deny an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under section 38-22(b) for access to a public right-of-way within the city. Pursuant to section 6(6) of the act (MCL 484.3106(6)), the city manager shall notify the MPSC when the city manager has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied. The city manager shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit. 
(b) ?Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the city manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with sections 6(1) and 15 of the act (MCL 484.3106(1) and 484.3115). 
(c) ?Conditions. Pursuant to section 15(4) of the act (MCL 484.3115(4)), the city manager may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way. 
(d) ?Bond requirement. Pursuant to section 15(3) of the act (MCL 484.3115(3)), and without limitation on subsection (c) of this section, the city manager may require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use. 
(Code 1988, § 20-104; Ord. No. 2002-5, § 1, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 38-24. - Construction/engineering permit. 
    A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining a construction engineering permit for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for such a construction or engineering permit. 
(Code 1988, § 20-105; Ord. No. 2002-5, § 1, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 38-25. - Conduit or utility poles. 
    Pursuant to section 4(3) of the act (MCL 484.3104(3)), obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the act or under this article does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles. 
(Code 1988, § 20-106; Ord. No. 2002-5, § 1, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 38-26. - Route maps. 
    Pursuant to section 6(7) of the act (MCL 484.3106(7)), a telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the city. The route maps should be in paper format unless and until the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with section 6(8) of the act (MCL 484.3106(8)). 
(Code 1988, § 20-107; Ord. No. 2002-5, § 1, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 38-27. - Repair of damage. 
    Pursuant to section 15(5) of the act (MCL 484.3115(5)), a telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the city, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition. 
(Code 1988, § 20-108; Ord. No. 2002-5, § 1, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 38-28. - Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. 
    In addition to the nonrefundable application fee paid to the city set forth in subsection 38-22(d), a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the city's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance fee to the authority pursuant to section 8 of the act (MCL 484.3108). 
(Code 1988, § 20-109; Ord. No. 2002-5, § 1, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 38-29. - Modification of existing fees. 
    In compliance with the requirements of section 13(1) of the act (MCL 484.3113(1)), the city hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the act, which shall be paid to the authority. In compliance with the requirements of section 13(4) of the act (MCL 484.3113(4)), the city also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the city's boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required under section 8 of the act (MCL 484.3108). The city shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of this article, in compliance with the requirement of section 13(4) of the act (MCL 484.3113(4)). To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the city's policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error. 
(Code 1988, § 20-110; Ord. No. 2002-5, § 1, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 38-30. - Savings clause. 
    Pursuant to section 13(5) of the act (MCL 484.3113(5)), if section 8 of the act (MCL 484.3108) is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under section 38-29 shall be void from the date the modification was made. 
(Code 1988, § 20-111; Ord. No. 2002-5, § 1, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 38-31. - Use of funds. 
    Pursuant to section 10(4) of the act (MCL 484.3110(4)), all amounts received by the city from the authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related purposes. In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the city from the authority shall be deposited into the major street fund and/or the local street fund maintained by the city under Public Act No. 51 of 1951 (MCL 247.651 et seq.). 
(Code 1988, § 20-112; Ord. No. 2002-5, § 1, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 38-32. - Annual report. 
    Pursuant to section 10(5) of the act (MCL 484.3110(5)), the city manager shall file an annual report with the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the authority. 
(Code 1988, § 20-113; Ord. No. 2002-5, § 1, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 38-33. - Cable television operators. 
    Pursuant to section 13(6) of the act (MCL 484.3113(6)), the city shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this act, for a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through broadband internet transport access services. 
(Code 1988, § 20-114; Ord. No. 2002-5, § 1, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 38-34. - Existing rights. 
    Pursuant to section 4(2) of the act (MCL 484.3104(2)), except as expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this article shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the city may have under a permit issued by the city or under a contract between the city and a telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Code 1988, § 20-115; Ord. No. 2002-5, § 1, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 38-35. - Compliance. 
    The city hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this article is to fully comply with the requirements of the act, and the provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The city shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the act, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1) ?Exempting certain route maps from the freedom of information act, Public Act No. 442 of 1976 (MCL 15.231 et seq.), as provided in section 38-22(c); 
(2) ?Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit requirements hereof, in accordance with section 38-22(f); 
(3) ?Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the $500.00 application fee, in accordance with section 38-22(g); 
(4) ?Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in accordance with section 38-23(a); 
(5) ?Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with section 38-23(a); 
(6) ?Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance with section 38-23(a); 
(7) ?Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, as provided in section 38-23(b); 
(8) ?Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way, in accordance with section 38-23(c); 
(9) ?Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's access and use, in accordance with section 38-23(d); 
(10) ?Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with section 38-24; 
(11) ?Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city's right-of-way fees with a copy of this article, in accordance with section 38-29; 
(12) ?Submitting an annual report to the authority, in accordance with section 38-32; and 
(13) ?Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with section 38-33. 
(Code 1988, § 20-116; Ord. No. 2002-5, § 1, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 38-36. - Reservation of police powers. 
    Pursuant to section 15(2) of the act (MCL 484.3115(2)), this article shall not limit the city's right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the city's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(Code 1988, § 20-117; Ord. No. 2002-5, § 1, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 38-37. - Authorized city officials. 
    The city manager or his designee is hereby designated as the authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal chapter violations bureau) for violations under this article as provided by this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 20-118; Ord. No. 2002-5, § 1, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 38-38. - Municipal civil infraction. 
    A person who violates any provision of this article or the terms or conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the city in the event of a violation by a person of this article or a permit. 
(Code 1988, § 20-119; Ord. No. 2002-5, § 1, 12-17-2002) 
Chapter 40 - TEMPORARY BUSINESS MERCHANTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Home solicitation sales, MCL 445.111 et seq.; transient merchants, MCL 445.371 et seq.; exemption for a veteran's license, MCL 35.441; charitable organizations and solicitations act, MCL 400.271 et seq.; public safety solicitation act, MCL 14.301 et seq. 

Sec. 40-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Algonac Temporary Business Merchants Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 1(16-1), 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 40-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the term "temporary business merchant" shall apply to any of the following categories of persons, whether residents of the city or not: 
(1) ?Peddler means any person traveling by foot, wagon, automobile, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying, or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, farm products, or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales, and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place, sell or offer for sale from a wagon, motor vehicle, or other vehicle or conveyance. 
(2) ?Solicitor means any person traveling by foot, wagon, automobile, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise, and personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries, or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not. 
(3) ?Transient merchant means any person engaging temporarily in a retail sale of goods, wares, merchandise, or services and who conducts such business from a lot, building, room, or structure of any kind. For purposes of this subsection, the transaction of business for less than six months consecutively shall be prima facie evidence that the business is temporary in nature. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 1(16-10), 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 40-3. - Application for license; information; investigation fee; license fee. 
(a) ?The city clerk, who from time to time may amend its requirements, shall maintain a temporary business merchant's license application. Persons who seek said license must execute and submit the application to the city clerk, along with a fee to cover the cost of a background check investigation. An additional license fee shall be assessed to applicants who pass the background check before the issuance of their licenses. 
(b) ?The fees referenced in this section shall be prescribed by resolution of city council, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 1(16-20), 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 40-4. - Background investigation; issuance of license or denial of application. 
(a) ?Upon receipt of an executed application and the required investigation fee, the city clerk shall refer the application to the city manager to conduct a background check investigation. If no negative criminal history is discovered, the city manager shall endorse on the application his approval, and instruct the city clerk to execute a license addressed to the applicant, and, upon receipt of payment of the prescribed fee, issue said license in the form of a badge as set forth in section 40-8. The license shall contain the signature and seal of the city clerk and shall show the name, address, and photograph of the licensee; the date of issuance; the year the license is operative; and the license number. The city clerk shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued. 
(b) ?No applicant shall be required to submit more than one background investigation within any 24-month period. 
(c) ?If the city manager discovers that the applicant has a negative criminal history, he shall endorse a rejection of the application, and return the application to the city clerk, who shall notify the applicant that the application has been denied. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 1(16-21), 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 40-5. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for a temporary business merchant to operate within the city without first obtaining a license. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 1(16-30), 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 40-6. - Permitted hours. 
    Duly licensed temporary business merchants shall be permitted to operate within the city limits from 9:00 a.m. to dusk unless operating from a building, in which case hours of operation are unregulated by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 1(16-31), 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 40-7. - Permitted locations for transient merchants. 
    Transient merchants as defined by section 40-2(3) shall operate only within areas designated by the city's zoning map as a central business district or general business district. Transient merchants operating from a vacant lot or parking lot shall be limited to no more than 96 consecutive hours at any one location, or 12 days in any one calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 1(16-32), 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 40-8. - Issuance of badge; display by licensee. 
    The city clerk shall issue to each successful applicant a badge to serve as visual evidence of the licensee's compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The badge shall bear the words "temporary business merchant," and contain the following information: the period of time for which the license is issued, and the number of the license in letters and figures that are plainly discernable. The licensee shall wear and display the badge conspicuously at all times he is engaged in business operations. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 1(16-35), 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 40-9. - Transfer of badge prohibited. 
    No badge issued by the city clerk pursuant to this chapter shall be used or worn by any person other than the licensee to whom it was assigned, nor may any licensee transfer use of a duly issued badge to another. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 1(16-40), 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 40-10. - Loud noises and speaking devices prohibited. 
    No temporary business merchant, nor any person on his behalf, shall shout, make any cryout, blow a horn, ring a bell, or use any loud-speaking radio or sound amplifying system upon any of the streets, alleys, parks, or other public places of the city or upon any private premises for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares, or merchandise the mobile business merchant proposes to sell. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 1(16-41), 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 40-11. - Exclusive use of streets and parks prohibited. 
    No temporary business merchant shall have exclusive right to operate in any location in the public streets; nor shall any be permitted to operate in any fixed location in the public right-of-way; nor shall any be permitted to operate in any area where his operation might impede traffic or pose a threat to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 1(16-42), 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 40-12. - Duty of police to enforce. 
    It shall be the duty of any police officer of the city to: 
(1) ?Require any apparent, unknown temporary business merchant to produce and display the license required by this chapter; and 
(2) ?Enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found to be violating it. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 1(16-50), 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 40-13. - Revocation; notice. 
(a) ?Licenses issued under this chapter may be revoked by the city manager after notice and opportunity for hearing for any of the following causes: 
(1) ?Fraud, misrepresentation for false statement contained in the application for license; 
(2) ?Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on his business as a mobile business merchant; 
(3) ?Any violation of this chapter; 
(4) ?Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
(5) ?Conducting business of in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(b) ?Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth the specific grounds of the complaint, and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his last known address at least five days before the date of the revocation hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 1(16-51), 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 40-14. - Appeal. 
    Any person aggrieved by the action of the city manager or the city clerk in the denial of an application for license as provided in section 40-4(c), or in the decision of the city manager to revoke a license as provided in section 40-13(a), shall have the right of appeal to the city council. Said appeal shall be taken by filing with the city council a written statement fully setting forth the grounds for the appeal within 14 days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such persons' last known address. The city council shall set a time and place for a hearing on a properly filed appeal in the same manner as provided in section 40-13(b). The decision and order of the city council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 1(16-52), 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 40-15. - Expiration. 
    All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter expire on December 31 of the year in which they are granted. The license fee for licenses granted after October 1 of each year shall be pro-rated. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 1(16-53), 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 40-16. - Records. 
    The city clerk shall maintain a record for all licenses issued; shall keep a report of all alleged violations of said licenses; and shall maintain a record of all convictions for violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 1(16-54), 10-6-2015) 
Chapter 42 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Michigan vehicle code, MCL 257.1 et seq.; regulations by local authorities, MCL 257.605, 257.606, 257.610. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1—42-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VEHICLE CODES 

Sec. 42-19. - Michigan vehicle code adopted. 
(a) ?The state vehicle code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq.), is hereby adopted by reference. MCL 257.625(1)(c) of the state vehicle code is specifically adopted by reference, pursuant to MCL 117.3(k). 
(b) ?References in the state vehicle code to "local authorities" shall mean the city. 
(c) ?The city clerk shall publish this section in the manner required by law and shall publish, at the same time, a notice stating the purpose of the state vehicle code and the fact that a complete copy of the code is available to the public at the office of the clerk for inspection. 
(d) ?The penalties provided by the state vehicle code are adopted by reference. The city may not enforce any provision of the state vehicle code for which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days; provided, however, that a violation of MCL 257.625(1)(c) is punishable by one or more of the following: 
(1) ?Community service of not more than 360 hours. 
(2) ?Imprisonment for not more than 180 days. 
(3) ?A fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $700.00. 
(Code 1988, § 23-1; Ord. No. 2000-3, § 1, 3-21-2000; Ord. No. 2012-02, § 3, 7-3-2012) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt Michigan vehicle code by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Sec. 42-20. - Uniform Traffic Code—Adoption. 
    The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages as promulgated by the director of the Michigan department of state police pursuant to the administrative procedures act of 1969, Public Act No. 306 of 1969 (MCL 24.201 et seq.) and made effective October 30, 2002, is incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, 3-2-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt the Uniform Traffic Code by reference, MCL 257.951. 
Sec. 42-21. - Same—Reference to governmental unit. 
    References in the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages to a "governmental unit" shall mean the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, 3-2-2016) 
Sec. 42-22. - Same—Penalties. 
    The penalties provided by the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages are adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, 3-2-2016) 
Secs. 42-23—42-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Stopping, standing and parking, MCL 257.672 et seq.; authority to regulate the standing or parking of vehicles, MCL 257.606(1)(a). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-48. - Unlawful parking on private property; penalty. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle on any private property without the express or implied consent, authorization or ratification of the owner, holder, occupant, lessee, agent or trustee of such property. Written complaint for the violation of this section shall be made by the owner, holder, occupant, lessee, agent, or trustee of such property. 
(b) ?A violation of this section shall constitute a municipal civil infraction. Any vehicle parked in violation of this provision may be removed to an impound yard at the direction of the police department with the cost of said removal charged to the registered owner of the vehicle. 
(Code 1988, § 23-46; Ord. No. 153, §§ 5, 6, 7-17-1979; Ord. No. 96-03, § 6, 1-9-1996; Ord. No. 2006-1, § 1, 6-6-2006) 
Secs. 42-49—42-69. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS 

Sec. 42-70. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Motor vehicle means every vehicle that is self-propelled. 
    Municipal parking lot means any area owned or leased by the city and designated for the parking of motor vehicles by the public. 
(Code 1988, § 23-71; Ord. No. 156, § 1, 6-17-1980) 
Sec. 42-71. - Speed limit. 
    No person shall operate any motor vehicle in a parking area at a speed in excess of ten miles per hour. 
(Code 1988, § 23-72; Ord. No. 156, § 2(a), 6-17-1980) 
Sec. 42-72. - Unattended vehicles. 
    No person shall leave any vehicle unattended for a period in excess of 24 hours in a municipal parking lot. Parking in a municipal parking lot shall not be allowed between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. from June 1 through September 30. 
(Code 1988, § 23-73; Ord. No. 156, § 2(b), 6-17-1980; Ord. No. 2006-1, § 1, 6-6-2006) 
Sec. 42-73. - Unnecessary noise. 
    No person shall operate any motor vehicle in a municipal parking lot with unnecessary noise, or start, move or turn such motor vehicle, or apply the brakes or the power on the motor vehicle, or in any manner operate it so as to cause the tires to squeal or the tires or vehicle to make any noise not usually connected with the operation of the motor vehicle, except in case of an emergency. 
(Code 1988, § 23-74; Ord. No. 156, § 2(c), 6-17-1980) 
Sec. 42-74. - Loitering; disorderly conduct. 
    No person shall loiter or otherwise act in a disorderly manner in a municipal parking lot. 
(Code 1988, § 23-75; Ord. No. 156, § 3(a), 6-17-1980; Ord. No. 2011-10, § 1, 12-20-2011) 
Sec. 42-75. - Alcoholic liquor. 
    It shall be unlawful for any individual to consume alcoholic liquors or to possess an alcoholic liquor in a container that is open, uncapped or upon which the seal is broken, in a municipal parking lot; provided, however, that the city council may, by resolution, waive this provision for purposes of special events approved by the state liquor control commission. 
(Code 1988, § 23-76; Ord. No. 156, § 3(b), 6-17-1980; Ord. No. 2000-4, § 1, 6-6-2000) 
Sec. 42-76. - Penalties. 
(a) ?A person who violates any provision of sections 42-71 through 42-74 shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(b) ?A person who violates any provision of section 42-75 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor . 
(Code 1988, § 23-77; Ord. No. 156, § 4, 6-17-1980; Ord. No. 2006-1, § 1, 6-6-2006; Ord. No. 2011-07, § 1, 12-20-2011) 
Secs. 42-77—42-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SHOPPING CENTER PARKING LOTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Control of traffic in parking areas, MCL 257.941 et seq. 

Sec. 42-96. - Finding of fact; authority for division. 
(a) ?The city council does hereby determine and declare the regulation of traffic control and other uses of shopping center parking areas to be a matter involving the safety and well-being of the residents of this city and accordingly does hereby enact the following regulations in conformity with Public Act No. 235 of 1969 (MCL 257.941 et seq.). 
(b) ?These regulations will go into effect after the owner or person in charge of the parking lot makes a request to the city. 
(Code 1988, § 23-101; Ord. No. 153, § 1, 7-17-1979) 
Sec. 42-97. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Motor vehicle means every vehicle that is self-propelled. 
    Parking area means any area near or contiguous to a shopping center and used by the public as a means of access to and egress from the stores and business establishments at the shopping center and free parking of motor vehicles of the patrons of the shopping center. 
    Shopping center means a minimum area of three acres of land on which there is located one or more stores or business establishments, and where there is provided a parking area. 
(Code 1988, § 23-102; Ord. No. 153, § 2, 7-17-1979) 
Sec. 42-98. - Traffic control regulations and devices. 
    The chief of police, working in cooperation with the owners or directors of a shopping center is hereby authorized to designate parking spaces, loading zones, traffic lanes, prohibited areas and limited parking areas within the parking area of a shopping center and to erect or cause to have erected and to maintain, at the expense of the owner, holder, occupant, lessee, agent or trustee, any stop signs, yield right-of-way signs or other traffic control devices as he shall deem necessary to implement this division. No person shall drive or park a motor vehicle in violation of any traffic-control order or traffic control device as may be established pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1988, § 23-103; Ord. No. 153, § 3(a), 7-17-1979) 
Sec. 42-99. - Speed limit. 
    No person shall operate any motor vehicle in a parking area at a speed in excess of ten miles per hour. 
(Code 1988, § 23-104; Ord. No. 153, § 3(b), 7-17-1979) 
Sec. 42-100. - Unattended vehicles. 
    No person shall leave any vehicle unattended for a period in excess of eight hours in a parking area unless the vehicle bears an employee identification sticker. 
(Code 1988, § 23-105; Ord. No. 153, § 3(c), 7-17-1979) 
Sec. 42-101. - Unnecessary noise. 
    No person shall operate any motor vehicle in a parking area with unnecessary noise or start, move or turn such motor vehicle, or apply the brakes or the power on the motor vehicle, or in any manner operate it so as to cause the tires to squeal or the tires or vehicle to make any noise not usually connected with the operation of the motor vehicle, except in case of an emergency. 
(Code 1988, § 23-106; Ord. No. 153, § 3(d), 7-17-1979) 
Sec. 42-102. - Exclusive use; disruptions. 
    Use of shopping center parking areas is expressly reserved for patrons of the shopping center businesses. No person shall loiter or otherwise act in a disorderly manner in a shopping center parking area. 
(Code 1988, § 23-107; Ord. No. 153, § 4(a), 7-17-1979; Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 12-20-2011) 
Sec. 42-103. - Alcoholic liquor. 
    It shall be unlawful for any individual to consume alcoholic liquors in a shopping center parking area or to possess an alcoholic liquor in a container that is open, uncapped or upon which the seal is broken, in a shopping center parking area. 
(Code 1988, § 23-108; Ord. No. 153, § 4(b), 7-17-1979) 
Sec. 42-104. - Penalties. 
(a) ?A person who violates any provision of sections 42-98 through 42-102 shall be responsible for a civil infraction. 
(b) ?A person who violates any provision of section 42-103 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 23-109; Ord. No. 153, § 6, 7-17-1979; Ord. No. 2011-09, § 1, 12-20-2011) 
Secs. 42-105—42-121. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WINTER PARKING 

Sec. 42-122. - Short title. 
    This division shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Algonac Winter Parking Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 42-123. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Street, highway, roadway and in public rights-of-way mean the entire width between boundary lines of every way publically maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Winter months means the period from December 1 through and including March 31. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 42-124. - Parking restriction; exception with permit. 
    No person shall park a motor vehicle on a street, highway, roadway or other public right-of-way under the jurisdiction of the city between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. during the winter months. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 42-125. - Traffic citation to be affixed on vehicle parked or left in violation of division. 
    Whenever any motor vehicle without an operator is found parked or left in violation of any provision of this division, and it is not removed and impounded as provided for in this division the officer finding the vehicle shall take its registration number and any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user and shall conspicuously affix to the vehicle a traffic citation for the operator to answer to the charge at a time and in a place specified in the citation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 42-126. - Evidence with respect to vehicles parked or left in violation of division. 
    In any prosecution with regard to a vehicle parked or left in a place or in a condition in violation of any provision of this division, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked or left in violation of a provision of this division, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time the registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the defendant was the person who parked or left the vehicle in violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 42-127. - Civil infraction; enforcement. 
    A violation of this division shall constitute a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 42-128. - Removal of vehicles by law enforcement. 
    Whenever any motor vehicle without an operator is found parked or left in violation of any provision of this division, city law enforcement may immediately remove the vehicle, or cause the vehicle to be removed, to a place of safekeeping at the expense of the registered owner of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 42-129. - No parking signs to be posted. 
    There shall be posted at the entranceways to the city, in conformance with the state manual of uniform traffic control devices, which state: "No parking on any street, highway, roadway or right-of-way from 1:00 a.m. through 6:00 a.m., December 1 to March 31." 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 1-20-2015) 
DIVISION 5. - GOLF CARTS 

Sec. 42-130. - Purpose. 
    These regulations are intended to secure the public peace, health and safety of the residents and property owners of the City of Algonac for the regulation of the use of golf carts on public roads within the corporate limits of the city and to provide penalties for the violation of these provisions. 
( Ord. No. 2018-05 , § 1, 10-16-2018) 
Sec. 42-131. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Driver license means an operator's or chauffeur's license or permit issued by the secretary of state under chapter III of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.301 to 257.329, as amended, to operate a vehicle, whether or not conditions are attached to the license or permit. 
    Golf cart means a vehicle designed for transportation while playing the game of golf. 
    Maintained portion means a road improved, designated or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
    Operate means to ride in or on, or be in actual physical control of the golf cart. 
    Operator means a person who operates or is in actual physical control of the golf cart. 
    Street means a road, roadway, street or right-of-way within the City of Algonac street system, but does not include a private road. The terms road, roadway, street and right-of-way are interchangeable. 
    Sunset and sunrise as determined by the National Weather Service on any given day. 
( Ord. No. 2018-05 , § 1, 10-16-2018) 
Sec. 42-132. - Operation of golf carts on city streets. 
    A person may operate a golf cart on city streets, subject to the following restrictions: 
(1) ?A person shall not operate a golf cart on any street unless he or she is at least 16 years old and is licensed to operate a motor vehicle. 
(2) ?The operator of a golf cart shall comply with the signal requirements of MCL Section 257.648, as amended, that apply to the operation of a vehicle. 
(3) ?All golf carts are required to have a red reflector on the rear of the golf cart that shall be visible from distances up to 500 feet when in front of lawful low beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. 
(4) ?The operator of a golf cart shall obey by all sections pertaining to traffic in the Michigan Vehicle Code and the Uniform Traffic Code. 
(5) ?A person operating a golf cart upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. 
(6) ?A person shall not operate a golf cart on a state trunk line highway. This subsection does not prohibit a person from crossing a state trunk line highway when operating a golf cart on a street of the city, using the most direct line of crossing. 
(7) ?Where a usable and designated path for golf carts is provided adjacent to a road or street, a person operating a golf cart shall be required to use that path. A golf cart shall not be operated on a sidewalk constructed for the use of pedestrians. 
(8) ?A person operating a golf cart shall not pass between lines of traffic, but may pass on the left of traffic moving in his or her direction in the case of a two-way street, or on the left or right of traffic, in an unoccupied lane, in the case of a one-way street. 
(9) ?A golf cart shall be operated at a speed not to exceed 15 miles per hour and shall not be operated on a roadway or street with a speed limit of more than 30 miles per hour except to cross that roadway or street. 
(10) ?A golf cart shall not be operated on the streets of the city one-half hour before sunset or one-half hour after sunrise. 
(11) ?An operator or a passenger in a golf cart is not required to wear a crash helmet. 
(12) ?A golf cart shall not be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed. 
(13) ?A golf cart operated on a street of the city is not required to be registered under the Michigan Vehicle Code for purposes of section 3101 of the Insurance Code of 1956, 1956 PA 218, MCL Section 500.3101, as amended. 
(14) ?A golf cart shall not be operated during weather events with snow and/or ice on the ground. 
(15) ?Golf carts shall not be operated on a road or street in a negligent manner, endangering any person or property, or obstructing, or impeding the lawful course of travel of any motor vehicle or the lawful use by any pedestrian of public streets, sidewalks, paths, trails, walkways or parks. 
(16) ?Off-road vehicles, such as Gators, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs), a multitrack or multi-wheel drive vehicle, dune buggy, or like-vehicles are not considered golf carts. 
(17) ?This section does not apply to a police officer, city officials, employees, contractors or volunteers operating a golf cart in the performance of city duties. 
( Ord. No. 2018-05 , § 1, 10-16-2018) 
Sec. 42-133. - Parking regulations. 
    The parking, stopping, and standing regulations provided in the city Code, which may be adopted by reference therein, shall also apply to golf carts operated in the city, as if they are motor vehicles under those provisions. 
( Ord. No. 2018-05 , § 1, 10-16-2018) 
Sec. 42-134. - Violations and penalties. 
    A person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to the penalties set forth in city Code section 1-14(c). 
( Ord. No. 2018-05 , § 1, 10-16-2018) 
Secs. 42-135—42-139. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - OFF-ROAD VEHICLES 

Sec. 42-140. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and cited as the City of Algonac ORV Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06 , § 1, 11-20-2018) 
Sec. 42-141. - Statement of purpose. 
    An ordinance adopted for the purpose of authorizing and regulating the operation of off-road vehicles ("ORVs") on certain streets within the city, and for providing penalties for violation thereof. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06 , § 1, 11-20-2018) 
Sec. 42-142. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose and construction of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Driver's license means a license, permit, or temporary license issued under the laws of the State of Michigan pertaining to the licensing of persons to operate motor vehicles. 
    Operate means to ride in or on and/or to physically control an ORV. 
    Operator means a person who operates and/or is in actual physical control of an ORV. 
    ORV means a motor-driven, off-road recreational vehicle capable of cross-country travel without the benefit of a road or trail, on or immediately over land, snow, ice, marsh, swampland, or other natural terrain. ORV includes, but is not limited to, a multi-track or multi-wheel drive vehicle; an all-terrain vehicle ("ATV"); a motorcycle or related two-wheel, three-wheel, or four-wheel vehicle; an amphibious machine; a ground-effect air cushion vehicle; or other means of transportation deriving power from a source other than muscle or wind. 
    Street means a major or local city street as described in MCL 247.659. 
    Safety Certificate means a certificate issued pursuant to Public Act 451 of 1994, as amended, MCL 324.81129, or a comparable safety certificate issued under the authority of another state or a province of Canada. 
    Visual supervision means the direct observation of the operator with the unaided or normally corrected eye, where the observer is able to come to the immediate aid of the operator. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06 , § 1, 11-20-2018) 
Sec. 42-143. - Operation of an off-road recreational vehicle. 
    Subject to the following limitations, an ORV may be operated on the far-right aspect of the maintained portion of streets, as above-defined, within the city: 
(1) ?This article does not authorize the operation of an ORV on a state trunkline highway; to wit, M-29. 
(2) ?From time to time, and after publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, city council may by resolution designate that certain streets in the city are exempt from this article; that ORVs are prohibited on those enumerated streets; and that said prohibition is effective 30 days after publication. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06 , § 1, 11-20-2018) 
Sec. 42-144. - Requirements for operation. 
    Subject to the following conditions, and except as set forth herein or otherwise provided by law, an ORV may be operated on a street in the city not specifically prohibited by section 42-143(1) or (2), provided it is operated: 
(1) ?At a speed of no more than 25 miles per hour, or a lower ORV posted speed limit; 
(2) ?By a person not less than 16 years of age; 
(3) ?With the flow of traffic; 
(4) ?In a manner that does not interfere with traffic; 
(5) ?In single file except when overtaking and passing another ORV; 
(6) ?While displaying a working, visible lighted headlight and lighted taillight at all hours; 
(7) ?While the operator and each passenger of the ORV wear a crash helmet and protective eyewear approved by the United States Department of Transportation, unless the ORV is equipped with a roof that meets or exceeds standards for a crash helmet and the operator and each passenger are wearing a properly adjusted and fastened seat belt; 
(8) ?With a throttle so designed that when the pressure used to advance the throttle is removed, the engine speed will immediately and automatically idle; 
(9) ?While equipped with a spark-arrester type, United States Forest Service-approved muffler in good working order and in constant operation; and 
(10) ?Consistent with noise and emission standards defined by law. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06 , § 1, 11-20-2018) 
Sec. 42-145. - Penalties for violation. 
    A person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to the penalties set forth in city Code section 1-14(c). 
( Ord. No. 2018-06 , § 1, 11-20-2018) 
Chapter 44 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Ownership and operation of public service facilities by city, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 24; local authority to provide and regulate sewer and water service, MCL 324.4301 et seq.; water and sewer authorities, MCL 124.281 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 44-1—44-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 44-19. - Supervision of system operation. 
    The operation, repair and management of the system and the acquiring of the project authorized in this article shall be under the supervision and control of the superintendent of the water department, subject, however, to general control and supervision of the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 24-47; Ord. No. 111, § 7, 3-3-1964) 
Sec. 44-20. - Access rates, fees and charges. 
(a) ?Water service rates, fees and charges shall be prescribed by resolution of the city council and shall be applied to all users of the water system in accord with the following: 
(1) ?User of the water system means any person, firm or association which requires or utilizes a water supply from the city. 
(2) ?Unit means a tract of land, or portion thereof, that, when buildings, structures or improvements, including but not limited to boat wells, trailer sites or similar improvements, are constructed thereon, requires or uses water supplied by the city. 
(3) ?Dwelling unit means a building or portion thereof designed for occupancy by one family for residential purposes. 
(4) ?Family means one or two persons as parents, with their direct lineal descendants and adopted children (including the domestic employees thereof) together with not more than two persons not related, living together in the whole or part of a dwelling constituting a single housekeeping unit. Every additional group of two or fewer persons living in such housekeeping unit shall be considered a separate family for the purpose of this article. 
(5) ?Water service charge means a charge levied on the users of the water system for the cost of operation, maintenance and administration of the system. 
(6) ?Maintenance fee means a charge levied against the premises connected to the water system by way of a water meter designed and installed for the purpose of measuring the water supplied from the city water system. 
(7) ?Customer means the person, firm or association responsible for payment of water supply charges imposed by resolution of city council. 
(8) ?Additional unit means any premises supplied through a single master meter, and shall include but not be limited to multiple dwelling units, condominium housing units, commercial units within a single structure as in retail shopping malls, industrial units within an industrial park development whether or not contained in a single building or individual structures, office units occupied by individual persons, firms or associations when contained in a single structure, boat wells either rented or condominiumized, house trailers, camper trailers or similar unit uses of premises which are supplied with water service from the city by way of a single master meter. 
(9) ?Usage fee means a dollar amount to be charged per 1,000 gallons of water supplied to a user by the water system. 
(10) ?Service fees means those fees, charges, security deposits and penalties including late payment penalties that may be imposed by resolution of city council for such services as tap-in fees, turn-on/turn-off charges, payment of security deposits and similar services as city council shall from time to time determine reasonable and necessary. 
(11) ?When city council shall determine that a particular development, premises or user is such that the rates and charges imposed by their resolution does not adequately address or fit particular circumstances, fees and charges in such instances may be levied pursuant to contract. 
(b) ?Billing. All recurring charges as provided in this article shall be rendered periodically as provided by city council resolution during each operating year at the same time and as part of the water bill for such period and shall represent charges for the period immediately preceding the date of rendering the bill. Such bills shall become due and payable within 30 days from the date thereof, and if the bill is not paid on or before the last due date thereof, a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the bill representing the water service charge shall be applied thereto. The city council will determine by resolution the billing period for the water service charge. 
(c) ?Enforcement. 
(1) ?The city is hereby authorized to enforce the payment of charges of water service to any premises by discontinuing the water service to such premises and the payment of charges for sewage disposal to any premises may be enforced by discontinuing either the water service or the sewage disposal service to such premises, or both, and a collection action may be instituted by the city against the customer. Notice of intent to discontinue service shall be given personally or by first class mail to the customer at the address served. 
(2) ?The charges for water service and sewage disposal service which, under the provisions of Public Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq.), are made a lien on the premises to which furnished are hereby recognized to constitute such lien, and the city shall annually, on April 1, certify all unpaid charges for such services furnished to any premise which, on March 31 preceding, have remained unpaid for a period of six months and place the charges on the next tax roll of the city. Such charges so assessed shall be collected in the same manner as general city taxes. 
(3) ?When the city is properly notified in accordance with the act referred to in subsection (c)(2) of this section that a tenant is responsible for water or sewage disposal service charges, no such service shall be commenced or continued to such premises until there has been deposited with the city treasurer a sum of $500.00 for such premises. 
(4) ?Where the water service to any premises is turned off to enforce the payment of water service charges or sewage disposal service charges, the water service shall not be recommended until all delinquent charges, plus the turn-on charge, have been paid and/or a deposit, as for tenants, is made. 
(5) ?Deposits made pursuant to this section may be applied against any delinquent water or sewage disposal charges on account, and the application thereof shall not affect the right of the utilities manager to turn off the water service and/or sewer service to any premises for any delinquency thereby satisfied. No such deposit shall bear interest, and such deposit or any remaining balance thereof shall be returned to the customer making the deposit when he shall discontinue receiving water and sewage disposal service. 
(Code 1988, § 24-48; Ord. No. 111, § 8, 3-3-1964; Ord. of 9-6-1977; Ord. of 6-5-1979; Ord. of 11-6-1979; Ord. of 9-1-1981(1); Ord. of 5-17-1983; Ord. of 6-18-1985; Ord. No. 91-06, 9-17-1991; Ord. No. 2011-05, § 1, 9-6-2011) 
State Law reference— Authority to discontinue service for failure to pay charges, MCL 123.166, 141.121; water and sewer charges constitute lien, MCL 141.121. 
Sec. 44-21. - Free service. 
    No free service shall be furnished by the system to any person, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality. 
(Code 1988, § 24-49; Ord. No. 111, § 9, 3-3-1964) 
Sec. 44-22. - Purpose of rates. 
(a) ?The rates fixed under this article are estimated to be sufficient to provide for: 
(1) ?The payment of the expenses of administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the system as are necessary to preserve the system in good repair and working order; 
(2) ?The payment of the interest upon and the principal of all the bonds as and when the bonds become due and payable, and the creation of the reserve therefor required by this article; 
(3) ?Such other expenditures and funds for the system as this article may require. 
(b) ?Such rates shall be fixed and revised from time to time as may be necessary to produce these amounts, and it is hereby covenanted and agreed at all times to fix and maintain such rates for services furnished by the system as shall be sufficient to provide for such amounts. 
(Code 1988, § 24-50; Ord. No. 111, § 10, 3-3-1964) 
Sec. 44-23. - Operating year. 
    The system shall be operated on the basis of an operating year commencing on July 1 and ending on the following June 30. 
(Code 1988, § 24-51; Ord. No. 111, § 11, 3-3-1964) 
Sec. 44-24. - Authority to issue and sell bonds. 
    The city clerk is hereby authorized and directed to make application to the finance commission for authority to issue and sell bonds under this article, and for approval of the form of notice of sale of the bonds in accordance with the provisions of Public Act No. 202 of 1943 (MCL 131.1 et seq., MSA 5.3188(1) et seq.), as amended, and of Public Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq., MSA 5.2731 et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1988, § 24-61; Ord. No. 111, § 21, 3-3-1964) 
Secs. 44-25—44-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CROSS CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 44-40. - Rules adopted. 
    The city adopts, by reference, the water supply cross connection rules of the state department of environmental quality being Mich. Admin. Code R325.11401—R325.11407. 
(Code 1988, § 24-81; Ord. No. 137, § 1, 5-25-1973) 
Sec. 44-41. - City to cause inspections. 
    It shall be the duty of the city to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply system where cross connections with the public water supply is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the city and as approved by the state department of public health. 
(Code 1988, § 24-82; Ord. No. 137, § 2, 5-25-1973) 
Sec. 44-42. - Right of entry; information. 
    The representative of the city shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the city for the purpose of inspecting the piping systems thereof for cross connections. On request, the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping systems on such property. The refusal of such information or access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. 
(Code 1988, § 24-83; Ord. No. 137, § 3, 5-25-1973) 
Sec. 44-43. - Discontinuance of service. 
    The city is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation of this division exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connections have been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1988, § 24-84; Ord. No. 137, § 4, 5-25-1973) 
Sec. 44-44. - Protection from contamination. 
    The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by this division and by the state plumbing code. Any water outlet that could be used for potable or domestic purposes and that is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as follows: 
"Water Unsafe for Drinking." 
(Code 1988, § 24-85; Ord. No. 137, § 5, 5-25-1973) 
Sec. 44-45. - Division to supplement state code. 
    This division does not supersede the state plumbing code but is supplementary to it. 
(Code 1988, § 24-86; Ord. No. 137, § 6, 5-25-1973) 
Sec. 44-46. - Testing of backflow prevention assemblies. 
    All testable backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested at the time of installation or relocation and after any repair. Subsequent testing of devices shall be conducted at a time interval specified by the city public services superintendent and in accordance with state department of environmental quality requirements. Only individuals that hold a valid state plumbing license and have successfully passed an approved backflow testing class shall perform such testing. The city public services superintendent also shall approve each tester. Individuals performing assembly testing shall certify the results of their testing. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Sec. 44-47. - Penalties. 
    Any person or customer found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this division, or any written order of the city public services superintendent in pursuance thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Secs. 44-48—44-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 44-68. - Authority to establish rules and regulations. 
    Under the provisions of the contract, the city is chargeable with the duty of operating and maintaining the sewer system as agent of, and for and on behalf of, the county, and establishing necessary rules and regulations relative to its use and connections thereto subject to the approval of the county board of public works. The city will, by appropriate resolution or ordinance, adopt and place into effect such necessary rules, regulations and standards as may be necessary to properly operate and maintain the system in accordance with the recommendations, and subject to the approval of the county board of public works. The city will further adopt such necessary rules, regulations and standards relative to connections to and use of the sewer system as may be necessary to meet public health requirements and the recommendations of the county board of public works, including adequate and lawful penalties for violations of any of such rules, regulations and standards. 
(Code 1988, § 24-111; Ord. No. 120, § 9, 8-15-1967) 
Secs. 44-69—44-94. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 44-95. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Additional users means any unit located on premises supplied through a master water meter and shall include, but not be limited to, separate dwelling units, condominium housing units, commercial units within a single structure as in retail shopping malls, industrial units within an industrial park development, whether or not contained in a single building or individual structure, office units occupied by individual persons, firms or associations when contained in a single structure, boat wells, either rented or condominiumized, house trailers, camper trailers or similar unit use of premises when supplied with water service from the city by way of a single master water meter when such separate units are connected to the sewer system. 
    Bonds means the county bonds issued and outstanding pursuant to this division. 
    Contract means the contract made and executed between the city and the county dated as of July 25, 1967, for the acquisition and construction of the sewer facilities as a part, or section, of the county sewage disposal system no. I, being the contract pursuant to this division and now on file in the office of the city clerk and the county board of public works. 
    Contractual installment payments means the installment payments required to be made by the city to the county board of public works pursuant to the provisions of the contract. 
    Dwelling unit means a building or portion thereof designed for occupancy by one family for residential purposes. 
    Family means one or two persons or parents, with their direct lineal descendants and adopted children (including the domestic employees thereof) together with not more than two persons not related, living together in the whole or part of a dwelling constituting a single housekeeping unit. Every additional group of two or fewer persons living in such housekeeping unit shall be considered a separate family for the purpose of this division. 
    Industrial user means any nongovernmental user of publicly owned treatment works identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget as amended and supplemented under the following divisions: 
(1) ?Division A: Agricultural, forestry and fishing; 
(2) ?Division B: Mining; 
(3) ?Division D: Manufacturing; 
(4) ?Division E: Transportation, communications, electric, gas and sanitary services; 
(5) ?Division I: Service. 
A user in the divisions listed may be excluded if it is determined that it will introduce primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences. 
    Operation and maintenance includes the term "replacement." 
    Replacement means expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. 
    Sewer service charge means a charge levied on the users of the sewer system for the cost of operation, maintenance and administration of the system. 
    Sewer system means the sanitary sewers and appurtenant facilities acquired and constructed within the corporate limits of the city pursuant to the provisions of the contract with the county and being a part, or section, of the system designated as "St. Clair County Sewage Disposal System No. I," and any extensions, improvements or additions thereto, and any additional facilities whether owned or operated by the city or the county within the limits of the city used or useful in connection with the collection, treatment or disposal of sewage or industrial wastes. 
    User or users means any premises connecting, or connected with, and using any of the facilities of the sewer system for the removal of sewage or waste. Each dwelling unit located in any premises shall be construed to be a separate user. When additional users located on any premises are connected to the sewer system and such additional users are supplied water through a master water meter such users shall be construed to be additional users. 
(Code 1988, § 24-131; Ord. No. 120, § 1, 8-15-1967; Ord. No. 120A, 2-15-1977; Ord. of 7-15-1980; Ord. No. 91-07, 9-17-1991) 
Sec. 44-96. - Fiscal year. 
    The sewer system shall be operated on the basis of a fiscal year beginning on July 1 and ending on June 30 of each year. 
(Code 1988, § 24-132; Ord. No. 120, § 2, 8-15-1967) 
Sec. 44-97. - Users. 
(a) ?Charges. Sewer service charges and debt retirement charges shall be prescribed by resolution of city council in accordance with the following: 
(1) ?To determine the sewage flow from any user for the purpose of determining the sewer service charge for any user, the city may use one of the following methods: 
a. ?The amount of water supplied to the premises by the city or a private water company as shown upon the water meter if the premises are metered; 
b. ?If such premises are supplied with river water or water from private wells, the amount of water supplied from such sources as estimated by the city from the water, gas or electric supply; 
c. ?If such premises are used for an industrial or commercial purpose of such a nature that the water supplied to the premises cannot be entirely discharged into the sewer system, the estimate of the amount of sewage discharged into the sewer system made by the city from the water, gas or electric supply; 
d. ?The number of gallons of sewage discharged into the sewer system as determined by measurements and samples taken at a manhole installed by the owner of the property served by the sewer system at his own expense; or 
e. ?A figure determined by the city by any combination of the foregoing or by any other equitable method and agreed to by the user in the form of a contractual agreement with the city. 
(2) ?Holding tank waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks or vacuum-pump tank trucks shall be measured using one of the methods set out in subsection (a)(1) of this section and charges imposed by the city accordingly. 
(3) ?The city may impose by resolution service fees for services performed by the city such as tap-in fees, turn-on and turn-off charges, payment security deposits and similar services as council shall determine to be reasonable and necessary. 
(b) ?Billing. All recurring charges as provided in this division shall be rendered periodically as provided by city council resolution during each operating year at the same time and as part of the water bill for such period and shall represent charges for the period immediately preceding the date of rendering the bill. Such bills shall become due and payable within 30 days from the date thereof, and if the bill is not paid on or before the last due date thereof, a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the bill representing the sewer service charges shall be applied thereto. The city council will determine by resolution the billing period for the sewer service charge. 
(Code 1988, § 24-133; Ord. No. 120, § 3, 8-15-1967; Ord. No. 120A, 2-15-1977; Ord. of 11-20-1979; Ord. of 9-1-1981(2); Ord. No. 91-07, 9-17-1991; Ord. No. 2011-05, § 1, 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 44-98. - Free service. 
    No free service shall be furnished by the sewer system to any person, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality. 
(Code 1988, § 24-134; Ord. No. 120, § 4, 8-15-1967) 
Sec. 44-99. - Allocation of revenues. 
    All moneys derived from the collection of the rates and charges imposed by this division shall be deposited into a bank to be designated by the city council, in a special depositary account to be designated "sewer system receiving fund," the moneys in such fund to be used and allocated periodically as follows: 
(1) ?There shall first be set aside, during each fiscal year, into a separate account designated "operation and maintenance fund," sums sufficient to provide for current costs and expenses of operation, maintenance and administration of the sewer system during such fiscal year, as shown by estimates submitted by the county board of public works, or, if such duty of operation, maintenance and administration is delegated by contract or lease to the city, by budget covering the foregoing expenses adopted by the city council and approved by the county board of public works prior to the commencement of the fiscal year. Sewage disposal rates or charges imposed by the county, through its board of public works, as authorized by section 14 of the contract shall also be considered an operation and maintenance expense of the sewer system and an amount sufficient to pay such rates or charges during the fiscal year shall likewise be set aside into such fund. 
(2) ?Any balance remaining in the sewer system receiving fund on the last day of each fiscal year, June 30, after the foregoing provisions have been made for the operation and maintenance fund, shall be set aside on July 1 of each year, into a separate depositary account designated "contractual payments fund" and used and applied to the payment of the contractual installment payments due on September 1 and March 1 of the then current fiscal year. To the extent such moneys are on hand in the contractual payments fund on July 1 of each year, the required annual tax levy to provide such contractual payments due the then current fiscal year, may be reduced to an amount sufficient to provide the balance of such payments. Such amounts so on hand in the contractual payments fund on July 1 of each year are hereby pledged solely and only for the payment of the contractual installment payments due the next succeeding September 1 and March 1 of the current fiscal year, and pursuant to the authorization provided in section 12, subsection (2) of Public Act No. 185 of 1957 (MCL 123.742(2)), as amended, the annual tax levy to provide such payments may be reduced by the amount so on hand in the contractual payments fund pledged to the payment of such obligations. If the moneys so on hand in the contractual payments fund on July 1 of each year are fully sufficient to pay in full the contractual installment payments due the current fiscal year, no tax levy shall be required for such purpose. 
(Code 1988, § 24-135; Ord. No. 120, § 5, 8-15-1967) 
Sec. 44-100. - Additional contracts. 
    Nothing contained in this division shall be construed in any way to prevent the city from entering into additional contracts with the county under the provisions of Public Act No. 185 of 1957 (MCL 123.731 et seq.), for the acquisition, construction and financing of additions, extensions and improvements to the sewer system, and the use of revenues of the system for the payment of additional obligations incurred thereby. 
(Code 1988, § 24-136; Ord. No. 120, § 6, 8-15-1967) 
Sec. 44-101. - Revision. 
    The initial rates and charges specified in section 44-97 shall be subject to revision from time to time by the city council, it being the intent that such rates and charges shall, as far as is reasonably possible, provide sufficient funds to enable the sewer system to be efficiently operated and maintained, and to provide additional funds to enable it to pay a major portion of its contractual installment payments, and thus reducing, to that extent, its annual tax levy obligation therefor. 
(Code 1988, § 24-137; Ord. No. 120, § 7, 8-15-1967) 
Sec. 44-102. - Additional charges, unreasonable burden on system. 
(a) ?If the character of sewage from a user exceeds a five-day BOD concentration of 300 milligrams per liter, or a suspended solids concentration of 350 milligrams per liter, than the charge to be applied to the user shall be determined and added to the sewer service charge billing. This charge shall be prescribed by resolution of the city council. 
(b) ?Although there are no industries currently served by the system, the city shall establish an "industrial cost recovery system" in compliance with section 35-928 of the federal regulations as contained in the Federal Register, February 11, 1974, Volume 39, No. 29. Such industrial cost recovery system shall become a part of this division as if fully set out in this section. 
(Code 1988, § 24-138; Ord. No. 120, § 8, 8-15-1967; Ord. No. 120A, 2-15-1977) 
Sec. 44-103. - Annual statements and audits. 
    The city shall cause to be maintained and kept proper books of record and account, in which shall be made full and correct entries of all transactions relating to the sewer system. Not later than two months after the close of each fiscal year, the city shall cause to be prepared a statement in reasonable detail, showing the cash income and disbursements of the sewer system at the beginning and close of the fiscal year, and such other information as may be necessary to enable any taxpayer of the city, user or beneficiary of the services furnished, to be fully informed as to all matters pertaining to the fiscal operation of the system during such year. Such annual statement shall be filed in the office of the city clerk where it will be open to public inspection. Such books of record and account shall be audited annually by a certified public accountant to be designated by the city council and a certified copy of such audit shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Code 1988, § 24-139; Ord. No. 120, § 10, 8-15-1967) 
Secs. 44-104—44-134. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SEWER USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 44-135. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days of 20 degrees Celsius expressed in parts per million by weight. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal five feet out from building from retaining wall. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particles greater than one-half-inch in any diameter. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
    Sanitary sewers means a sewer that carries sewage and to which stormwaters, groundwaters, and surface waters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such stormwaters, groundwaters and surface waters as may be present. 
    Sewerage treatment plant means any arrangements of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer that carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Suspended solids means the solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage or other liquids, and that are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1988, § 24-161; Ord. No. 122, art. I, 5-21-1968) 
Sec. 44-136. - Required use of public sewers. 
(a) ?Deposits. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(b) ?Discharges. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sanitary sewage, and industrial wastes, except where suitable treatment was provided in accordance with this division. 
(c) ?Alternative facilities. Except as provided in this division, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(d) ?Suitable facilities. The owners of houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in the future be located, a public sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this division, within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so. 
(Code 1988, § 24-162; Ord. No. 122, art. II, 5-21-1968) 
Sec. 44-137. - Unauthorized use. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, may make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(Code 1988, § 24-163; Ord. No. 122, § 301, 5-21-1968) 
Sec. 44-138. - Permit classes; fees. 
(a) ?There shall be two classes of building sewer permits. They shall be for: 
(1) ?Residential and commercial service; and 
(2) ?Service to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
(b) ?In both cases under subsection (a) of this section, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city manager. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed in accordance with the schedule of fees as prescribed by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 24-164; Ord. No. 122, § 302, 5-21-1968; Ord. of 4-21-1981) 
Sec. 44-139. - Permit applicant to notify city. 
    The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city 24 hours prior to time inspection is required and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the city manager. 
(Code 1988, § 24-165; Ord. No. 122, § 312, 5-21-1968) 
Sec. 44-140. - Installation costs borne by owner. 
    All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Code 1988, § 24-166; Ord. No. 122, § 303, 5-21-1968) 
Sec. 44-141. - Independent building facilities; exception. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(Code 1988, § 24-167; Ord. No. 122, § 304, 5-21-1968) 
Sec. 44-142. - Old buildings. 
    Old building sewers may be used only when they are found, on examination and test by the city, to meet all requirements of this division. 
(Code 1988, § 24-168; Ord. No. 122, § 305, 5-21-1968) 
Sec. 44-143. - Pipe diameters, materials, joints. 
(a) ?Building sewers shall be: 
(1) ?Six-inch diameter C-200 vitrified sewer pipe with tylow (type B), wedgelock types 1 and 3 or ambit joints or other county agency approved joints; 
(2) ?Six-inch diameter class 2400 asbestos cement pipe with ring-tite or other county agency approved joint; 
(3) ?Six-inch diameter, service strength cast iron soil pipe with hot poured lead joint; 
(4) ?ABS solid wall plastic pipe conforming to ASTM specifications D2751, SDR 35; or 
(5) ?PVC solid wall plastic pipe conforming to ASTM specifications D3034, SDR 35, or approved equal. 
Where bends or curves are specified, they shall be smooth, long radius type. No mitered or segmented type bends will be allowed. Branch connections may be cast fittings of the same material and joints as the main sewer, or may be an approved fabricated special fitting that provides a suitable connection for the service lead to the main sewer. 
(b) ?Public sewers shall be a minimum of eight inches in diameter and constructed of materials as approved by the city engineer or the department of public works superintendent. House connection sewers should be six inches in diameter minimum, all joints shall be tight and when tested for infiltration, no sewer shall exceed 250 U.S. gallons per inch of diameter, per mile, per 24 hours. A crock to iron joint shall be sealed by an approved bituminous joint filler, encased in concrete to provide a watertight seal. Flexible adapter fittings, such as those manufactured by Fernco Joint Sealer Company or approved equal may be used without concrete encasement. The pipe inside the building shall be plugged and remain plugged and watertight until such time as the plumbing is carried on to the first floor, the basement backfilled and the roof is on the building, thereby providing that no water from the excavated basement will enter the sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1988, § 24-169; Ord. No. 122, § 306, 5-21-1968; Ord. of 8-4-1987) 
Sec. 44-144. - Size and slope. 
    The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the city, but in no event shall the diameter be less than six inches. The slope of such six-inch pipe shall be not less than one-eighth inch per foot. 
(Code 1988, § 24-170; Ord. No. 122, § 307, 5-21-1968) 
Sec. 44-145. - Gravity connections; depth of pipes, alignment. 
    No gravity building sewer connection shall be permitted from the lower floor level of a building unless such floor level is at least 1½ feet above the record high water level in the St. Clair River, such high water level being determined by the records of the United States Lake Survey based on the International Great Lakes Datum of 1955. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings. 
(Code 1988, § 24-171; Ord. No. 122, § 308, 5-21-1968) 
Sec. 44-146. - Low drains; artificial lifts. 
    In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity to the public sewer or where the lowest floor level is less than 1½ feet above the record high level in the St. Clair River, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Code 1988, § 24-172; Ord. No. 122, § 309, 5-21-1968) 
Sec. 44-147. - Installation excavations; pipe laying, backfill. 
    All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the city. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM specification C-12-64 except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. 
(Code 1988, § 24-173; Ord. No. 122, § 310, 5-21-1968) 
Sec. 44-148. - Building connection to public system. 
    The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, or houselead, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If no properly located "Y" branch or houselead is available, a neat hole may be cut into the public sewer to receive the building sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about 45 degrees. A saddle or 45-degree ell may be used to make such connection, with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the city. 
(Code 1988, § 24-174; Ord. No. 122, § 311, 5-21-1968) 
Sec. 44-149. - Protection from public hazard; restoration of disturbed areas. 
    All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city or other municipal authority having jurisdiction. 
(Code 1988, § 24-175; Ord. No. 122, § 313, 5-21-1968) 
Sec. 44-150. - Restricted discharges. 
(a) ?No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. Footing drains and sump pump discharge shall not be connected to the sanitary sewer. 
(b) ?Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the city. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged upon approval of the city to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(c) ?Except as provided in this division, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into a public sewer any: 
(1) ?Liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 100 degrees Fahrenheit; 
(2) ?Water or wastes which may contain more than 100 parts per million by weight of fat, oil or grease; 
(3) ?Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; 
(4) ?Garbage that has not been properly shredded; 
(5) ?Ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works; 
(6) ?Waters and wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0 or having some other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the sewage works; 
(7) ?Waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant; 
(8) ?Waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant; 
(9) ?Noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance. 
(Code 1988, § 24-176; Ord. No. 122, §§ 401—403, 5-21-1968) 
Sec. 44-151. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
(a) ?Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(b) ?Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight. 
(c) ?Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner at his expense in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(Code 1988, § 24-177; Ord. No. 122, §§ 404, 405, 5-21-1968) 
Sec. 44-152. - Admission approval for certain waters and wastes. 
(a) ?Admission into the public sewers shall be subject to the review and approval of the city manager of any waters or wastes having: 
(1) ?A five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 parts per million by weight; 
(2) ?More than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids; 
(3) ?Any quantity of substance having the characteristics described in section 44-150(c); or 
(4) ?An average daily flow greater than two percent of the average daily sewage flow of the city. 
(b) ?Where necessary in the opinion of the city, the owner shall provide at his expense such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to: 
(1) ?Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million and the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight; 
(2) ?Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the minimum limits provided for in section 44-150(c); or 
(3) ?Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. 
(Code 1988, § 24-178; Ord. No. 122, § 406, 5-21-1968) 
Sec. 44-153. - Plans and specifications. 
    Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the city and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until such approval is obtained in writing. Such plans and specifications shall be submitted for approval by the city within 60 days after notification of the necessity thereof. If satisfactory plans and specifications are not furnished, or if furnished and construction does not proceed according to the agreed upon construction time, the city shall, upon 30 days' notice in writing to such person admitting wastes above the approved standards, terminate sewer service to such owner. All costs of termination of service and resumption, after completion of required construction, shall be borne by the owner. 
(Code 1988, § 24-179; Ord. No. 122, § 406, 5-21-1968) 
Sec. 44-154. - Preliminary treatment facilities. 
    Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. If such preliminary treatment facilities are not maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner, the city may, after notice as provided for in section 44-153, terminate sewer service until proper operation is provided for. 
(Code 1988, § 24-180; Ord. No. 122, § 407, 5-21-1968) 
Sec. 44-155. - Control manhole. 
    When required by the city, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Code 1988, § 24-181; Ord. No. 122, § 408, 5-21-1968) 
Sec. 44-156. - Measurements, tests and analyses. 
    All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in sections 44-150(c) and 44-152 shall be determined in accordance with Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for in section 44-155, or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. If no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(Code 1988, § 24-182; Ord. No. 122, § 409, 5-21-1968) 
Sec. 44-157. - Limit of division application. 
    No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. 
(Code 1988, § 24-183; Ord. No. 122, § 410, 5-21-1968) 
Sec. 44-158. - Damaging and defacing. 
(a) ?No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage works. 
(b) ?Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be held responsible for all damages. 
(Code 1988, § 24-184; Ord. No. 122, § 501, 5-21-1968; Ord. No. 122A, 2-15-1977) 
State Law reference— Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 44-159. - Right of entry. 
    The city manager and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1988, § 24-185; Ord. No. 122, § 601, 5-21-1968) 
Sec. 44-160. - Registration; bond. 
    No person shall lay, alter or repair any house drain or sewer work, or make any connections whatever with any sewer or house or building belonging to the sanitary sewer system, or do any kind of work connected with the laying of house drains or house sewers or making any repairs, additions or alterations of any drain or sewer connected or designed to be connected with the sanitary sewer system unless regularly registered by the city and bond posted in the amount required by the city. Any person doing such work without such registration shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this division and shall be subject to penalties therefor. 
(Code 1988, § 24-186; Ord. No. 122, § 701, 5-21-1968) 
Sec. 44-161. - Petition; license; record. 
    Any person desiring to do business as a sewer builder and to construct house drains connecting with the sewer system of the city shall file in the office of the city clerk a petition giving the name of the individual, firm or corporation together with his place of business and such other information as may be required by the city and asking to be registered by the city clerk as a sewer builder. Such petition must show that he is experienced in his trade and willing to be governed in all respects by the rules and regulations which are or may be adopted by the city council. Each applicant shall, at any time of making his application, pay an annual registration fee as prescribed by resolution of the city council, and such application shall contain an agreement on the part of the applicant that, if licensed, he will indemnify and save harmless the city from all accidents and damages caused by any negligence in protecting his work, or by an unfaithful, imperfect, inadequate, careless or unskilled work done by him, and that he will also promptly and at the proper time replace and restore sidewalks, pavement or street surface or any opening he may have made to as good a state and condition as he found previous to opening the same, and keep and maintain the same in good order to the satisfaction of the municipal authority having jurisdiction for the period of one year next thereafter and shall post bonds in amounts required by the city. On the applicant receiving his license, the city clerk shall make a record thereof and of the actual place of business, the name under which the business is transacted, and the licensee shall immediately notify the city clerk of any change in either thereafter. No license shall be granted for more than one year and all licenses shall be granted to expire on May 1 next succeeding their issue. The contractor shall provide bond as required by the city. 
(Code 1988, § 24-187; Ord. No. 122, § 702, 5-21-1968) 
Sec. 44-162. - Violation. 
    Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any provision of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 24-188; Ord. No. 122, § 801, 5-21-1968) 
Chapter 46 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1—46-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-19. - Jurisdiction of city. 
    The regulation and governing of taxicabs and the taxicab business and the transportation of passengers for hire within the city is hereby declared to be within the public powers of the city council if, in its judgment, the best interests of the public require such action. 
(Code 1988, § 25-21; Ord. No. 166, § 6, 3-1-1988) 
Sec. 46-20. - Passenger fee; receipt. 
    A taxicab operator, or his employee, may charge a fee in advance, but must in all cases, when requested, deliver to the passenger or party paying the fee a receipt stating the amount so paid and for what service, and the name of the driver of the taxicab. 
(Code 1988, § 25-22; Ord. No. 166, § 4, 3-1-1988) 
Secs. 46-21—46-43. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 46-44. - Required. 
    No taxicab service vehicle or other vehicle for the transportation of persons for hire shall be conducted or operated within the city limits except those duly licensed as provided in this division. 
(Code 1988, § 25-46; Ord. No. 166, § 3, 3-1-1988) 
Sec. 46-45. - Qualifications. 
    The city clerk shall not issue a license to any person to engage in the taxicab business or the transportation of passengers for hire within the city except and unless the person complies with the following: 
(1) ?Applicants, and any person driving a taxicab in his employ, must be a resident of the state and possess a valid chauffeur's license and must not be physically incapacitated from properly operating the taxicab service. 
(2) ?Each vehicle shall be inspected by a competent automobile mechanic, and there shall be filed with the city clerk, together with the application for license, a certificate signed by such mechanic certifying that the vehicle to be used in connection with the business is in good operating condition and safe for travel and the transportation of passengers. 
(3) ?Any applicant shall file proof with the city clerk that he holds for the term of the license a policy of insurance protecting all persons against personal injury and property loss sustained by reasons of collision or otherwise, in amounts to be determined by resolution of the city council. Such policy shall cover any bodily injury or property damage suffered by passengers as well as other persons injured due to the negligent operation of any taxicab owned or operated by the licensee. 
(4) ?Any applicant shall produce proof to the satisfaction of the city council that there is a public necessity for the issuance of the license to the applicant, and if it is the opinion of the city council that there is no public necessity for the issuance of a license then the city council may, in its discretion, deny a license to the applicant. 
(Code 1988, § 25-47; Ord. No. 166, § 5, 3-1-1988) 
Sec. 46-46. - Fee; duration. 
    All applications for a license to operate and maintain taxicab service for hire shall be made in writing to the city clerk, and, upon compliance by the applicants with the provisions of this division, the city council may cause a license to be issued by the city clerk upon payment in advance by the applicant of an annual fee as prescribed by resolution of the city council. Such license shall run for a period of 12 months and may be renewed annually upon application. 
(Code 1988, § 25-48; Ord. No. 166, § 1, 3-1-1988) 
Sec. 46-47. - Display. 
    All operators of taxicabs duly licensed as provided in this division shall post such license in a conspicuous place within the licensed vehicle. 
(Code 1988, § 25-49; Ord. No. 166, § 2, 3-1-1988) 
Sec. 46-48. - Revocation and denial. 
    Violation of any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed cause for revocation of any existing license or for denial of any application. 
(Code 1988, § 25-50; Ord. No. 166, § 7, 3-1-1988) 
Chapter 48 - WATERWAYS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Watercraft and marine safety, MCL 324.80101 et seq.; local regulation, MCL 324.80111. 

Sec. 48-1. - No swimming; signs. 
(a) ?It is hereby declared illegal for any persons, minors or adults, to swim, bathe or wade in any waters adjoining property owned by the city at any time or season, day or night. 
(b) ?There shall be posted proper and adequate signs in appropriate places to warn against violation of this section. 
(Code 1988, § 26-1; Ord. No. 106, §§ 1, 2, 4-17-1961) 
Sec. 48-2. - Speed of motorboats. 
(a) ?On the waters of the St. Clair River and the north channel of the St. Clair River offshore from the city, from the mouth of Fisher Creek, also known as the "Marine City Drain" to the south city limits at Pte. DuChene, no operator of any motorboat shall exceed a slow, no-wake speed when within 600 feet of the shore or any dock, or when within 100 feet of any raft, buoyed or occupied bathing area, buoyed diver's flag or vessel moored or at anchor, except when picking up or dropping off water skiers when such operation is conducted with due regard to the safety of persons and property. Motorboat operators shall, insofar as it is reasonably possible, pick up and drop off water skiers in a line perpendicular to the shoreline. The term "slow, no-wake speed" means a very slow speed whereby the wake or wash created by the motorboat is minimal. 
(b) ?On the waters of all other channels and canals of the city, county or state, no operator of any motorboat shall exceed a slow, no-wake speed, which means a very slow speed whereby the wake or wash created by the motorboat would be minimal. 
(Code 1988, § 26-2; Ord. No. 125, 3-17-1970; Ord. of 6-19-1973) 
Chapter 50 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Michigan zoning enabling act, MCL 125.3101 et seq.; Michigan planning enabling act, MCL 125.3801 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Citation. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Algonac Zoning Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 100, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-2. - Construction of language. 
    The following rules of construction apply to the text of this chapter: 
(1) ?The particular shall control the general. 
(2) ?In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this article and any caption or illustration, the text shall control. 
(3) ?The term "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The term "may" is permissive. 
(4) ?Words used in the present tense shall include the future, and words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(5) ?A "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof. 
(6) ?The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for" or "occupied for." 
(7) ?The term "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association or any other similar entity. 
(8) ?Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or," "either…or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
a. ?"And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
b. ?"Or" indicates that the connected item, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
c. ?"Either…or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
(9) ?Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 200, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory use or accessory means a use which is clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with, and located on the same zoning lot unless otherwise specified as the principal use to which it is related. When the term "accessory" is used in this text, it shall have the same meaning as accessory use. An accessory use includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1) ?Residential accommodations for servants and/or caretakers. 
(2) ?Outdoor swimming pools, hot tubs and saunas for the use of occupants of a residence or their guests. 
(3) ?Domestic or agricultural storage in a barn, shed, tool room or similar accessory building or other structure. 
(4) ?A newsstand primarily for the convenience of the occupants of a building, which is located wholly within such building and has no exterior signs or displays. 
(5) ?Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock in connection with a business or industrial use, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable district regulations. 
(6) ?Storage of goods used in or produced by industrial uses or related activities, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable district regulations. 
(7) ?Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, subject to the accessory off-street parking regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located. 
(8) ?Uses clearly incidental to a main use, such as, but not limited to, offices of an industrial or commercial complex located on the site of the commercial or industrial complex. 
(9) ?Accessory off-street loading, subject to the off-street loading regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located. 
(10) ?Accessory signs, subject to the sign regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located. 
(11) ?Common household gardening in a residential district when located only in the rear yard and/or nonrequired side yard areas. 
(12) ?Solar panel, wind generators, television reception antenna and air conditioning units. 
    Alley means any dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Alterations means any change, addition or modification in construction or type of occupancy, or in the structural members of a building such as walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, the consummated act of which may be referred to herein as "altered" or "reconstructed." 
    Amusement device means any machine or device which, upon the insertion of a coin, currency, slug, token, plate or disc, operates or may be operated as a game or contest of skill or amusement when the element of skill in such operation predominates over chance or luck. The term "amusement device" includes mechanical, electrical, or electronic video games, mechanical grabbing devices pinball games, mechanical, electrical, or electronic baseball, football, basketball, hockey and similar sports-type games, mechanical, electrical, or electronic card games, shooting games, target games, or any other machine, device or apparatus which may be used as a game of skill and wherein the player initiates, employs or directs any force generated by such machine. 
    Apartment, efficiency, means a dwelling unit consisting of not more than one room in addition to kitchen, dining and necessary sanitary facilities. 
    Apartments means a suite of rooms in a multiple-family building arranged and intended for a place of residence of a single-family or a group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit. 
    Arcade means any place open to the public in which four or more amusement devices are located for public use. 
    Architectural features means steps, window sills, belt courses, brick and/or wrought iron wing walls, chimneys, architraves, pediments. 
    Automobile repair, major, means the general repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles; collision service, such as body, frame or fender straightening and repair; and painting of automobiles. 
    Automobile repair, minor, means repairs other than major repair including engine tune up, muffler shops, shock absorber replacement shops, undercoating shops and tire stores. 
    Basement means that portion of a building which is partly or wholly below grade but so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the ceiling. A basement shall not be counted as a story. 

BASEMENT AND STORY 
    Bed and breakfast means a use which is subordinate to the principal use of a dwelling unit, and a use in which transient guests are provided sleeping room and board for payment. 
    Berm, obscuring, means an earthen mound of definite height and location to serve as an obscuring device in carrying out the requirements of this chapter. 
    Block means the property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), or between the nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, lake, river or live stream; or between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity or development, or corporate boundary lines of the city. 
    Board means the zoning board of appeals as established under this chapter. 
    Boardinghouse, roominghouse or lodginghouse means a building containing a single-dwelling unit and guestrooms providing lodging with or without meals, for compensation on a weekly, daily or monthly basis. 
    Boat or vessel means every description of watercraft used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water. 
    Building means any structures, either temporary or permanent, having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. The term "building" includes tents, awnings or vehicles situated on private property and used for such purposes. 
    Building height means the vertical distance measured from the established grade to the highest point of the roof surface for flat roofs; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the average height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. Where a building is located on sloping terrain, the height may be measured from the average ground level of the grade at the building wall (see illustration "building height") 

BUILDING HEIGHT 
    Building line means a line formed by the face of the building and, for the purposes of this article, the same as a front setback line (see illustration "building line"). 

BUILDING LINE 
    Building, main or principal, means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. 
    Child care center means a group facility for more than six children which gives care to children away from their homes. 
    Club means an organization of persons for special purposes or for the promulgation of sports, arts, sciences, literature, politics or the like, but not operated for profit. 
    Collector street (secondary thoroughfare) means a street used primarily to carry traffic from minor (local) streets to major thoroughfares. 
    Condominium subdivision plan means the site, survey and utility plans; floor plans; and sections, as appropriate, showing the existing and proposed structures and improvements including the location thereof on the land. 
    Condominium subdivision (site condominium) means a method of subdivision where land ownership of sites is regulated by the condominium act, Public Act No. 59 of 1978 (MCL 559.101 et seq.) as opposed to the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.). The term "condominium subdivision" shall be equivalent to the term "subdivision" as used in this chapter and the subdivision regulations in chapter 22. 
    Convalescent or nursing home means a structure with sleeping rooms, where persons are housed or lodged and are furnished with meals, nursing and limited medical care. 
    Day care home for elderly adults means a one-family dwelling which receives not more than six elderly or infirmed adults for care during the day. 
    Development means the construction of a new building or other structure on a zoning lot, the relocation of an existing building on another zoning lot, or the use of open land for a new use. 
    District means a portion of the incorporated area of the city within which certain regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Drive-in means an establishment where food, frozen desserts or beverages are sold to the customers in a ready-to-consume state and where the customer consumes food, frozen dessert or beverages in an automobile parked upon the premises or at other facilities provided for customers which are located outside the building. 
    Drive-through means an establishment so developed that some portion of its retail or service character is dependent upon providing a driveway approach and staging area specifically designed for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while in their motor vehicles, rather than within a building or structure, for carrying out and consumption or use after the vehicle is removed from the premises. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family, means a building or a portion thereof designed exclusively for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other. 
    Dwelling, one-family, means a building designed for and occupied exclusively by one family. 
    Dwelling, two-family, means a building designed exclusively for occupancy by two families living independently of each other. 
    Dwelling unit, manufactured, means a dwelling unit which is substantially built, constructed, assembled and finished off the premises upon which it is intended to be located. 
    Dwelling unit, site-built, means a dwelling unit which is substantially built, constructed, assembled and finished on the premises which is intended to serve as its final location. Site-built dwelling units shall include dwelling units constructed of precut materials and panelized wall, roof and floor sections when such sections require substantial assembly and finishing on the premises which is intended to serve as its final location. 
    Erected means built, constructed, altered, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on the premises which are required for construction, excavation, fill, drainage and the like shall be considered a part of erection. 
    Essential services means the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments of underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, steam, fuel or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals and hydrants in connection herewith, but not including buildings which are necessary for the furnishing of adequate service to the city by such utilities or municipal departments for the general health, safety or welfare. Wireless communication towers, devices and facilities are not defined as an essential service. 
    Excavation means any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and ground care. 
    Family means one or more persons related by blood, marriage, civil union, or adoption; or a group of not more than four persons who need not be so related and who are living together in a dwelling unit and maintaining a common household. 
    Family child care home means a private home in which one but fewer than seven minor children are received for care and supervision for compensation for periods of less than 24 hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. The term "family child care home" includes a home in which care is given to an unrelated minor child for more than four weeks during a calendar year. A family child care home does not include an individual providing babysitting services for another individual. As used in this section, the term "providing babysitting services" means caring for a child on behalf of the child's parent or guardian when the annual compensation for providing those services does not equal or exceed $600.00 or an amount that would, according to the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, obligate the child's parent or guardian to provide a form 1099-MISC to the individual for compensation paid during the calendar year for those services. 
    Farm. 
(1) ?The term "farm" means all of the contiguous neighboring or associated land operated as a single unit on which bona fide farming is carried on directly by the owner-operator, manager or tenant farmer, by his own labor or with the assistance of members of his household or hired employees; provided, however, that land to be considered a farm hereunder shall include a continuous parcel of five acres or more in area; provided further, farms may be considered as including establishments operated as bona fide green-houses, nurseries, orchards, chicken hatcheries, poultry farms and apiaries; but establishments keeping or operating fur-bearing animals, riding or boarding stables, commercial dog kennels, stone quarries or gravel sand pits shall not be considered farms hereunder unless combined with bona fide farm operations on the same continuous tract of land of not less than 20 acres. 
(2) ?No farms shall be operated as piggeries or for the disposal of garbage, sewage, rubbish, offal or rendering plants, or for the slaughtering of animals except such animals as have been raised on the premises for at least a period of one year immediately prior thereto and for the use and consumption by persons residing on the premises. 
    Fence means a manmade structure or plant materials installed for the purpose of or to have the effect of enclosing or screening an area. 
    Fence, ornamental, means a manmade structure, the surface area of which is more than 75 percent open, to include plant materials not exceeding three feet six inches in height. Ornamental fences shall not be of chainlink or wire construction. 
    Filling means the depositing or dumping of any matter onto or into the ground, except common household gardening and ground care. 
    Floor area, residential, means for the purposes of computing the minimum allowable floor area in a residential dwelling unit, the sum of the horizontal areas of each story of the building shall be measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls. The floor area measurement is exclusive of areas of basements, unfinished attics, attached garages, breezeways, and enclosed and unenclosed porches (see illustration "basic structural terms"). 

BASIC STRUCTURAL TERMS 
    Floor area, usable (for purposes of computing parking lot), means that area used for or intended to be used for the sale of merchandise or services, or for use to serve patrons, clients or customers. Such floor area which is used or intended to be used principally for the storage or processing of merchandise, hallways or for utilities or sanitary facilities, shall be excluded from this computation of usable floor area. Measurement of usable floor area shall be the sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls. 

FLOOR AREA 
    Garage sale means any sale of tangible personal property of any description whatsoever, which is advertised by any means whereby the public is, or can be made, aware of such, and includes all such sales commonly known as attic, lawn or rummage sales. The term "garage sale" does not include business or trade sales which are regulated by any other ordinance of the city. 
    Gasoline service station means a place for the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuels directly to users of motor vehicles, together with the sale of minor accessories and services for motor vehicles but not including major automobile repair. 
    Grade means the ground elevation or height of land on a site or a parcel for the purpose of regulating the height of a building. When referring to "building grade," it shall mean the elevation of the ground at the edge of a building. Generally, the building grade of a building shall be set at 18 inches above the road at a point adjacent to the building if the ground is level. If the ground is not entirely level, the building grade shall be the average elevation of the ground at each face or side of the building. 
    Greenbelt means a strip of land of definite width and location reserved for the planting of shrubs and/or trees to serve as an obscuring screen or buffer strip in carrying out the requirements of this chapter. 
    Group child care home means a private home in which more than six but not more than 12 minor children are given care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. Group child care home includes a home in which care is given to an unrelated minor child for more than four weeks during a calendar year. 
    Guarantee means a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter or credit, or such other instrument acceptable to the city. 
    Guestroom means a sleeping room offered for compensation for permanent or transient occupancy containing no less than 100 square feet, measured from the interior faces of the walls of such room. 
    Hardship means situations created by circumstances unique to an individual property that do not generally occur to land or buildings in the neighborhood or zoning district of the property in question and which circumstances make the use of such property infeasible under conditions imposed by this chapter. The term "hardship" shall not include personal or financial hardship or economic disadvantage nor shall it constitute circumstances that are self-created. 
    Home occupation means an occupation carried on by an occupant of a dwelling unit as a secondary use which is clearly subservient to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes. 
    Hospice means a lodging place for the ill where persons are housed and furnished meals and attendant care. 
    Hotel means a building or part of a building, with a common entrance in which the dwelling units or rooming units are used primarily for transient occupancy, and in which one or more of the following services are offered: maid service, furnishing of linen, telephone, secretarial or desk service, and bellboy service. A hotel may include a restaurant or cocktail lounge, public banquet halls, ballrooms or meeting rooms. 
    Improvements means those features and actions associated with a project which are considered necessary by the city to protect natural resources or the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city, and future users or inhabitants of the proposed project or project area, including parking areas, landscaping, roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, screening and drainage. Improvements do not include the entire project which is the subject of zoning approval. 
    Junkyard means an area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. The term "junkyard" includes automobile wrecking yards and includes any open area of more than 200 square feet for storage, keeping or abandonment of junk. 
    Kennel, commercial, means any lot or premises on which three or more dogs, cats or other household pets are either permanently or temporarily boarded or bred and raised for remuneration. 
    Loading space means an off-street space on the same lot with a building or group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials. 
    Lot means a parcel of land occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a main building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for the principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such yards and open spaces as are required under the provisions of this chapter. A lot may or may not be specifically designated as such on public records. The term "lot" shall mean the same as homesite and condominium unit in site condominium developments. 
    Lot area means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot where the interior angle of two adjacent sides at the intersection of two streets is less than 135 degrees. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot for the purposes of this article if the arc is of less radius than 150 feet and the tangents to the curve, at the two points where the lot lines meet the curve or the straight street line extended, form an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
    Lot coverage means that percent of the total lot area occupied by buildings, including accessory buildings (see illustration "lots and areas"). 
    Lot depth means the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured along the median between the side lot lines. 
    Lot, double-frontage, means any interior lot (through lot) having frontage on two more or less parallel streets as distinguished from a corner lot. In case of a row of double-frontage lots, all sides of said lots adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and front yards shall be provided as required (see illustration "interior, through and corner lots"). 
    Lot, interior, means any lot other than a corner lot (see illustration "interior, through and corner lots"). 

INTERIOR, THROUGH AND CORNER LOTS 
    Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot as defined herein: 
(1) ?Front lot line. In the case of an interior lot, that line separating such lot from the street. In case of a corner lot or double-frontage lot, that line separating such lot from that street which is designated as the front street in the plat and in the application for a certificate occupancy. 
(2) ?Rear lot line. The opposite the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten feet long lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot. 
(3) ?Side lot line. Any lot line other than the front or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line. 

LOTS AND AREAS 
    Lot of record means a parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a recorded plat on file with the county register of deeds at the time of adoption of this chapter or in common use by municipal or county officials and which actually exists as so shown, or any part of such parcel held in a record ownership separate from that of the remainder thereof. 
    Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at the two points where the building line, or setback, intersects the side lot lines. 
    Lot, zoning, means a single tract of, land, located within a single block which, at the time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. 
    Main building means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot upon which it is situated. 
    Main use means the principal use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose for which the premises exist. 
    Major thoroughfare means an arterial street which is intended to serve as a large volume trafficway for both the immediate municipal area and the region beyond, and is designated as a major thoroughfare, parkway, freeway, expressway or equivalent term on the major thoroughfare plan to identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the major thoroughfare plan. 
    Master plan means the comprehensive community plan, including graphic and written proposals indicating the general location for streets, parks, schools, public buildings and all physical development of the city, and includes any unit or part of such plan, and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof. 
    Mezzanine/loft means an intermediate floor in a story occupying not more than one-third of the floor area of such story. 
    Mini storage units means storage buildings for lease to the general public for storage of office or business effects not including the warehousing of products or supplies. 
    Mobile home means any building or structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a chassis and designed to be sold as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained in the structure. The term "mobile home" does not include recreational equipment. 
    Mobile home park means a parcel or tract of land under the control of a person upon which three or more mobile homes are located on a continual nonrecreational basis and which is offered to the public for that purpose regardless of whether a charge is made therefore, together with any building, structure, enclosure, street, equipment, or facility used or intended for use incidental to the occupancy of a mobile home. 
    Motel means a series of attached, semidetached or detached rental units containing a bedroom and closet space. Units shall provide for overnight lodging and are offered to the public for compensation, and shall cater primarily to the public traveling by motor vehicle. 
    Nonconforming structure means a structure or portion thereof lawfully existing at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to the provisions of the ordinance in the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming use means a use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming use or structure, class A, means a nonconforming use or structure which has been designated to be allowed to be perpetuated and improved under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Nonconforming use or structure, class B, means a nonconforming use or structure which has been designated to be allowed to be continued within the restricted provisions of this chapter. 
    Nuisance factors means an offensive, annoying, unpleasant or obnoxious thing or practice, a cause or source of annoyance, especially a continuing or repeating invasion of any physical characteristics of activity or use across a property line which can be perceived by or affects a human being, or the generation of an excessive or concentrated movement of people or things, such as, but not limited to: 
(1) ?Noise; 
(2) ?Dust; 
(3) ?Smoke; 
(4) ?Odor; 
(5) ?Glare; 
(6) ?Fumes; 
(7) ?Flashes; 
(8) ?Vibration; 
(9) ?Shock waves; 
(10) ?Heat; 
(11) ?Electronic or atomic radiation; 
(12) ?Objectionable effluent; 
(13) ?Noise of congregation of people, particularly at night; 
(14) ?Passenger traffic; 
(15) ?Invasion of nonabutting street frontage by traffic; 
(16) ?A burned structure; 
(17) ?A condemned structure. 
    Nursery, plant materials, means a space, building or structure, or combination thereof, for the storage of live trees, shrubs or plants offered for retail sale on the premises including products used for gardening or landscaping. The term "nursery," within the meaning of this chapter, does not include any space, building or structure used for the sale of fruits, vegetables or Christmas trees. 
    Nursery school means a facility which has as its main objective a development program for preschool children and whose staff meets the educational requirements established by the state. 
    Nursing home means a structure with sleeping rooms where persons are housed or lodged and are furnished with meals, nursing and medical care. 
    Off-street parking lot means a facility providing off-street vehicular parking spaces and drives or aisles for the parking of more than three vehicles. 
    Open storage means the storage of any materials or objects outside the confines of a building. 
    Parking means the parking of a motor vehicle for short duration, and possessing the element of a vehicle in use, being temporarily parked or placed until it is about to be again put into service or use. Temporary, for the purpose of this definition, shall be measured by hours or at most by not more than three days. 
    Parking spaces means an area of definite length and width, said area shall be exclusive of drives, aisles or entrances giving access thereto, and shall be fully accessible for the parking of permitted vehicles. 
    Performance standards means criterion developed to control nuisance factors. 
    Plot plan means a plan drawn for use in applying for a building permit as required by this chapter. 
    Principal use means the main use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose for which the premises exist. 
    Private club means a facility intended to house the activities of fraternal organizations or other organizations which are not generally open to the public but are established for special purposes, such as for the promulgation of the arts, sciences, literature or the like. 
    Public utility means a person, firm, cooperation, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal, state, or municipal regulations to the public: gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication, telegraph, transportation or water. 
    Reasonable accommodation use means provisions for providing housing opportunities suited for the needs of persons entitle to housing accommodation under law. 
    Recreational equipment means travel trailers, camp trailers, truck camber bodies, folding tent trailers, utility trailers, horse trailers, snowmobiles, off-road vehicles or any other altered vehicles designed for off-road use as well as any trailers or other transportation equipment designed for, or used in conjunction with, any of the above listed items. Also manufactured motor busses or any vehicle of a like or similar nature uses, or designed for use, as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, or vacation purposes. The term "recreational equipment" includes not only all specially listed items, but all items of a like or similar nature. 
    Setback means the distance required to obtain front, side or rear yard open space provisions of this chapter. 
    Sign. The term "sign" includes the following definitions: 
(1) ?Sign means any announcement, declaration, display, billboard, illustration and insignia when designed and placed so as to attract general public attention. The term "sign" shall include any banner, bulbs or other lighting devices, streamer, pennant, inflated or deflated membrane device, propeller, flag (other than the official flag of any nation or state) and any similar device of any type or kind whether bearing lettering or not. 
a. ?Decorative display means a decorative, temporary display designed for the entertainment or cultural enrichment of the public and having no direct or indirect sales or advertising content. 
b. ?Freestanding sign means a sign, other than a ground sign or portable sign, which is not attached to a building and is capable of being moved from one location to another on the site on which it is located. 
c. ?Ground sign means a permanent display sign supported by one or more columns, uprights or braces or mounted directly in and upon the ground surface and having a height not in excess of six feet. 
d. ?Marquee sign means a sign on or attached to a permanent overhanging shelter that projects from the face of the building and is supported entirely by the building. 
e. ?Portable sign means a sign and sign structure which is designed to facilitate the movement of the sign from one zoning lot to another. The sign may or may not have wheels, changeable lettering and or hitches for towing. A sign shall be considered portable only if such sign is manifestly designed to be portable to manifest its movement form one zoning lot to another. Signs utilized to be movable, other than from one zoning lot to another, shall be considered freestanding signs under this chapter. 
f. ?Projecting sign means a sign which is affixed to any building or structure, other than a marquee, and any part of which extends beyond the building wall or structure more than 15 inches. 
g. ?Pole sign means a display sign supported by one or more columns, uprights or braces in the ground surface and having a height in excess of six feet. 
h. ?Temporary sign means a display sign, banner or other advertising device constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, plastic or other light temporary material, inflated devices with or without a structural frame, or any other sign intended for a limited period of display, but not including decorative displays for holidays or public events. 
i. ?Wall sign means a display sign which is painted on or attached directly to the building wall. 
(2) ?Sign, accessory, means a sign which pertains to the principal use of the premises. 
(3) ?Sign, nonaccessory, means a sign which does not pertain to the principal use of the premises. 
(4) ?Sign, alteration, means the changing, enlarging or relocating of any sign, excluding the changing of movable parts of an approved sign that is designed for such changes or the repainting or reposting of original display matter, shall be deemed an alteration. 
(5) ?Erect means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, suspend, affix or paint. 
    Single housekeeping unit means all of the associated rooms in a dwelling unit available to and occupied by all of the occupants with a single set of cooking facilities also available to all of the occupants of the dwelling unit. 
    Site condominium. The following definitions are related to site condominiums: 
(1) ?Condominium act means Public Act No. 59 of 1978 (MCL 559.101 et seq.). 
(2) ?Condominium documents means the master deed, recorded pursuant to the condominium act, and any other instrument referred to in the master deed or bylaws which affects the rights and obligations of a co-owner in the condominium. 
(3) ?Condominium subdivision plan means the drawings and information prepared in accordance with section 66 of the condominium act (MCL 559.166). 
(4) ?Condominium unit means that portion of the condominium project designed and intended for separate ownership and use, as described in the master deed, regardless of whether it is intended for residential, office, industrial, business, recreational, use as a timeshare unit, or any other type of use. 
(5) ?Consolidating master deed means the final amended master deed for a contractible or expandable condominium project, or a condominium project containing convertible land or convertible space, which final amended master deed fully describes the condominium project as completed. 
(6) ?Contractible condominium means a condominium project from which any portion of the submitted land or buildings may be withdrawn in accordance with this chapter and the condominium act. 
(7) ?Conversion condominium means a condominium project containing condominium units some or all of which were occupied before the filing of a notice of taking reservations under section 71 of the condominium act (MCL 559.171). 
(8) ?Expandable condominium means a condominium project to which additional land may be added in accordance with this chapter and the condominium act. 
(9) ?Master deed means the condominium document recording the condominium project to which are attached as exhibits and incorporated by reference the bylaws for the project and the condominium subdivision plan for the project, and all other information required by section 8 of the condominium act. 
(10) ?Notice to proceed action means the notice required by section 71 of the condominium act (MCL 559.171), to be filed with the city and other agencies. 
(11) ?Site condominium means a condominium development containing residential, commercial, office, industrial or other structures for uses permitted in the zoning district in which located, in which each co-owner owns exclusive rights to a parcel of and herein defined as a condominium unit, as described in the master deed, as well as described space in a building located in a condominium unit. 
(12) ?Yards, condominium subdivisions (site condominiums), means: 
a. ?Front yard setback shall be equal to the distance between the front yard area line and the condominium dwelling. 
b. ?Rear yard setback shall be equal to the distance between the side yard area line and the condominium dwelling. 
c. ?Side yard setback shall be equal to the distance between the side yard area line and the condominium dwelling. 
    Story means that part of a building, except a mezzanine as defined herein, included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the next floor or, if there is no floor above, then the ceiling next above. The term "story" shall not be counted as a story when more than 50 percent, by cubic content, is below the height level of the adjoining ground. 
    Story, half , means an uppermost story lying under a sloping roof, the usable floor area of which, at a height of four feet above the floor does not exceed two-thirds of the floor area in the story directly below, and the height above at least 200 square feet of floor space is seven feet six inches. 
    Street means a right-of-way dedicated to public use which provides vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, lane or however otherwise designated. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground except walls or pavement. 
    Subdivide or subdivision means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors, or assigns for the purpose of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building development that results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and that is not exempted from the platting requirements of this state law by MCL 560.108 and 560.109. The term "subdivide" or "subdivision" does not include a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel; and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of state law or the requirements of an applicable local ordinance. 
    Temporary use of building means a use or building permitted by the board of appeals to exist during periods of construction of the main building or use for special events or as otherwise permitted in this chapter. 
    Tourist home means a building containing a single dwelling unit and guestrooms offered to the public for compensation and catering primarily to the public traveling by motor vehicle. 
    Usable floor area means, for the purposes of computing parking, that area used or intended to be used for the sale of merchandise or services or for use to serve patrons, clients or customers. Such floor area which is used or intended to be used principally for the storage of processing of merchandise or for utilities shall be excluded from this computation of "usable floor area." Measurement of floor area shall be the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls (see illustration "floor area"). 
    Use means the purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed, or intended or for which land or a building is or may be occupied. 
    Wall (fence) means a completely obscuring structure of definite height and location to serve as an obscuring screen in carrying out the requirements of this chapter. 
    Yard means the open spaces on the same lot with a main building unoccupied and unobstructed form the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this chapter, and as defined herein: 
(1) ?Front yard means an open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest point of the main building. All yards abutting on a street shall be considered as front yards for setback purposes and all lots having water frontage shall consider both the street side and waterfront as front yards for setback purposes. 
(2) ?Rear yard means an open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest point of the main building. In the case of a corner lot, the rear yard shall be opposite the front building facade side of such lot. 
(3) ?Side yard means an open space between a main building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point on the side lot line to the nearest point of the main building. 
(4) ?Side yard, interior, means a side yard abutting a side yard on an adjacent lot. 
(5) ?Side yard, exterior, means a side yard abutting a street. 

YARDS 
(Ord. No. 96-5, §§ 201—208, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 98-2, 3-3-1998; Ord. No. 98-2, 3-3-1999; Ord. No. 2000-2, 3-21-2000; Ord. No. 2000-05, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 2006-02, 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 50-4. - Zoning exceptions and variances. 
    A use permitted only after review of an application by the board of appeals or planning commission other than the administrative official (building inspector), such review being necessary because the provisions of this article covering conditions, precedent or subsequent, are not precise enough to all applications without interpretation and such review is required by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-6-2005; Ord. No. 96-5, § 209, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-5. - Repeal of prior ordinances. 
    Any and all previous ordinances adopted by the city and all amendments thereto are hereby repealed. The repeal of the above ordinances and their amendments does not affect or impair any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued or acquired or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time enforced, prosecuted or inflicted. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, art. XXII, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-6. - Interpretation. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience or general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with any existing provisions of law or ordinance other than the above described zoning chapter or with any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to the law relating to the use of buildings or premises; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than is required by existing ordinance or by rules, regulations or permits, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, art. XXIII, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-7. - Vested right. 
    Nothing in this chapter should be interpreted or construed to give rise to any permanent vested rights in the continuation of any particular use, district, zoning classification or any permissible activities therein; and they are hereby declared to be subject to subsequent amendment, change or modification as may be necessary to the preservation or protection of public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, art. XXIV, 3-5-1996) 
Secs. 50-8—50-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ZONING DISTRICTS, MAPS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 50-33. - City areas. 
    For the purpose of convenience, the city is hereby divided into areas which are placed on maps as hereafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 300, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-34. - Zoning districts. 
    For the purposes of this article, the city is hereby divided into the following zoning districts: 
Residential Districts R-1 One-Family Residential District R-2 One-Family Residential District R-3 One- and Two-Family Residential District RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential District RM-2 Multiple-Family Residential District Nonresidential Districts MB Marina Business District CBD Central Business District GB General Business District I Industrial District P Parking District WP Waterfront Park District  
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 301, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-35. - Zoning maps. 
    Each area shall be set forth on a map containing such information as may be acceptable to the council and showing by appropriate means the various districts into which the area is divided, which map shall be entitled "Zoning District Map(s) of the City of Algonac," and shall bear the date adopted or amended, and it shall be the duty of the city mayor and clerk to authenticate such records by placing their official signatures thereon. All such maps with all explanatory matter thereon are hereby made a part of this article and shall be as much a part of this article as if the matters and information set forth thereon were all fully described herein. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 302, 3-5-1996) 
Editor's note— The zoning map referred to in section 302 has not been reproduced herein but is available for inspection in appropriate city offices. 
Sec. 50-36. - District boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the districts established in this article as shown on the zoning district map, the following rules shall be applied: 
(1) ?Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets or highways, street lines or highway right-of-way lines, such centerlines, street lines or highway right-of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(2) ?Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately parallel to the centerlines of streets or the centerlines of right-of-way lines of the highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distances therefrom as indicated on the zoning district map. If no such distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the zoning district map. 
(3) ?Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(4) ?Where the boundary of a district follows a stream, lake or other body of water, such boundary line shall be deemed to be located midway between opposite shores. 
(5) ?Where the boundary of a district follows a subdivision boundary line, such boundary line shall be construed to be such district boundary line. 
(6) ?Where unzoned property may exist or where, due to the scale, lack of detail or illegibility of the zoning district map accompanying the ordinance from which this article is derived, there is any uncertainty, contradiction or conflict as to the intended location of any district boundaries shown thereon, interpretation concerning the exact location of district boundary lines shall be determined, upon written application or upon its own motion, by the board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 303, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-37. - Zoning text. 
    Where uncertainty exists with respect to uses permitted in any district, or any condition set forth in this chapter, the following rules shall apply: 
(1) ?No use of land shall be permitted in any use district except those uses specifically set forth in the district. 
(2) ?Uses or structures not specifically permitted in a zoning district shall be prohibited in such district. 
(3) ?Unless otherwise provided for in this article where uses of yard areas are indicated as being permitted, the use of any other yard area for additional use shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 304, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-38. - Zoning of vacated areas. 
    Wherever any street, alley or other public way within the city shall be vacated, such street, alley or other public way or portion thereof shall automatically be classified in the same zoning district as the property to which it attaches. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 305, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-39. - Zoning of annexed areas. 
    Any area annexed to the city shall immediately upon such annexation be automatically classified as an R-1 district until a zoning district map for such area has been adopted by the council. The planning commission shall recommend appropriate zoning for such area within three months after the matter is referred to it by the council. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 306, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-40. - District requirements. 
    All buildings and uses in any district shall be subject to the provisions of article XV, general provisions, and article XVI, general exceptions, of this chapter. Uses for enterprises or purposes that are contrary to federal, state, or local laws or ordinances are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 307, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 50-41. - Imposition of conditions precedent to approval of uses subject to special conditions. 
(a) ?Mandatory conditions precedent. The planning commission shall impose on all special use permits granted under this article the following conditions precedent: 
(1) ?It must determine that the proposed special use harmoniously co-exists with the adjacent land uses and the surrounding neighborhood in general; 
(2) ?It must determine that the proposed special use promotes and protects the public health, safety, tranquility, or general welfare of a zoning district, including, but not limited to, those reasonably calculated to reduce or minimize the hazards to vehicular or pedestrian traffic; and 
(3) ?In furtherance of these determinations, traffic, market, environmental and other reports as deemed necessary to make an informed determination may be ordered. 
(b) ?Optional conditions precedent. The planning commission may act to protect the best interest of the city and the surrounding property within the zoning district, or an adjacent district, and to achieve the objectives of this chapter by adding additional conditions precedent. 
(c) ?Conditions imposed pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall meet all of the following requirements: 
(1) ?Be designed to protect the public health, safety, tranquility, and general welfare; the social and economic well-being of both residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed land use or activity, and the surrounding neighborhood generally; those who will use the land use or activity under consideration; the city's natural resources; and the community as a whole. 
(2) ?Be related to the valid exercise of the police power, and purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity. 
(3) ?Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this article, be related to the standards established in the ordinance for the land use or activity under consideration, and be necessary to ensure compliance with those standards. 
(d) ?The conditions imposed with respect to the approval of a special land use or activity shall be recorded in the record of the approval action, and shall remain unchanged except upon the mutual consent of the planning commission and the landowner. The planning commission shall maintain a record of conditions that are changed. 
(e) ?The conditions imposed by this section shall occur contemporaneously and in conjunction with the reviews referenced in sections 50-82, 50-112, 50-142, 50-172, 50-202, 50-230, 50-258, 50-284, 50-309 and 50-339. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 307, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. ZOA-2016-01, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 50-42. - Conditional rezoning. 
    It is recognized that there are certain instances where it would be in the best interests of the city, as well as advantageous to property owners seeking a change in zoning boundaries, if certain conditions could be proposed by property owners as part of a request for rezoning. It is the intent of this section to provide a process consistent with the provisions of section 405, Michigan zoning enabling act, Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3405) by which an owner seeking a rezoning may voluntarily propose conditions regarding the use and/or development of land as part of the rezoning request. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 308, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-43. - Application and offer of conditions. 
(a) ?An owner of land may voluntarily offer in writing conditions relating to the use and/or development of land for which a rezoning is requested. This offer may be made either at the time the application for rezoning is filed, or may be made at a later time during the rezoning process. 
(b) ?The required application and process for considering a rezoning request with conditions shall be the same as that for considering rezoning requests made without any offer of conditions, except as modified by the requirements of this section. 
(c) ?The owner's offer of conditions may not purport to authorize uses or developments not permitted in the requested new zoning district. 
(d) ?The owner's offer of conditions shall bear a reasonable and rational relationship to the property for which rezoning is requested. 
(e) ?Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that would require a special land use permit under the terms of this article may only be commenced if a special land use permit for such use or development is ultimately granted in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(f) ?Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that require variance under the terms of this article may only be commenced if a variance for such use or development is ultimately granted by the zoning board of appeals in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(g) ?Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that would require site plan approval under the terms of this article may only be commenced if site plan approval for such use or development is ultimately granted in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(h) ?The offer of conditions may be amended during the process of rezoning consideration provided that any amendments or additional conditions are entered voluntarily by the owner. An owner may withdraw all or part of its offer of conditions any time prior to final rezoning action, provided that if such withdrawal occurs subsequent to the planning commission's public hearing on the original rezoning request, then the rezoning application shall be referred to the planning commission for a new public hearing with appropriate notice and a new recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 308(1), 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-44. - Planning commission review. 
    The planning commission, after public hearing and consideration of the factors for rezoning, shall recommend approval, approval with recommended changes or denial of the rezoning; provided, however, that any recommended changes to the offer of conditions are acceptable to and thereafter offered by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 308(2), 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-45. - City council review. 
    After receipt of the planning commission's recommendations, the city council shall deliberate upon the requested rezoning and may approve or deny the conditional rezoning request. The city council's deliberations shall include, but not be limited to, a consideration of the factors for rezoning of this chapter. Should the city council consider amendments to the proposed conditional rezoning advisable and if such contemplated amendments to the offer of conditions are acceptable to and thereafter offered by the owner, then the city council shall, in accordance with section 405 of the Michigan zoning enabling act (MCL 125.3405), refer such amendments to the planning commission for a report thereon within a time specified by the city council and proceed thereafter in accordance with said statute to deny or approve the conditional rezoning with or without amendments. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 308(3), 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-46. - Approval. 
(a) ?If the city council finds the rezoning request and offer of conditions acceptable, the offered conditions shall be incorporated into a formal written statement of conditions acceptable to the owner and conforming in form to the provisions of this section. The statement of conditions shall be incorporated by attachment or otherwise as an inseparable part of the ordinance adopted by the city council to accomplish the requested zoning. 
(b) ?The statement of conditions shall: 
(1) ?Be in a form recordable with the register of deeds of the county or, in the alternative, be accompanied by a recordable affidavit, or memorandum prepared and signed by the owner giving notice of the statement of conditions in a manner acceptable to the city council. 
(2) ?Contain a legal description of the land to which it pertains. 
(3) ?Contain a statement acknowledging that the statement of conditions runs with the land and is binding upon successor owners of the land. 
(4) ?Incorporate by attachment or reference any diagram, plans or other documents submitted or approved by the owner that are necessary to illustrate the implementation of the statement of conditions. If any such documents are incorporated by reference, the reference shall specify where the document may be examined. 
(5) ?Contain a statement acknowledging that the statement of conditions or an affidavit or memorandum giving notice thereof may be recorded by the city with the register of deeds of the county. 
(6) ?Contain the notarized signatures of all of the owners of the subject land preceded by a statement attesting to the fact that they voluntarily offer and consent to the provisions contained within the statement of conditions. 
(c) ?Upon rezoning taking effect, the zoning map shall be amended to reflect the new zoning classification along with a designation that the land was rezoned with a statement of conditions. The city clerk shall maintain a listing of all lands rezoned with a statement of conditions. 
(d) ?The approved statement of conditions or an affidavit or memorandum giving notice thereof shall be filed by the city with the register of deeds of the county. The city council shall have authority to waive this requirement if it determines that, given the nature of the conditions and/or the time frame within which the conditions are to be satisfied, the recording of such a document would be of no material benefit to the city or to any subsequent owner of the land. 
(e) ?Upon the rezoning taking effect, the use of the land so rezoned shall conform thereafter to all of the requirements regulating use and development within the new zoning district as modified by any more restrictive provisions contained in the statement of conditions. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 308(4), 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-47. - Compliance with conditions. 
(a) ?Any person who establishes a development or commences a use upon land that has been rezoned with conditions shall continuously operate and maintain the development or use in compliance with all of the conditions set forth in the statement of conditions. Any failure to comply with a condition contained within the statement of conditions shall constitute a violation of this chapter and be punishable accordingly. Additionally, any such violation shall be deemed a nuisance per se and subject to judicial abatement as provided by law. 
(b) ?No permit or approval shall be granted under this article for any use or development that is contrary to an applicable statement of conditions. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 308(5), 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-48. - Time period for establishing development or use. 
    Unless another time period is specified in the ordinance rezoning the subject land, the approved development and/or use of the land pursuant to building and other required permits must be commenced upon the land within 18 months after the rezoning took effect and thereafter proceed diligently to completion. This time limitation may upon written request be extended by city council if: 
(1) ?It is demonstrated to the city council's reasonable satisfaction that there is a strong likelihood that the development and/or use will commence within the period of extension and proceed diligently thereafter to completion; and 
(2) ?The city council finds that there has not been a change in circumstances that would render the current zoning with statement of conditions incompatible with other zones and uses in the surrounding area or otherwise inconsistent with sound zoning policy. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 308(6), 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-49. - Reversion of zoning. 
    If approved development and/or use of the rezoned land do not occur within the time frame specified under section 50-48, then the land shall revert to its former zoning classification as set forth in the Michigan zoning enabling act (MCL 125.3405). The reversion process shall be initiated by the city council requesting that the planning commission proceed with consideration of rezoning of the land to its former zoning classification. The procedure for considering and making this reversionary rezoning shall thereafter be the same as applies to all other rezoning requests. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 308(7), 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-50. - Subsequent rezoning of land. 
    When land that is rezoned with a statement of conditions is thereafter rezoned to a different zoning classification or to the same zoning classification but with a different or no statement of conditions, whether as a result of a reversion of zoning pursuant to section 50-49 or otherwise, the statement of conditions imposed under the former zoning classification shall cease to be in effect. Upon the owner's written request, the city clerk shall record with the register of deeds of the county that the statement of conditions is no longer in effect. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 308(8), 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-51. - Amendment of conditions. 
    During the time period for commencement of an approved development or use specified pursuant to section 50-48 or during any extension thereof granted by the city council the city shall not add to or alter the conditions in the statement of conditions. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 308(9), 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-52. - City right to rezone. 
    Nothing in the statement of conditions nor in the provisions of this section shall be deemed to prohibit the city from rezoning all or any portion of land that is subject to a statement of conditions to another zoning classification. Any rezoning shall be conducted in compliance with this chapter and the Michigan zoning enabling act (MCL 125.3405). 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 308(10), 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-53. - Failure to offer conditions. 
    The city shall not require an owner to offer conditions as a requirement for rezoning. The lack of an offer of conditions shall not affect an owner's rights under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 1, 8-18-2009; Ord. No. 96-5, § 308(11), 3-5-1996) 
Secs. 50-54—50-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - R-1 AND R-2 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 50-80. - Preamble. 
    The one-family residential districts established by this article are designed to provide for one-family dwelling sites and residentially related uses in keeping with the master plan of residential development in the city. In addition, the preservation of natural terrain and wooded areas is reflected in the controls set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, art. IV, preamble, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-81. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a one-family residential district (R-1 and R-2), no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this article: 
(1) ?One-family detached dwellings. 
(2) ?State-licensed residential facilities, which would include adult foster care family homes, foster family homes and foster family group homes, as required by section 206 of Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3206). 
(3) ?Farms. 
(4) ?Publicly owned and operated libraries, parks, parkways and recreational facilities. 
(5) ?Cemeteries. 
(6) ?Public, parochial and other private elementary schools offering courses in general education and not operated for profit. 
(7) ?Home occupation in compliance with section 204 of Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3204) and the following provisions: 
a. ?Home occupation shall not be permitted if said home occupation: 
1. ?Changes the outside appearance of the residential character of the dwelling; 
2. ?Occupies more than 25 percent of the ground floor area or basement of the dwelling; 
3. ?Requires the employment of anyone in the home or as a contract employee other than the dwelling occupants; 
4. ?Generates excessive traffic, parking, sewage, or water use; 
5. ?Requires parking for customers that cannot be accommodated on the site and/or not exceeding one parking space at curbside in the street; 
6. ?Creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or results in electrical interference, or becomes a nuisance; 
7. ?Results in outside storage or display of anything, including signs; 
8. ?Requires the delivery of goods or the visit of customers before 6:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. 
b. ?The following are permitted home occupations provided they do not violate the provisions of subsection (7)a of this section. 
1. ?Dressmaking, sewing, and tailoring; 
2. ?Laundering and ironing. 
3. ?Home crafts, such as model making, rug weaving, and lapidary work; 
4. ?Painting, sculpturing, or writing; 
5. ?Telephone answering; 
6. ?Computer application; not including sale of computers; 
7. ?Salesperson office or home office of a professional person; 
8. ?Tutoring, music, or dance teaching, limited to four students at a time; 
9. ?Repair of clocks, instruments, or other small appliances which do not create a nuisance due to noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or results in electrical interference; 
10. ?Child care family home. 
c. ?The following are not permitted as home occupations: 
1. ?Private clubs; 
2. ?Repair shops which create a nuisance due to noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference; 
3. ?Restaurants; 
4. ?Stables or kennels; 
5. ?Vehicle repair or paint shops. 
d. ?Any proposed home occupation not referenced in subsections (7)b and c of this section may be permitted subject to the conditions set forth in subsection (7)a and subject to further review and approval by the planning commission pursuant to the procedure set forth in section 50-82. 
e. ?Home occupation permits shall be limited to applicants who legally reside in the residence. 
(8) ?The mooring of no more than three boats on vacant residential lots between the dates of April 1 and November 1. 
(9) ?Accessory building and uses, customarily incident to any of the above uses, provided such buildings and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 400, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-82. - Uses subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted after a public hearing held in accordance with section 50-546 by the planning commission if the commission, upon review of the plans, finds that the plans meet the conditions herein required, together with such other conditions as may be imposed to carry out the purposes of this article, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use: 
(1) ?Utility and public service buildings and uses (without storage yards) when operating requirements necessitate the locating of such facilities within the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity. Further, no building and/or structure shall be located in any required front or side yard. 
(2) ?Private recreational areas and institutional recreation centers when not operated for profit, nonprofit swimming pool clubs, all subject to the following conditions: 
a. ?In those instances where the proposed site is not to be situated on a lot or lots of record, the proposed site shall have one property line abutting a major thoroughfare (see major thoroughfare plan, and the site shall be so planned as to provide ingress and egress directly onto such major thoroughfare. 
b. ?Front, side, and rear yards shall be at least 75 feet wide, except on those sides adjacent to nonresidential districts and shall be landscaped in trees, shrubs, grass and terrace areas. All such landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy condition. There shall be no parking or structures permitted in these yards, except for required entrance drives and those walls and/or fences used to obscure the use from abutting residential districts. 
c. ?Buildings erected on the premises shall not exceed one story or 14 feet in height. 
d. ?Whenever a swimming pool is constructed under this article, the pool area shall be provided with a protective fence six feet in height, and entry shall be provided by means of a controlled gate or turnstyle. 
e. ?Off-street parking shall be provided so as to accommodate at least one-fourth of the member families and/or individual members. Bylaws of the organization shall be provided to the planning commission in order to establish the membership involved in computing parking requirements. 
f. ?All storm and sanitary sewer plans shall be provided and shall be reviewed and approved by the city engineer prior to issuance of a building permit. 
g. ?The off-street parking and general site layout and its relationship to all adjacent lot lines shall be reviewed by the planning commission, which may impose any reasonable restrictions or requirements so as to ensure that contiguous residential areas will be adequately protected. 
(3) ?State-licensed child care centers for children subject to the following conditions: 
a. ?Such facility shall have received a state license to operate prior to seeking a special use permit under this article. 
b. ?Not less than 400 square feet of outdoor play area per child, as authorized by the license issued to the applicant by the department of children and family services allowed to occupy such home, shall be provided on the site. 
c. ?Screening and fencing of outdoor play area shall be provided as required by the planning commission. 
d. ?Parking shall be provided to allow for direct drop-off and pick-up of children without requiring children to cross public streets. 
(4) ?State-licensed group child care home all in accordance with Public Act No. 116 of 1973 (MCL 722.111 et seq.) for not more than 12 children for care during the day subject to the following: 
a. ?Location is not closer than 1,500 feet to any of the following: 
1. ?Another licensed group child care home. 
2. ?Another adult foster care small group home or large group home licensed under the adult foster care facility licensing act, Public Act No. 218 of 1979 (MCL 400.701 et seq.). 
3. ?A facility offering substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation service to seven or more people licensed under article 6 of the Public Health Code. 
4. ?A community correction center, resident home, halfway house, or other similar facility which houses an inmate population under the jurisdiction of the department of corrections. 
b. ?Has appropriate fencing for the safety of the children in the group child care home as determined by the city. 
c. ?Maintains the property consistent with the visible characteristics of the neighborhood. 
d. ?Does not exceed 16 hours of operation during a 24-hour period. The city may limit the operation of group child care home between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
e. ?Off-street parking for not less than two cars in addition to requirements for the dwelling unit shall be provided. 
(5) ?Adult foster care facilities, as defined by section 3 of Public Act No. 218 of 1979 (MCL 400.703(4) as provided for by said act and to the extent exempted from local regulation by section 33 of Public Act No. 218 of 1979 (MCL 400.733) thereof and by section 206 of Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3206). 
(6) ?College, universities and other such institutions of higher learning, public and private, offering courses in general, technical or religious education and not operated for profit, all subject to the following conditions: 
a. ?Any use permitted shall be developed only on sites of at least 40 acres in area and shall not be permitted on any portion of a recorded subdivision plat. 
b. ?All ingress to and egress from such site shall be directly onto a major thoroughfare. 
c. ?No building other than a structure for residential purposes shall be closer than 75 feet to any property line. 
(7) ?Churches and other facilities normally incidental thereto, subject to the following conditions: 
a. ?The principal buildings on the site shall be set back from abutting properties zoned for residential use not less than 15 feet. 
b. ?Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in article XIV of this chapter may be allowed, provided front, side and rear yards are increased above the minimum requirements by one foot for each foot of building that exceeds the maximum height allowed. 
(8) ?Municipal buildings and structures when in character with the neighborhood. 
(9) ?Bed and breakfast dwelling, provided the following conditions are met: 
a. ?Such dwellings shall be located only on state trunkline routes. 
b. ?The establishment shall be located within a residence which is the principal dwelling unit on the property and such dwelling shall be the principal residence of the establishment operator. 
c. ?Not more than 25 percent of the total floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used for bed and breakfast sleeping rooms. 
d. ?There shall be no separate cooking facilities used for the bed and breakfast sleeping rooms. 
e. ?A sign not exceeding six square feet in area for each side of such sign may be permitted as a freestanding sign, provided the following conditions are met: 
1. ?Such sign shall not exceed five feet in height. 
2. ?Such sign shall not be illuminated. 
3. ?A setback of not less than ten feet shall be maintained from the front property line. 
4. ?The location of such sign shall be such that traffic and pedestrian safety will not be impaired. 
5. ?Such sign shall receive the review and approval of the planning commission to assure its compatibility with the residential character of the area. 
(10) ?Functional equivalent family; additional persons. The limit upon the number of persons who may reside as functional equivalent of the domestic family may be increased or enlarged upon demonstration by the applicant of all the following: 
a. ?There are adequate provisions on the subject property for off-street parking for each adult proposed to reside on the premises, and adequate storage for each person proposed to reside on premises. 
b. ?The extent of increase or enlargement of the limit upon the number of persons shall not, when considered cumulatively with existing and reasonably projected population concentration in the area, place an unreasonable burden upon public services, facilities and/or schools. 
c. ?There shall be a minimum of 150 square feet of useable floor space per person on the premises. 
d. ?If the city grants an application under this provision, the determination shall include the specific maximum number of persons authorized to reside on the property, and minimum parking or storage requirements to be maintained. 
(11) ?Reasonable accommodation use. This use is intended to authorize and grant relief from the strict terms of this chapter in order to provide equal housing opportunities particularly suited to the needs of persons entitled to reasonable accommodation under law and to encourage innovation in land use and variety in design and layout. In the event state and federal law (e.g., The Federal Fair Housing Amendment Act of 1988) requires the city to make reasonable accommodation for a particular proposed use of property, the following shall apply: 
a. ?As a condition to approval of a reasonable accommodation use, the applicant must comply with all the terms of this section, and must demonstrate all of the following: 
1. ?The ultimate residential uses or users of the property shall be persons for whom the state or federal law mandates the city shall make reasonable accommodations in connections with proposed uses of land. 
2. ?Taking into consideration the needs, facts, and circumstances which exist through the community, and within the population to be served by the use, including financial and other conditions, making the proposed reasonable accommodation shall be necessary to afford such persons equal opportunity to the proposed use and enjoyment within the community. 
3. ?Approval of the proposed housing shall not require nor will likely result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of the land use district and neighborhood in which the property is situated, considering cumulative impact of one or more other uses and activities in, or likely to be in the area, and shall not impose an undue financial or administrative burden. The interest of the community shall be balanced against the need for accommodation on a case-by-case basis. 
4. ?No other specific provision exists and is available to provide the relief sought. 
b. ?The application for a reasonable accommodation use shall include the following: 
1. ?A plan drawn to scale showing the proposed use and development. 
2. ?A separate document providing a summary of the basis on which the applicant asserts entitlement to approval of a reasonable accommodation use, covering each of the requirements of subsection (11)a.1 through 4 of this section. 
3. ?The information required for site plan review, provided, upon showing by the applicant that the inclusion of specified information generally required for site plan review would be irrelevant, the city may waive the requirement to include such material in the application. 
4. ?All regulations and standards for buildings, structures and site improvements within the district in which the property is situated shall apply. 
5. ?Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses, provided such buildings and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 401, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2006-02, 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 50-83. - Required conditions. 
(a) ?See article XIV of this chapter, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, the maximum density permitted and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(b) ?All dwelling units shall be reviewed by the building inspector subject to the following conditions: 
(1) ?Dwelling units shall conform to all applicable city codes and ordinances. Any such local requirements are not intended to abridge applicable state or federal requirements with respect to the construction of the dwelling. 
(2) ?Dwelling units shall be permanently attached to a perimeter foundation. In instances where the applicant elects to set the dwelling on piers or other acceptable foundations which are not at the perimeter of the dwelling, then a perimeter wall shall also be constructed. Any such perimeter wall shall be constructed of durable materials and shall also meet all local requirements with respect to materials, construction and necessary foundations below the frost line. Any such wall shall also provide an appearance which is compatible with dwelling and other homes in the area. 
(3) ?Dwelling units shall be provided with exterior finish materials similar to the dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(4) ?Dwelling units shall be provided with roof designs and roofing materials similar to the dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(5) ?Dwelling units shall be provided with an exterior building wall configuration which represents an average width-to-depth or depth-to-width ratio which does not exceed three to one, or is in reasonable conformity with the configuration of dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(6) ?The dwelling shall contain storage capability in a basement located under the dwelling, in an attic area, in closet areas, or in a separate structure of standard construction similar to or of better quality than the principal dwelling, which storage area shall be equal to ten percent of the square footage of the dwelling or 100 square feet, whichever shall be less. 
(7) ?The building inspector may request a review by the planning commission of any dwelling unit with respect to subsections (b)(3) through (5) of this section. The building inspector or planning commission shall not seek to discourage architectural variation, but shall seek to promote the reasonable compatibility of the character of dwelling units, thereby protecting the economic welfare and property value of surrounding residential uses and the city at large. In reviewing any such proposed dwelling unit, the building inspector may require the applicant to furnish such plans, elevations and similar documentation as it deems necessary to permit a complete review and evaluation of the proposal. When comparing the proposed dwelling unit to similar types of dwelling areas, consideration shall be given to comparable types of homes within 300 feet. If the area within 300 feet does not contain any such homes, then the nearest 25 similar dwellings shall be considered. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 402, 3-5-1996; Ord. of 9-15-2006) 
Secs. 50-84—50-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - R-3 ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 50-110. - Preamble. 
    The one-and two-family residential district established by this article is designed to provide for one- and two-family dwelling sites and residentially related uses in keeping with the master plan of residential development in the city. In addition, the preservation of natural terrain and wooded areas is reflected in the controls set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, art. V, preamble, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-111. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a one- and two-family residential district (R-3), no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this article: 
(1) ?All principal uses permitted in R-1 and R-2 districts. 
(2) ?One-family detached dwellings. 
(3) ?Two-family dwellings. 
(4) ?Farms. 
(5) ?Publicly owned and operated libraries, parks, parkways and recreational facilities. 
(6) ?Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 500, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-112. - Uses subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted after a public hearing held in accordance with section 50-546 by the planning commission if the commission, upon review of the plans, finds that the plans meet the conditions herein required, together with such other conditions as may be imposed to carry out the purposes of this article, subject to the conditions herein after imposed for each use: All special condition uses permitted in the R-1 and R-2, one-family residential districts and subject to the regulation of those districts. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 501, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2001-3, 7-6-2001) 
Sec. 50-113. - Required conditions. 
    All conditions as specified in section 50-83 shall be required in this district. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 502, 3-5-1996) 
Secs. 50-114—50-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RM-1 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 50-140. - Preamble. 
    The RM-1, Multiple-Family Residential District is designed to provide sites for low-rise multiple-family dwelling structures and related uses which will generally serve as zones of transition between the nonresidential districts and the lower density one- and two-family residential district. The multiple-family district is further provided to serve the limited needs for the apartment type of unit in an otherwise low-density, single-family community. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, art. VI, preamble, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-141. - Principal uses permitted. 
    Approval shall be contingent upon finding that: 
(1) ?The site plan shows that a property relationship exists between local streets and any proposed service roads, driveways and parking areas to encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety; 
(2) ?All the development features including the principal building or buildings and any accessory buildings or uses, open spaces and any service roads, driveways and parking areas are so located and related to minimize the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent property, such as, but not limited to, channeling excessive traffic onto local residential streets, lack of adequate screening or buffering of parking or service areas, or building groups and circulation routes located so as to interfere with police or fire equipment access. 
a. ?All principal uses first permitted in the R-3 One- and Two-Family Residential District and subject to the regulations of that district. 
b. ?Low-rise, multiple-family dwellings. 
c. ?Nonprofit clubs, providing that no residential facilities of any kind be a part of the premises. 
d. ?Boardinghouse, roominghouse, or lodginghouse. 
e. ?Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses, provided such buildings and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 600, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-142. - Uses subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted after a public hearing held in accordance with section 50-546 by the planning commission if the commission, upon review of the plans, finds that the plans meet the conditions herein required, together with such other conditions as may be imposed to carry out the purposes of this article, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use: 
(1) ?All special conditions uses permitted in the R-3 One- and Two-Family Residential District and subject to regulations of that district. 
(2) ?General hospitals, except those for criminals and those solely for the treatment of persons who are mentally ill or have contagious disease, not to exceed two stories when the following conditions are met: 
a. ?All such hospitals shall be developed only on sites consisting of at least five acres in area and shall not be permitted on a lot or lots of record. 
b. ?The proposed site shall have at least one property line abutting a major thoroughfare. 
c. ?The minimum distance of any main or accessory building from bounding lot lines or streets shall be at least 100 feet for front, rear and side yards for all two story structures. 
d. ?Ambulance and delivery areas shall be obscured from all residential view with an obscuring wall or fence six feet in height. Ingress and egress to the site shall be directly from a major thoroughfare. 
e. ?All ingress and egress to the off-street parking area for guests, employees, staff, as well as any other uses of the facilities, shall be directly from a major thoroughfare. 
(3) ?Convalescent homes, not to exceed a height of two stories, when the following conditions are met: 
a. ?The site shall be so developed as to create a land-to-building ratio on the lot or parcel whereby for each one bed in the convalescent home there shall be provided not less than 1,500 square feet of open space. The 1,500 square feet of land area per bed shall provide for landscape setting, off-street parking, service drives, loading space, yard requirements, employee facilities and any space required for accessory uses. The 1,500 square feet requirement is over and above the building coverage area. 
b. ?No building shall be closer than 40 feet from any property line. 
(4) ?Mortuary establishments, not to exceed a height of two stories, when the following conditions are met: 
a. ?All ingress and egress to the off-street parking area for guests, employees, staff, as well as any other uses of facilities shall be directly from a major thoroughfare. 
b. ?Adequate assembly area shall be provided off-street for vehicles to be used in funeral processions. Further, such assembly area shall be provided in addition to any off-street parking area. Ingress and egress to the area shall be provided in addition to any off-street parking area. Ingress and egress to the area shall be directly from a major thoroughfare. 
c. ?Hearse and delivery areas shall be obscured from all residential view with an obscuring wall or fence six feet in height. Ingress and egress to the area shall be directly from a major thoroughfare. 
d. ?No building shall be closer than 30 feet from any property line. 
e. ?A caretaker's residence may be provided within the main building of mortuary establishments. 
(5) ?Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses, provided such buildings and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 601, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-143. - Required conditions. 
    All conditions as specified in section 50-83 shall be required in this district. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 602, 3-5-1996) 
Secs. 50-144—50-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RM-2 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 50-170. - Preamble. 
    The RM-2 Multiple-Family Residential District is designed to provide sites for high-rise multiple-family dwelling structures and related uses which will generally be located in high-intensity areas. The multiple-family district is further provided to service the limited needs for the apartment type of unit in a high-density part of the community. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, art. VII, preamble, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-171. - Principal uses permitted. 
    Approval shall be contingent upon finding that: 
(1) ?The site plan shows that a proper relationship exists between local streets and any proposed service roads, driveways and parking areas to encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety; and 
(2) ?All the development features including the principal building or buildings and any accessory buildings or uses, open spaces and any service roads, driveways and parking areas are so located and related to minimize the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent property, such as, but not limited to, channeling excessive traffic onto local residential streets, lack of adequate screening or buffering of parking or service areas, or building groups and circulation routes located so as to interfere with police or fire equipment access. 
a. ?All principal uses first permitted in the RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential District subject to the regulations of that district. 
b. ?High-rise multiple-family dwellings. 
c. ?Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses, provided such buildings and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 700, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-172. - Uses subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted after a public hearing held in accordance with section 50-546 by the planning commission if the commission, upon review of the plans, finds that the plans meet the conditions herein required, together with such other conditions as may be imposed to carry out the purposes of this article, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use: all special conditions uses permitted in the RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential District and subject to regulations of that district. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 701, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-173. - Required conditions. 
    See article XIV of this chapter, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, the maximum density permitted and providing minimum yard setbacks. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 702, 3-5-1996) 
Secs. 50-174—50-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MB MARINA BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 50-200. - Preamble. 
    The MB Marina Business District is designed to accommodate recreational boating along with those activities and services related to harbor and waterway improvements, thereby facilitating navigation and providing safe and economical waterfront recreation development. To this end, uses permitted in this district shall be subject to approval by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, art. VIII, preamble, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-201. - Principal uses permitted. 
    Under such conditions as the planning commission, after a hearing in accordance with section 50-546, finds the use as not being injurious to the MB District and environs and not contrary to the spirit and purposes of this article, the following uses may be permitted: 
(1) ?Any uses permitted in any residential district which is part of a planned development, subject to the approval of the planning commission; and provided that such use shall comply with all of the zoning regulations of the highest residential district in which it is first allowed. 
(2) ?Engine and hull repair shops. 
(3) ?Boat fuel stations. 
(4) ?Municipal or private development of either the berthing, protection or service of recreational boats, yachts, cruisers, inboards, outboards and sailboats. 
(5) ?Commissary facilities for the provision food, beverages and the like to be stored aboard boats. 
(6) ?Municipal or private beaches and water-related recreation areas. 
(7) ?Retail businesses that supply commodities for persons using the facilities of the district, such as the sale of boats, engines and accessories, fishing equipment and other similar items. 
(8) ?Restaurants, lounges or clubs. 
(9) ?Hotels or other such facilities to provide temporary home-port accommodations. 
(10) ?Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses provided such buildings and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(11) ?Other uses of a similar and no more objectionable character and which, in the opinion, of the planning commission, will not be injurious or have any adverse areas and may, therefore, be permitted subject to such conditions, restrictions and safeguards as may be deemed necessary by the planning commission in the interest of public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 800, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-202. - Required conditions. 
(a) ?All dredging, construction and/or development shall be subject to the requirements of all subject codes and ordinances of the city and where applicable all state and federal requirements. 
(b) ?See article XIV of this chapter, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings and the minimum size of lot by permitted land use. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 801, 3-5-1996) 
Secs. 50-203—50-227. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CBD CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 50-228. - Preamble. 
    The CBD Central Business District is designed to provide for a mix of uses in a compact setting to continue the character that has been established in this area. Single- and mixed-use developments containing retail, office, residential, and/or public uses are permitted in this district, which also provide for a pedestrian orientation, a reduction in automobile trips where possible, and a unique coastal town setting. The central business district provides the major focus of retail, government and business services facilities for the entire community. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, art. IX, preamble, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. ZOA-2015-01, 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 50-229. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a central business district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this article: 
(1) ?Any generally recognized retail business which supplies commodities on the premises within a completely enclosed building, such as, but not limited to, groceries, meats, dry goods, clothing, furniture, and hardware. 
(2) ?Any personal service establishment which performs services on the premises within a completely enclosed building, such as, but not limited to: repair shops (watches, radios, televisions, shoes, etc.), tailor shops, beauty parlors, barber shops, interior decorators, photographers and dry cleaners. 
(3) ?Restaurants and taverns where the patrons are served within a building, or walk-up service, occupied by such establishments and wherein such establishment does not extend as an integral part of, or accessory thereto, any service of a drive-in. Drive-through services are permitted. 
(4) ?Theaters, assembly halls, concert halls or similar places of assembly when conducted completely within enclosed buildings. 
(5) ?Offices and medical offices, including clinics. 
(6) ?Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations and similar uses, with drive-through facilities permitted when said drive-through facilities are incidental to the principal function. 
(7) ?Municipal buildings and post offices. 
(8) ?Business schools, or private schools operated for profit. Examples of private schools permitted herein include, but are not limited to, the following: dance schools, music and voice schools and art studios. 
(9) ?Newspaper and publisher offices. 
(10) ?Warehouse and storage facilities when incident to and physically connected with any principal use permitted, provided that such facility is within the confines of the building or part thereof occupied by such establishment. 
(11) ?Hotels and motels. 
(12) ?Publicly owned off-street parking lots or parking structures. 
(13) ?Publicly owned buildings, public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electric transformer stations and substations and gas regulator stations with service yards, but without storage yards. 
(14) ?Veterinary offices and clinics, excluding kennels. 
(15) ?Funeral homes and mortuaries, not including crematoriums. 
(16) ?Churches. 
(17) ?Clubs, lodge halls, rental or catering halls, and similar uses. 
(18) ?Gift/specialty retail (florist, party supplies, cosmetics, hobby supplies, bakery supplies, jewelry, trophy shops, art gallery, sporting goods, pets, fabrics, computers, music instruments, tourist souvenirs, among others) 
(19) ?Health clubs and fitness centers. 
(20) ?Bed and breakfast inns. 
(21) ?Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses, provided such structures and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(22) ?Other uses which are similar to the above and subject to the following restrictions: 
a. ?All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail from the premises where produced. 
b. ?All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking or loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
c. ?Outdoor storage of commodities shall be expressly prohibited. 
(Ord. No. ZOA-2015-01, § 900, 4-21-2015; Ord. No. ZOA-2018-04 , § 1, 7-10-2018) 
Sec. 50-230. - Uses subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted after a public hearing held in accordance with section 50-546 by the planning commission if the commission, upon review of the plans, finds that the plans meet the conditions herein required, together with such other conditions as may be imposed to carry out the purposes of this article, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use: 
(1) ?High-rise multiple-family dwellings. High-rise multiple-family dwellings in buildings of four stories or more on a site of at least three acres in area, subject to the dimensional requirements for the RM-2 district in the schedule of regulations. 
(2) ?Business on high-rise multiple-family dwelling site. Business uses shall be permitted on a high-rise multiple-family dwelling site when developed as retail and/or service uses clearly accessory to the main use within the walls of the main structure, with access from the interior only. Such businesses and/or services shall be prohibited on all floors above the first floor, or grade level, except that a restaurant or restaurant-lounge may be permitted on the uppermost story. 
(3) ?Sidewalk or outdoor cafes. Outdoor cafes or restaurants subject to the following conditions: In the interest of promoting business by increasing activity and improving the general business climate, the city manager or his designee may issue revocable permits to businesses that apply for a permit to operate a sidewalk cafe or an outdoor cafe as an extension of or compatible with, the existing business on a portion of a city sidewalk adjacent to the business or on private property adjacent to the business. The permit may be issued under the following terms and conditions: 
a. ?Sidewalk or outdoor cafe permits shall be issued if the city manager or his designee determines the occupancy will not: 
1. ?Interfere with the use of the street for pedestrian or vehicular travel. 
2. ?Unreasonably interfere with the view of, access to or use of property adjacent to said street. 
3. ?Reduce any sidewalk width to less than five feet. 
4. ?Interfere with street cleaning or snow removal activities. 
5. ?Cause damage to the street or to sidewalks, trees, benches, landscaping or other objects lawfully located therein. 
6. ?Cause a violation of any state or local laws. 
7. ?Be principally used for off-premises advertising. 
8. ?Be attached to or reduce the effectiveness of or access to any utility pole, sign or other traffic control device. 
9. ?Cause increased risk of theft or vandalism. 
10. ?Be in or adjacent to property zoned exclusively for residential purposes. 
b. ?All businesses selling food or beverages to be consumed in a public sidewalk area or outdoor area adjacent to the business shall enclose the area with a temporary structure approved by the building inspector. Prior to approval, written plans shall be submitted to the building inspector. All construction shall conform to existing building codes and regulations of the city and shall not be permanent. Such plans shall also include the location of adequate trash receptacles. 
c. ?Prior to the issuance of a sidewalk or outdoor cafe permit, the applying business must provide the city with a certificate of liability insurance in an amount to be determined solely by the city. The certificate of insurance must be in effect for at least the period of the permit to be issued. In addition, the applying business shall, by written agreement with the city, indemnify and hold harmless the city from all claims or damages incident to the establishment and operation of a sidewalk cafe. 
d. ?Prior to the issuance of a permit, a fee as specified from time to time by resolution of the city council shall be paid by the requesting business for the period of the permit. The period of a sidewalk or outdoor cafe; permit shall not exceed 180 days. The date and duration shall be specified on the permit. The permit shall be subject to immediate revocation for failure to properly maintain the area being used as a sidewalk or outdoor cafe;, or for any other violation of this article. 
(4) ?Dwellings above stores. To encourage and provide for the economic vitality of the central business district, residential occupancy shall be permitted in buildings of two stories in height or greater subject to the following: 
a. ?No dwelling unit shall occupy any portion of the building at ground level or below ground level. Businesses may occupy any number of total rooms. 
b. ?Such dwellings shall meet all applicable codes and ordinances of the city, county or state. 
c. ?Floor plans drawn to scale of all floors to be utilized for dwelling purposes shall be submitted to the building department. 
d. ?Approved smoke detectors shall be provided in each dwelling unit and in common hallways and shall be provided as required in the single state construction code. 
e. ?Emergency egress lighting shall be provided to assure continued illumination for a duration of not less than one hour in case of emergency or primary power loss in common hallway areas as may be required in the building department. 
f. ?An approved fire extinguisher shall be provided in the common hallway accessible to all occupants as may be required by the single state construction code. 
g. ?In those instances where residential uses are proposed to occupy the same floor as a business use, the planning commission shall review such mixed use and may approve such mixed use based on findings that compatibility of the business with residential occupancy will occur. Such findings may include, but are not limited to: 
1. ?Compatible hours of operation. 
2. ?Noise of operation or occupancy that would be detrimental to the business operation or vice-versa. 
3. ?Excessive foot traffic. 
(5) ?Live/work units. A live/work unit is an integrated residence and work space (located on the ground floor), occupied and utilized by a single household in an array of at least three such structures, or a structure with at least three units arranged side by side along the primary frontage, that has been designed or structurally modified to accommodate joint residential occupancy and work activity. 
a. ?Primary residence. The residential and the commercial space must be occupied by the same tenant, and no portion of the live/work unit may be rented or sold separately. The unit shall be the primary residence of the business owner or principal manager. 
b. ?Permitted commercial components. The commercial component of live/work units are intended for use by the following occupations: accountants; architects; artists and artisans; attorneys; computer software and multimedia-related professionals; consultants; engineers; fashion, graphic, interior and other designers; hair stylists; home-based office workers; insurance, real estate, and travel agents; one-on-one instructors; photographers; and similar occupations as determined by the building inspector. 
c. ?Access standards. 
1. ?The main entrance to the ground floor work space shall be accessed directly from and face the street. 
2. ?The upstairs dwelling shall be accessed by a separate entrance, and by a stair and/or elevator. 
3. ?Accessibility should be accommodated between a pair of units and not in the front yard to the degree possible. 
d. ?Service standards. 
1. ?The commercial use shall not generate external noise, odor, glare, vibration or electrical interference detectable to the normal sensory perception by adjacent neighbors. 
2. ?Services (including all utility access, aboveground equipment, and trash containers) shall be located on an alley when present, or in the rear of the lot for those lots without alley access. 
3. ?No explosive, toxic, combustible or flammable materials in excess of what would be allowed incidental to normal residential use shall be stored or used on the premises. 
e. ?Frontage standards. Each live/work unit shall be designed so that social areas (e.g., living room, family room, dining room, etc.), rather than sleeping and service rooms, are oriented toward the fronting street. 
f. ?Building size and massing standards. 
1. ?The maximum height of live/work structures in the CBD shall be subject to the review and approval of the planning commission; however, at no time shall the height of a live/work structure exceed three stories. 
2. ?Buildings on corner lots shall be designed with two front facades. 
g. ?Prohibited commercial uses in live/work units. 
1. ?Entertainment, drinking, and public eating establishments. 
2. ?Veterinary services, including grooming and boarding, and the breeding or care of animals for hire or for sale. 
3. ?Adult-oriented businesses, astrology, palmistry, massage, head shops, and similar uses. 
4. ?Sales, repair or maintenance of vehicles, including automobiles, boats, motorcycles, aircraft, trucks, or recreational vehicles. 
5. ?Trade of private schools. This excluded private instruction of up to two students at any one time (e.g., music lessons, tutoring) 
(6) ?Public outdoor markets. In the interest of promoting business by increasing activity and improving the general business climate in the central business area, the city manager or his designee may issue permits to operate public outdoor markets for the retail sale of farm produce and products and other items such as floral items, craft products, and antiques subject to the following conditions: 
a. ?A sketch plan showing the boundaries of the market area and its relationship to nearby buildings, parking areas and public streets shall be submitted. 
b. ?A public outdoor market may be permitted if the city manager or his designee determines the use will not: 
1. ?Interfere with the use of the street or a parking area for pedestrian or vehicular travel. 
2. ?Unreasonably interfere with the view of, access to, or use of property in close proximity to the market. 
3. ?Cause damage to the street or to sidewalks, parking areas, trees, benches, landscaping or other objects located in the vicinity. 
4. ?Cause a violation of any state or local laws. 
5. ?If located on or adjacent to an existing parking lot, cause a reduction in parking which impacts negatively on the uses for which the parking lot serves. 
c. ?All construction shall conform to existing building codes and regulations of the city and shall not be permanent. 
d. ?Adequate trash receptacles shall be provided at convenient locations throughout the market area. All refuse, produce and materials shall be removed by each operator of a location in the market area prior to or at the close of the market each day. 
e. ?The use of public areas such as streets, parking lots, parks, etc., for a public outdoor market shall require the approval of the city council. For the use of such areas, the city may require liability insurance and property damage coverage naming the city as an insured party. 
(7) ?Arcades. 
(8) ?Accessory structures. Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above uses, provided such structures and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(Code 1988, § 11-44; Ord. No. 95-03, 11-21-1995; Ord. No. 96-5, § 901, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. ZOA-2015-01, § 901, 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 50-231. - Required conditions. 
(a) ?Outdoor cafes or restaurants shall provide off-street parking in keeping with the same standards as specified for similar indoor facilities in section 50-450. 
(b) ?See article XIV of this chapter, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 900, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. ZOA-2015-01, § 902, 4-21-2015) 
Secs. 50-232—50-255. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - GB GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS 

Sec. 50-256. - Preamble. 
    The GB General Business Districts are designed to provide for all the same uses allowed in the CBD Central Business District, along with a variety of other more diverse businesses often located to serve passerby traffic. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, art. X, preamble, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. ZOA-2015-02, 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 50-257. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a general business district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this article: 
(1) ?Any use permitted and as regulated in the CBD district as principal uses permitted and uses subject to special conditions. 
(2) ?New automobile sales or showroom and any accessory parking or outdoor sales are subject to the conditions under section 50-258(1). 
(3) ?Bus passenger stations. 
(4) ?Mortuary establishments. 
(5) ?Private clubs or lodge halls. 
(6) ?Governmental offices or other governmental uses; public utility offices, exchanges, transformer stations, pump stations and service yards, but not including outdoor storage. 
(7) ?Clinics (medical, dental and veterinary). 
(8) ?Retail cold storage establishments. 
(9) ?Laundry and dry cleaning establishments. 
(10) ?Indoor recreation centers such as bowling alleys, skating rinks, billiard parlors, establishments for the operation of amusement devices, or dance halls when conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
(11) ?Open-air business uses such as, but not limited to, retail sales of live plant materials not grown on the site; lawn furniture; playground equipment; and other home garden supplies. 
(12) ?Storage of materials or goods to be sold at retail, provided such storage is within a building or is enclosed so as not to be visible to the public from any abutting nonindustrial district or public street. 
(13) ?Offices and showrooms of plumbers, electricians, decorators or similar trades, in connection with which not more than 25 percent of the floor area of the building or part of the building occupied by such establishment is used for making, assembling, remodeling, repairing, altering, finishing or refinishing its products or merchandise, and provided that the ground floor premises facing upon and visible from any abutting street shall be used only for entrances, offices or display. All storage of materials on any land shall be within the confines of the building or part thereof occupied by such establishment. 
(14) ?Newspaper printing plants. 
(15) ?Other uses which are similar to the above uses. 
(16) ?Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses provided such structures and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1000, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. ZOA-2015-02, § 1000, 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 50-258. - Uses subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted after a public hearing held in accordance with section 50-546 by the planning commission if the commission, upon review of the plans, finds that the plans meet the conditions herein required, together with such other conditions as may be imposed to carry out the purposes of this article, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use: 
(1) ?Outdoor sales space for exclusive sale of boats, automobiles or house trailers, subject to the following: 
a. ?Ingress and egress to the outdoor sales area shall be at least 60 feet from the intersection of any two streets. 
b. ?The lot or area shall be provided with durable and dustless surface and shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface water accumulated with the area. 
c. ?No major repair or major refinishing shall be done on the lot; however, auto repair garages may be permitted, subject to the following: 
1. ?In no case shall the building be located closer than 40 feet to residentially zoned land. 
2. ?Outdoor storage of wrecked automobiles or junk shall be prohibited. 
(2) ?Business in the character of a drive-in, subject to the following: 
a. ?A setback of at least 60 feet from the street right-of-way line of any existing or future land use plan street must be maintained. 
b. ?Ingress and egress points hall be located at least 60 feet from the intersection of any two streets. 
(3) ?Commercially used outdoor recreational space for children's amusement parks, miniature golf courses, subject to the following: 
a. ?Children's amusement parks must be fenced on all sides with a four-foot wall or fence. 
b. ?Adequate parking shall be provided off the road right-of-way and shall be fenced with a four-foot six-inch wall or fence where adjacent to the use. 
(4) ?Gasoline service station, subject to the following: 
a. ?100 feet of street frontage on the lot proposed for the gasoline service station shall be provided on the principal street serving the station. The lot shall contain not less than 10,000 square feet of lot area. 
b. ?All buildings shall be set back not less than 40 feet from all street right-of-way lines. Canopies over pump islands may be set back not less than 20 feet from street right-of-way lines. 
c. ?Gasoline pumps, air and water hose stands and other appurtenances shall be set back not less than 15 feet from all street right-of-way lines. 
d. ?Driveway widths entering the filling station shall have a maximum width of 35 feet. Curb openings for such driveways shall not exceed 50 feet in length. 
e. ?Curb cuts shall be no closer than ten feet to any adjoining property and shall be no closer than 25 feet to any corner of two intersecting street right-of-way lines. Any two driveways shall be separated by an island at least 20 feet long. 
f. ?The angle of intersection of any driveway shall not be less than 60 degrees, unless acceleration or deceleration lanes are provided. 
g. ?Curbs in accordance with standard municipal specifications shall be constructed on all streets adjacent to the gasoline service station site. 
h. ?Prohibited activities include, but are not limited to, the following: vehicle body repair, painting, tire recapping engine rebuilding, auto dismantling, upholstery work, auto glass work, and such other activities whose external physical effects could adversely extend beyond the property line. The storage of wrecked automobiles on the site shall be obscured from public view. No automobiles or vehicle of any kind shall be stored in the open for a period exceeding one week. 
i. ?All restroom doors shall be shielded from adjacent streets and residential districts. 
(5) ?Adult entertainment facilities subject to the provisions of section 50-465. 
(6) ?Minor automotive repair businesses such as muffler shops, shock absorber replacement shops, tire stores, undercoating shops and minor engine repair shops, subject to the following conditions: 
a. ?Access to such use shall be directly to a major or collector street or shall be to a minor street which has direct access to an abutting major or collector street. 
b. ?Access to and from such use shall not be cause for traffic to utilize residential streets. 
c. ?Outdoor storage of parts or materials shall be prohibited unless such storage is within a fenced and obscured area which meets all setback requirements. 
d. ?Vehicles shall not be allowed to be stored outside the building for more than 48 hours unless awaiting repair for which a "work order," signed by the owner of the vehicle, is posted in the vehicle so as to be visible from outside the vehicle. 
e. ?Areas for off-street parking required for customer use shall not be utilized for the storage of vehicles awaiting repair. 
f. ?All vehicle servicing or repair, except minor repairs such as, but not limited to, tire changing and headlight changing shall be conducted within a building. 
g. ?Suitable containers shall be provided and utilized for the disposal of used parts and such containers shall be screened from public view. 
h. ?A six-foot obscuring wall shall be provided and maintained on those property lines adjacent to or abutting a residential district. 
(7) ?Automobile carwash subject to the following: 
a. ?All buildings shall have a front yard setback of not less than 50 feet. 
b. ?All washing facilities shall be within a completely enclosed building. 
c. ?Vacuuming and drying areas may be located outside the building but shall not be in the required front yard and shall not be closer than 25 feet from any residential district. 
d. ?All cars required to wait for access to the facilities shall be provided space off the street right-of-way and parking shall be provided in accordance with sections 50-450 and 50-451. 
e. ?Ingress and egress points shall be located at least 60 feet from the intersection of any two streets. 
f. ?All off-street parking and waiting areas shall be hard surfaced and dust free. 
g. ?All lighting shall be shielded and directed away from adjacent residential districts. 
h. ?A four-foot six-inch completely obscuring wall shall be provided where abutting to a residential district. 
(8) ?Arcades. 
(9) ?Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses provided such structures and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(Code 1988, § 11-44; Ord. No. 95-03, 11-21-1995; Ord. No. 96-5, § 1001, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. ZOA-2015-02, § 1001, 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 50-259. - Required conditions. 
    See article XIV of this chapter, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1002, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. ZOA-2015-02, § 1002, 4-21-2015) 
Secs. 50-260—50-281. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 50-282. - Preamble. 
    The I Industrial District is designed so as to primarily accommodate wholesale and warehouse activities, and industrial operations whose external physical effects are restricted to the area of the district and in no manner affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding districts. The I district is so structured as to permit, along with any specified uses, the manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, assembly and/or treatment of finished or semifinished products from previously prepared material. It is the intent of this article that the processing of raw material for shipment in bulk form to be used in an industrial operation at another location not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, art. XI, preamble, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-283. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an I Industrial district, no land or building shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this article. 
(1) ?Any of the following uses when conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, or within a designated area enclosed on all sides with a six-foot fence or solid wall. Such fence or wall shall be completely obscuring on those sides where abutting or adjacent to districts zoned for residential use. 
a. ?Warehousing and wholesale establishments and trucking facilities. 
b. ?The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of such products as, but not limited to, bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceutical, toiletries, food products, hardware and cutlery, tool, die, gauge and machine shops. 
c. ?The manufacture, compounding, assembly or treatment of articles of merchandise from previously prepared materials such as, but not limited to, bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, precious or semiprecious metals or stones, sheet metal (excluding large stampings such as automobile fenders or bodies), shell, textiles, tobacco, wax, wire, wood (excluding saw and planing mills) and yarns. 
d. ?The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by electricity or gas. 
e. ?Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties and metal or rubber stamps, or other small molded rubber products. 
f. ?Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices; radios and phonographs. 
g. ?Laboratories, experimental, film or testing. 
h. ?Manufacture and repair of electric or neon signs, light sheet metal products, including heating and ventilating equipment, cornices, eaves and the like. 
i. ?Warehouse, storage and transfer and electric and gas service buildings and yards, water supply and sewage disposal plants. Water and gas tank holders, railroad transfer and storage tracks, heating and electric power generating plants and all necessary uses, railroad rights-of-way and freight terminals. 
j. ?Storage facilities for building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber, open storage of contractor's equipment and supplies, provided such is enclosed within a building or within an obscuring wall or fence on those sides abutting all residential or business districts, and on any front yard abutting a public thoroughfare. In any I district, the extent of such fence or wall may be determined by the board of appeals on the basis of usage. Such fence or wall shall not be less than six feet in height and may, depending on land usage, be required to be eight feet in height. A chainlink type fence with heavy evergreen shrubbery inside of such fence shall be considered to be an obscuring fence. 
(2) ?All public utilities, including buildings, necessary structures, storage yards and other related uses. 
(3) ?Kennels, commercial. 
(4) ?Nonaccessory signs shall be permitted in accordance with the requirements set forth in section 50-456. 
(5) ?Other uses of a similar character, subject to such conditions, requirements and safeguards as set forth in sections 50-545 and 50-547. 
(6) ?Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses provided such buildings and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1100, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-284. - Uses subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted after the planning commission, after a public hearing held in accordance with section 50-546 and upon review of the plans, finds that the plans meet the conditions as may imposed to carry out the purposes of this article: 
(1) ?Retail uses which have an industrial character in terms of either their outdoor storage requirements or activities (such as, but not limited to, lumber yards, building materials, outlets, garage sales; upholsterer, cabinet maker; outdoor boat, or house trailer, automobile, or agricultural implement sales) or serve convenience needs of the industrial district (such as, but not limited, eating and drinking establishments, excluding drive-in, motel or bowling alley). 
(2) ?Auto repair station and undercoating shops when completely enclosed. 
(3) ?Lumber and planing mills when completely enclosed and when located in the interior of the district so that no property line shall form the exterior boundary of the I district. 
(4) ?Metal plating, buffing and polishing, subject to appropriate measures to control the type of process to prevent noxious results and/or nuisances. 
(5) ?Other uses which, in the determination of the planning commission after a public hearing held in accordance with section 50-546, are of a similar character to the above uses and subject to the requirements set forth in sections 50-545 and 50-547. 
(6) ?Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above uses provided such structures and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1101, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-285. - Required conditions. 
(a) ?Any use established in the I district after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be operated so as to comply with the performance standards set forth hereinafter in article XV of this chapter, general provisions. 
(b) ?See article XIV of this chapter, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1102, 3-5-1996) 
Secs. 50-286—50-303. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - P PARKING DISTRICT 

Sec. 50-304. - Preamble. 
    The P Parking District is intended to permit the establishment of areas to be used solely for off-street parking of private passenger vehicles as a use incidental to a principal use. This district will generally be provided by petition or request to serve a use district which has developed without adequate off-street parking facilities. The following regulations shall apply to all P districts. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, art. XII, preamble, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-305. - Principal uses permitted. 
    Premises in parking districts shall be used only for an off-street vehicular parking area and shall be developed and maintained subject to such regulations as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1200, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-306. - Required conditions. 
(a) ?The parking area shall be accessory to and for use in connection with one or more existing professional or institutional office buildings or institutions. 
(b) ?Such parking lots shall be contiguous to an MB, CBD, GB or I district. Parking areas may be approved when adjacent to such districts, or on the end of a block where such areas front on a street which is perpendicular to that street servicing the district. There may be a private driveway or public street or public alley between such P district and such MB, CBD, GB or I district. 
(c) ?Parking areas shall be used solely for parking of private passenger vehicles (for periods of less than one day) and shall not be used as an off-street loading area. 
(d) ?No commercial repair work or service of any kind or display thereof shall be conducted in such parking area. 
(e) ?No signs of any kind other than signs designating entrances, exits and conditions of use, shall be maintained on such parking area. 
(f) ?No buildings other than those for shelter of attendants shall be erected upon the premises, and they shall not exceed 15 feet in height. 
(g) ?Application for P district rezoning shall be made to the planning commission by submitting a layout of the area requested showing the intended parking plan. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1201, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-307. - Minimum distances and setbacks. 
(a) ?Side and rear yards. Where the P district is contiguous to the side and/or rear lot lines of premises within a residentially zoned district, the required wall shall be located along such lot line. 
(b) ?Front yards. Where the P district is contiguous to a residentially zoned district which has a common frontage on the same block with residential structures, or wherein no residential structures have been yet erected, there shall be a setback equal to the required residential setback for such residential district or a minimum of 25 feet, whichever is the greater. The required wall shall be located on this minimum setback line. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1202, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-308. - Parking space layout, standards, construction and maintenance. 
    The P Parking District shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of section 50-451. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1203, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-309. - Approval and modifications. 
(a) ?The planning commission may modify the yard and wall requirements where, in unusual circumstances, no good purpose would be served by compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b) ?In all cases where a wall extends to an alley which is a means of ingress and egress to a parking area, it shall be permissible to end the wall not more than ten feet from such alley line in order to permit a wider means of access to the parking area. 
(c) ?In addition to the above requirements, such parking area shall comply with such further requirements or conditions as may be prescribed by the planning commission for the protection of the residential district abutting such parcel or parcels in which the parking area is to be located. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1204, 3-5-1996) 
Secs. 50-310—50-336. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - WP WATERFRONT PARK DISTRICT 

Sec. 50-337. - Preamble. 
    The WP Waterfront Park District is designed to accommodate recreational and public uses, while at the same time provide an open unobstructed character. To this end, uses permitted in this district shall be subject to approval by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, art. XIII, preamble, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-338. - Principal uses permitted. 
    Under such conditions as the planning commission, after hearing in accordance with section 50-546, finds the use as not being injurious to the WP district and environs and not contrary to the spirit and purposes of this article, the following uses may be permitted: 
(1) ?Municipal or private water-related recreation areas. 
(2) ?Municipal or private development of the berthing of recreational boats, yachts, cruises, inboards, outboards, sailboats and ferries. 
(3) ?Municipal office buildings (i.e., administrative, library, police, fire, etc.) when in character with the surrounding area. 
(4) ?Other uses of a similar and no more objectionable character and which, in the opinion of the planning commission after a public hearing in accord with section 50-546 will not be injurious or have any adverse effect on the adjacent areas and may, therefore, be permitted subject to such conditions, restrictions and safeguards as may be deemed necessary by the planning commission in the interest of public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1300, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-339. - Required conditions. 
(a) ?All dredging, construction and/or development shall be subject to the requirements of all subject codes and ordinances of the city and where applicable all state and federal requirements. 
(b) ?All site plans shall be subject to the review and approval of the planning commission relative to area and bulk requirements, parking plan, and ingress and egress. 
(c) ?Sec article XIV of this chapter, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings and the minimum size of lot permitted land use. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1301, 3-5-1996) 
Secs. 50-340—50-366. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - PD PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Planned unit development, MCL 125.3503. 

Sec. 50-367. - Intent. 
    The Planned Development District (PD) is intended to permit the private or public development or redevelopment of acres throughout the city which shall be substantially in accord with the goals and objectives of the master plan of future land use for the city. The use patterns of the areas involved shall provide a desirable environment and shall be harmonious to the general surrounding uses permitting flexibility in overall development while ensuring the highest of safeguards and standards for public health, safety, convenience and general welfare. Such planned development district may embrace a mixture of one or more distinct uses or zoning categories, in the vertical or horizontal plane. A planned development district shall encourage the use of land in accordance with its character and adaptability; conserve natural resources and energy; encourage innovation in land use planning; and bring about a compatibility of design and use. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1350, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2003-1, § 1350, 4-1-2003) 
Sec. 50-368. - Standards for planned development districts. 
(a) ?The uses proposed will have a beneficial effect, in terms of public health, safety, welfare or convenience or any combination thereof, on present and potential surrounding land uses. The uses proposed will encourage a more efficient use of public utilities and service and lessen the burden on circulation systems, surrounding properties, and the environment. This beneficial effect for the city (not the developer) shall be one which could not be achieved under any other single zoning classification. 
(b) ?The uses proposed shall be consistent with the master plan of future land use for the city. 
(c) ?The zoning is warranted by the design and amenities incorporated in the development proposal. 
(d) ?Usable open spaces shall be provided, at least equal to the total of the minimum usable open space which would be required for each of the component uses of the development. The city may, if deemed appropriate, require for planned developments more or less open space than that required by this article. 
(e) ?Off-street parking sufficient to meet the minimum required by section 50-450 shall be provided and the city may, if deemed appropriate, require for planned developments more or less parking than that required by this article. 
(f) ?Landscaping shall be provided so as to ensure that proposed uses will be adequately buffered from one another and from surrounding public and private property. The city may, if deemed appropriate, require for planned unit developments more or less landscaping than that required by this article. 
(g) ?Vehicular and pedestrian circulation, allowing safe, convenient uncongested and well-defined circulation within and to the district shall be provided. 
(h) ?Natural and historical features of the district shall reasonably be protected and preserved. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1351, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2003-1, § 1351, 4-1-2003) 
Sec. 50-369. - Procedure for application. 
    Application shall be made to the city council for consideration under this district. The person applying shall be required to make a submittal of the following material for review and recommendation by the planning commission: 
(1) ?A property area survey of the exact area being required (scale: one inch equals 100 feet). 
(2) ?A proof of ownership of land being requested for rezoning. 
(3) ?A topographic map of the entire area at a contour interval showing two-foot changes in elevation. This map shall indicate all natural and manmade features (scale: one inch equals 100 feet). In those instances where more detailed topography is deemed necessary, the city may request a contour interval of one foot. Where extreme slopes exist, the city may allow a contour interval of five feet. 
(4) ?A preliminary plan of the entire area carried out in such detail as to show the land use being requested, the densities being proposed where applicable, the system of collector streets, and off-street parking system. 
(5) ?A preliminary plan layout or an overlay of such plan on a currently available aerial photo of the site and its immediate surroundings. 
(6) ?A written statement explaining in detail the full intent of the sponsor indicating the specifics of the development plan as it relates to the type of dwelling units contemplated and resultant population; the extent of nonresidential development and the resultant traffic generated and parking demands created, and providing supporting documentation, such as, but not limited to, market studies, supporting land use request, and the intended scheduling of development and such other studies as the city council or planning commission may require. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1352, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2003-1, § 1352, 4-1-2003) 
Sec. 50-370. - Acceptance and approval of preliminary (Stage I) site plan and rezoning. 
    Approval of the preliminary plan by the city council shall be effective for a period of two years, and such accepted plan may be renewed upon expiration of said two-year period, provided conditions have not changed that would be cause for denial of such extension. In reviewing and approving the plan, the following procedures and conditions shall be followed: 
(1) ?The preliminary plan shall be reviewed and a recommendation shall be made by the planning commission after public hearing to the city council relative to the plan, meeting the intent and the requirements of the master plan of future land use and for the rezoning of the property to PD district. Such rezoning shall be contingent on approved Stage II plans becoming part of such rezoning. The hearing for the preliminary plan may also, with proper notification and advertising, be the hearing for rezoning of the property to a planned development district. 
(2) ?Approval of the preliminary plan shall be given only after public hearing by the planning commission and shall not constitute final site plan approval. Rezoning procedures under this section will rely on the plan submitted for both Stage I and Stage II and the supporting documentation and the plan, therefore, is basic to the rezoning. 
(3) ?Once an area has been rezoned to a PD district, no development shall take place therein nor use made of any part thereof except in accordance with the preliminary plan as originally approved, or in accordance with an approved amendment thereto. 
(4) ?Approval of the preliminary plan by the city council shall not constitute approval of the final site plan. It shall be deemed as approval of the land use plan submitted and shall serve as a guide in the preparation of the final plan. 
(5) ?The proposed PD district shall be of such area as to represent a sound carrying out of the master plan of future land use, it not being the intention of this district that an unrelated parcel by parcel rezoning be effectuated. 
(6) ?The zoning ordinance amendment which effectuates the rezoning to the PD district shall refer to and incorporate by reference the Stage I site plan and the Stage II site plan and such zoning amendment shall be carried out in accordance with rezoning procedures of this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1353, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2003-1, § 1353, 4-1-2003) 
Sec. 50-371. - Final plan submittal (Stage II site plan) prior to building permit. 
    A presentation of the final site plan shall be made to the planning commission for review and recommendation to the city council of the following: 
(1) ?A final overall site plan for the entire area being requested under this PD district shall be submitted. This plan shall be worked out in detail showing specific uses, building location, off-street parking, street alignments, open spaces and other physical plan details being proposed. Supporting documentation in the form of building plans, and schedule of construction shall be submitted. The final site plan shall conform to all site plan requirements and all site plan review requirements of this article. 
(2) ?The final plan shall reflect and adhere to those use patterns as approved in the preliminary plan. Standards for building bulk and off-street parking shall be equal to at least the minimum standards set forth for like uses in article XVI of this chapter and off-street parking requirements of section 50-450. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1354, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2003-1, § 1354, 4-1-2003) 
Sec. 50-372. - Stage II site plan; approval of site plan. 
    Approval of the final site plan shall be effective for a period of three years. If development is not completed in this period, the planning commission shall review progress to date and make a recommendation to the city council as to action relative to permitting continuation under an extension of the original approval. In reviewing and approving the final plan, the following conditions shall be set forth: 
(1) ?A Stage II certificate of compliance may be granted by the city provided that the Stage II site plan is accepted and approved by the planning commission. 
(2) ?All dedications of the public rights-of-way or planned public open spaces shall be made prior to any construction taking place on the site and shall be recorded by the developer. 
(3) ?In residential use areas, any prorated open space shall be committed by dedication to an association of residents, either as rights-in-fee, easement, or in a master deed and retained as open space for park, recreation and related uses. All lands dedicated in fee or easement shall meet the requirements set forth by the city council. Provisions satisfactory to the city council shall be made to provide for the financing of any improvements by a means satisfactory to the city council. This may include a development agreement. Such documents shall be recorded with the county register of deeds. 
(4) ?In those instances where a subdivision plat or site condominium is being utilized as a planned development or a part of such development, the procedures and expiration dates of the land division act or condominium act shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1355, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2003-1, § 1355, 4-1-2003) 
Sec. 50-373. - General design standards. 
(a) ?All regulations applicable to setbacks, parking and loading, general provisions, and other requirements shall be met in relation to each respective land use in the development based upon zoning districts in which the use is listed as a permitted use or use permitted subject to special conditions. 
(b) ?Residential density shall be regulated as follows: 
(1) ?The maximum permitted residential density for single-family dwelling shall not exceed the density allowed for the R-2 single-family district. Yard setbacks for the R-2 district shall apply. 
(2) ?The maximum permitted residential density for multiple-family areas shall not exceed the requirements of the RM-2 district and shall meet setback requirements of the RM-2 district. 
(c) ?Requirements for height, bulk and density for all nonresidential uses shall be in accordance with zoning district standards most nearly reflecting policies in the city's master plan or as may be modified if appropriate by the city. 
(d) ?Density calculations shall meet the following requirements: 
(1) ?Land areas to be used in calculating gross residential density as provided in this section shall each be delineated on the Stage I plan and the Stage II plan so that the acreage and density computations can be confirmed. 
(2) ?The land area used for calculating gross residential density shall include the total residential land area designated on the plan, where applicable, less any area within existing public street rights-of-way. 
(3) ?The planning commission may require, as part of a final site plan review of a phase of a PD, that land shown as open space on the approved plan be held in reserve as part of the phase to be developed, in order to guarantee that density limits for the entire approved PD will not be exceeded when the subject phase is completed. Such reserved land may be included in the development of subsequent phases if the density limits will not be exceeded upon completion of that phase or if other land is similarly held in reserve. 
(4) ?The surface area of lakes, streams, ponds, (natural, manmade, or stormwater retention), marshlands, and similar areas may be included in the acreage used for calculating density if at least 50 percent of the frontage of such areas are part or lands devoted to parks and open space used for and accessible to all residents in the PD district. 
(5) ?Common open space, other common properties and facilities, individual properties, and all other elements of a PD district shall be so planned that they will achieve a unified open space and recreation area system, with open space and all other elements in appropriate locations, suitable related to each other, the site and surrounding lands. 
(e) ?To the maximum extent feasible, the development shall be designed so as to preserve natural resources and natural features. 
(f) ?There shall be a perimeter setback and berming, for the purpose of buffering the development in relation to surrounding properties. Such perimeter setback shall be established in the discretion of the planning commission taking into consideration the use or uses in and adjacent to the development. The setback distance need not be uniform at all points on the perimeter of the development. 
(g) ?Thoroughfare, drainage, and utility design shall meet or exceed the standards otherwise applicable in connection with each of the respective types of uses served. 
(h) ?There shall be underground installation of utilities, including cable, electricity and telephone, as found necessary by the city council, upon the recommendation of the planning commission. 
(i) ?Signage, lighting, landscaping, building architecture and materials, and other features of the project, shall be designed to achieve an integrated and controlled development, consistent with the character of the community, surrounding development or developments, and natural features of the area. 
(j) ?Where nonresidential uses adjoin residentially zoned property, noise reduction and visual screening mechanisms such as landscape berms and/or decorative walls shall be employed. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1356, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2003-1, § 1356, 4-1-2003) 
Sec. 50-374. - Required conditions. 
    Before approving the plan in either the preliminary Stage I site plan or final Stage II plan submittal, the planning commission and the city council shall determine that: 
(1) ?The cost of installing all streets, sidewalks, bike paths, street lights, park areas and necessary utilities and maintenance thereof has been assured by a means satisfactory to the city council. The city council shall have the option of requiring suitable guarantee in a form suitable to the city for the provision of any or all site improvements. 
(2) ?The final plan of each project area of the approved plan is in conformity with the overall approved plan. Any changes or amendments requested shall terminate approval of the preliminary plan until such changes or amendments have been reviewed and approved as in instance of the first submittal, it being the intent of this section that no other administrative or board of appeals action shall constitute official approval of such changes or amendments. Denial by the city council of any requested changes or amendments shall not void the originally approved plan. 
(3) ?Proceeding with a planned development district shall only be permitted if it is mutually agreeable to the city council and the developer. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1357, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2003-1, § 1357, 4-1-2003) 
Sec. 50-375. - Deviations from approved planned development final site plan. 
    Minor changes to a previously approved planned development site plan may be approved without necessity of planning commission or city council action thereon if the building inspector certifies in writing that the proposed revision constitutes a minor alteration and does not alter the basic design nor any specific conditions of the plan as agreed upon by the planning commission and city council. The building inspector shall record all such changes on the original PD site plan and shall advise the planning commission and city council of all said minor revisions within 15 days of said administrative approval. Minor alterations or revisions under this section shall be limited to: 
(1) ?Addition or relocation of fire escapes. 
(2) ?Shifting of building heights and elevations, providing such shifting does not exceed ten percent of the previously approved dimension and providing such shifting does not significantly alter the conceptual integrity of the plan. 
(3) ?Construction of additional, or alteration of, approved sidewalks, provided that the full intent of pedestrian movement through and around the site is not inhibited thereby. 
(4) ?Shifting of, additions to, changes in species of landscape materials, provided such change does not reduce minimum landscape requirements. 
(5) ?Relocation of refuse collection stations. 
(6) ?Internal rearrangement of parking lots and curb cut locations, not including the relocation of parking lots, provided such functional rearrangement does not reduce the total number of parking spaces required, and further provided that the minimum landscape requirements are maintained, and further provided that such rearrangement does not inhibit good traffic flow or circulation. 
(7) ?Any decrease in building size or changes in bedroom counts per dwelling unit in no more than ten percent of the total number of units. 
(8) ?Installation of recreational or maintenance facilities that do not require erection of a structure intended for human use or occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1358, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2003-1, § 1358, 4-1-2003) 
Sec. 50-376. - Filing of zoning amendment. 
    Upon adoption by the city council of the zoning amendment, the site plan, building elevation and other development proposals including the proposed uses shall become an integral part of the zoning amendment to the PD district and for the purposes of recordation, shall be referred to as "Planned Development No. _____." All approved plans shall be filed with the city clerk and building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1359, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2003-1, § 1359, 4-1-2003) 
Sec. 50-377. - Fees. 
    Fees for legal, engineering and planning review of the site plans shall be as established by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1360, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2003-1, § 1360, 4-1-2003) 
Secs. 50-378—50-397. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS 

Sec. 50-398. - Schedule limiting height, bulk, density and area by zoning district. 

Zoning District Minimum lot area Lot Width  
Stories Feet Front Yard Side Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
Minimum Floor Area Minimum Floor Area
Maximum Lot Coverage
R-1 9,600 80(a) 2 25 25(b),(o),(p) 10(b),(c) 20(b),(c) 35(b) 960 1,200 35 
R-2 7,200 60(a) 2 25 25(b),(o),(p) 5(b),(c) 16(b),(c) 35(b) 860 1,100 35 
R-3 6,000 50(a) 2 25 25(b),(o),(p) 5(b),(c) 16(b),(c) 35(b) 760 1,000 35 RM-1 Multiple-Family 
RM-1 2,000 -  2 25 30(f) 30(f) 60(f) 30(f) Eff 
RM-2 700 - - 50(f) 50(f) 100(f) 50(f) 3 Br 
4 Br 900 
1,100 15 MB Marina Business None None 2 30 20(g),(i) (h),(j),(k) (h),(j),(k) 20(i),(j) None None None CBD Central Business None None 2 30 20(g),(i) (h),(j),(k) (h),(j),(k) 20(i),(j) None None None GB General Business None None 2 30 20(g),(i) (h),(j),(k) (h),(j),(k) 20(i),(j) None None None I Industrial None None — 40 40(g),(l) 20(k),(m) 40(k),(m) 40(m),(n) None None None WP Waterfront Park None None 2 30 30(j),(k) 30(j),(k) 60(j),(k) 30(j) None None None  
Notes: 
(a) ?See section 50-399, 50-400 and 50-401 regarding flexibility allowances. 
(b) ?For all uses permitted other than single-family residential, the setback shall equal the height of the main building or the setback required in the district, whichever is greater. In the case of single-family dwellings, when it can be found that the front yards of two or more permitted principal structures in any block in existence at the time of adoption of this article within the district zoned and on the same side of the street are less than the minimum front yard permitted in the district, then a principal structure erected there-after shall provide the average depth of the front yards of said two or more structures. 
(c) ?In the case of a rear yard abutting a side yard, or when a side yard is adjacent to a front yard across a common separating street, the side yard abutting a street shall not be less than the minimum front yard of the district in which located (see illustration). 
(d) ?In an RM-1 multiple-family district, the total number of rooms (not including kitchen, dining and sanitary facilities) shall not be more than the area of the parcel, in square feet, divided by 2,000. All units shall have at least one living room and one bedroom, except that not more than ten percent of the units may be of an efficiency apartment type. 
a. ?In an RM-2 Multiple-Family District, the total number of rooms (not including kitchen, dining and sanitary facilities) shall not be more than the area of the parcel, in square feet, divided by 700. All units shall have at least one living room and one bedroom, except that not more than ten percent of the units may be of an efficiency apartment type. 
b. ?In both the RM-1 and RM-2 districts, for the purpose of computing the permitted number of dwelling units per acre, the following room assignments shall control: 
Efficiency = 1 room One-bedroom = 2 rooms Two-bedroom = 3 rooms Three-bedroom = 4 rooms Four-bedroom = 5 rooms  

SIDE YARDS ABUTTING A STREET [GRAPHIC] 
c. ?Plans presented showing one-, two- or three-bedroom units and including a "den," "library" or other extra room shall count such extra room as a bedroom for the purpose of computing density. 
d. ?In an RM-1 or RM-2 district, the area used for computing density shall be the total site area exclusive of any dedicated public right-of-way of either interior or bounding roads. 
(e) ?The maximum height of structures in the RM-2 Multiple-Family High-Rise District shall be subject to the review and approval of the planning commission. 
(f) ?In all RM-1, multiple-family residential low-rise, and RM-2, multiple-family residential high-rise, districts, the minimum distance between any two buildings shall be regulated according to the length and height of such buildings, and in no instance shall this distance be less than 30 feet. Parking may be permitted within a required side or rear yard but shall not cover more than 30 percent of the area of any required yard or any minimum distance between buildings. The formula regulating the required minimum distance between the two buildings in all RM-1 and RM-2 districts is as follows: 
S = (L A + L B + 2 (H A + H B ) 
___________ 
6  
Where: 
S = The required minimum horizontal distance between any wall of building A and any wall of building B or the vertical prolongation of either. 
L A = The total length of building A. The total length of building A is the length of that portion or portions of a wall or walls of building A from which, when viewed directly from above, lines drawn perpendicular to building A will intersect any wall of building B. 
L B = Total length of building B. The total length of building B is the length of that portion or portions of a wall or walls of building B from which, when viewed directly from above, lines drawn perpendicular to building B will intersect any wall of building A. 

H A = Height of building A. The height of building A at any given level is the height above natural grade level of any portion or portions of a wall or walls along the length of building A. Natural grade level shall be the mean level of the ground immediately adjoining the portion or portions of the wall or walls along the total length of the building. 
H B = Height of building B. The height of building B at any given level is the height above natural grade level of any portion or portions of a wall or walls along the length of building B. Natural grade level shall be mean level of the ground immediately adjoining the portion or portions of the wall or walls along the total length of the building (see illustration). 
(g) ?Off-street parking shall be permitted to occupy a portion of the required front yard, provided that there shall be maintained a minimum unobstructed and landscaped setback of ten feet between the nearest point of the off-street parking area, exclusive of access driveways, and the nearest right-of-way line as indicated on the major thoroughfare plan. In those instances where access drives serve as maneuvering lanes for parking spaces, such drive shall not be considered an access drive for setback purposes. 
(h) ?No side yards are required along the interior side lot lines of the district, except as otherwise specified in the single state construction code, provided that if walls of structures facing such interior side lot lines contain windows or other openings, side yards of not less than ten feet shall be provided. On a corner lot which has a rear yard abutting a residential district, there shall be provided a setback of 20 feet on the residential side street. Where a lot borders on a residential district or a street, there shall be provided a setback of not less than ten feet on the side bordering the residential district or street. 
(i) ?Loading space shall be provided in the rear yard in the ratio of at least ten square feet per front foot of building and shall be computed separately from the off-street parking requirements; except in the instance of office uses, loading space shall be provided in the ratio of five square feet per front foot of building. Where an alley exists or is provided at the rear of buildings, the rear building setback and loading requirements may be computed from the center of the alley. 
(j) ?No building shall be closer than 30 feet to any adjacent residential district. 
(k) ?Off-street parking shall be permitted in a required side yard setback except in those instances where a lot borders a residential district. 
(l) ?Off-street parking for visitors, over and above the number of spaces required under section 50-450, may be permitted within the required front yard, provided that such off-street parking is not located within 20 feet of the front lot line. 
(m) ?No building shall be located closer than 40 feet or the height of the building, whichever is the greater, to the outer perimeter (property line) of such district when such property line abuts any residential district. 
(n) ?All storage shall be in the rear yard and shall be completely screened with an obscuring wall or fence, not less than six feet high, or with a chainlink type fence and a greenbelt planting so as to obscure all view from any adjacent residential, office or business district or from a public street. 
(o) ?In residential districts R-1, R-2 and R-3, where lots are located on the St. Clair River or associated channels and canals, the property shall be treated as a through lot and have required front yards on the street and waterfront sides. Any dwelling to be constructed on the river, channel or canal frontage shall have a minimum setback on the waterfront side determined by the average setback of adjacent dwellings from the river, channel or canal. 
(p) ?In a block on one side of the street 50 percent or more occupied, the depth of the front yard need not be more than the average depth of front yards of existing buildings, and in no instance shall the front yard depth be less than 15 feet. 
(q) ?Single-family detached condominiums in a condominium subdivision shall meet all minimum requirements and standards of the district in which such dwellings are to be constructed, including minimum floor area requirements. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1400, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-399. - Average lot size. 
    The intent of this section is to permit the subdivider or developer to vary his lot sizes and lot widths so as to average the minimum size of lot per unit as required in this article for each one- and two-family residential district. If this option is selected, the following conditions shall be met: 
(1) ?In meeting the average minimum lot size, the subdivision shall be so designed as not to create lots having an area or width greater than ten percent below that area or width required in the schedule of regulations and shall not create an attendant increase in the number of lots. 
(2) ?Each final plat submitted as part as part of a preliminary plat shall average the minimum required for the district in which it is located. 
(3) ?All computations showing lot area and the average resulting through this technique shall be indicated on the print of the preliminary plat. 
(4) ?Lot averaging shall not be utilized in combination with a subdivision open space plan. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1401, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-400. - Subdivision open space plan. 
(a) ?The intent of the subdivision open space plan is to promote the following objectives: 
(1) ?Provide a more desirable living environment by preserving the natural character of open fields, stands of trees, brooks, hills and similar natural assets. 
(2) ?Encourage developers to use a more creative approach in the development of residential areas. 
(3) ?Encourage a more efficient, aesthetic and desirable use of open area, while recognizing a reduction in development costs and allowing the developer to bypass natural obstacles on the site. 
(4) ?Encourage the provision of open space within reasonable distance to all lot development of the subdivision and to further encourage the development of recreational facilities. 
(b) ?Modification to the standards outlined in this article may be made in the one- and two-family residential districts when the following conditions are met: 
(1) ?The lot area in all one- and two-family residential districts which are served by a public sanitary sewer system may be reduced up to 20 percent. In the R-1 district, this reduction may be accomplished in part by reducing lot widths up to ten feet. In the R-2 and R-3 districts, this reduction may be accomplished in part by reducing lot widths up to five feet. These lot area reductions shall be permitted, provided that the dwelling unit density shall be not greater than if the land area to be subdivided were developed in the minimum square feet lot areas as required for each one- and two-family districts under this article. All calculations shall be predicated upon the one- and two-family districts having the following gross densities (including rights-of-way): 
District Dwelling Units Per Acre R-1 3.4 R-2 4.5 R-3 5.5  
(2) ?Rear yards may be reduced to 30 feet when such lots border on land dedicated for park, recreation and/or open space purposes, provided that the width of such dedicated land shall not be less than 100 feet measured at the point at which it abuts the rear yard of the adjacent lot. 
(3) ?Under the provisions of subsection (b)(1) of this section, for each square foot of land gained within a residential subdivision through the reduction of lot size below the minimum requirements as outlined in this article, at least equal amounts of land shall be dedicated to the common use of the lot owners of the subdivision in a manner approved by the city. 
(4) ?The area to be dedicated for subdivision open space purposes shall in no instance be less than two acres and shall be in a location and shape approved by the planning commission. 
(5) ?The land area necessary to meet the minimum requirements of this section shall not include bodies of water, swamps or land with excessive grades making it unsuitable for recreation. All land dedicated shall be so graded and developed as to have natural drainage. The entire area may, however, be located in a floodplain. 
(6) ?This plan for reduced sizes shall be permitted only if it is mutually agreeable to the legislative body and the subdivider or developer. 
(7) ?This plan for reduced sizes shall be started within six months after having received approval of the final plat and must be completed in a reasonable time. Failure to start within this period shall void all previous approval. 
(8) ?Under this subdivision open space approach, the developer or subdivider shall dedicate the total park area at the time of filing of the final plat on all or any portion of the plat. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1402, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-401. - Single-family clustering option. 
    The intent of this section is to permit the development of single-family residential patterns which, through design innovation, will introduce flexibility so as to provide for the sound physical handling of site plans in situations where the normal subdivision approach would otherwise be unnecessarily restrictive. To accomplish this, the following modifications to the one- and two-family residential standards shall be permitted, subject to the conditions herein imposed: 
(1) ?Under this section, the attaching of single-family homes shall be permitted when said homes are attached through a common party wall which does not have over 50 percent of its area in common with an abutting dwelling wall; by means of an architectural wall detailed which does not form interior room space; or through a common party wall in only the garage portion of adjacent structures, there being no common party wall relationship permitted through any other portion of the residential units. 
(2) ?The number of units attached in the above manner shall not exceed four. 
(3) ?Yard requirements may be modified as follows: 
a. ?No building shall be located closer to a street or service drive than 25 feet. 
b. ?Spacing between groups of attached units or individual units shall be at least 15 feet in the R-1, R-2 and R-3 districts. 
c. ?That side of a cluster adjacent to a service drive or private lane shall not be nearer to such drive or land than ten feet. 
(4) ?In all one- and two-family residential districts on parcels of land meeting certain criteria, densities in a cluster development may be increased to the following maximums (including street private right-of-way): 
District Dwelling Units Per Acre R-1 3.4 R-2 4.5 R-3 5.5  
(5) ?The planning commission may approve the clustering or attaching of buildings on parcels of land, under single ownership and control, which in the opinion of the planning commission have characteristics which would make sound physical development under the normal subdivision approach impractical because of parcel size, shape or dimension or because of soil problems or similar natural condition. In approving an area for cluster development at the densities permitted in subsection (4) of this section, the planning commission shall find at least one of the following conditions to exist: 
a. ?The parcel to be developed is generally parallel to and generally does not exceed 500 feet in depth on those unsubdivided parcels of land abutting at major or collector thoroughfare of at least 86 feet of right-of-way width so as to provide transition between such major thoroughfare and adjacent single-family detached housing. 
b. ?A parcel of land located between developed single-family detached uses in which the size, shape and location of the parcel preclude a development of single-family detached units for subdivision in a proper manner; the determination shall be made by the planning commission. 
c. ?A small parcel which is shaped such that it contains acute angles which would make a normal subdivision difficult to achieve and has frontage on a major thoroughfare or collector street. 
d. ?A substantial part of the parcel's perimeter is bordered by a major or collector thoroughfare which would result in a substantial proportion of the lots of the development abutting the major thoroughfare or collector street. 
e. ?The parcel contains a floodplain or poor soil condition which results in a substantial portion of the total area of the parcel being unbuildable. Soil test borings, floodplain maps or other documented evidence must be submitted to the planning commission in order to substantiate the parcel's qualification for cluster development. 
f. ?The parcel contains natural assets which could be preserved through the use of cluster development. Such assets may include natural stands of large trees, lands which serve as a natural habitat for wildlife, unusual topographic features or other natural assets which, in the opinion of the planning commission, should be preserved. Requests for qualification under these conditions must be supported by documented evidence which indicates that the natural assets would qualify the parcel under this option. 
(6) ?The area in open space accomplished through the use of one-family clusters shall represent at least 15 percent of the horizontal development area of a one-family cluster development. 
(7) ?In order to provide an orderly transition where the project proposed for use as a cluster development abuts a one- and two-family residential district, the planning commission shall determine that the abutting one- and two-family district is effectively buffered by means of one of the following within the cluster development; one-family lots, or detached one-family units subject to the standards of the schedule of regulations, open or recreations space, a major thoroughfare or collector street, a minimum of 40 feet greenbelt or some other similar means of providing a transition. 
(8) ?Any area to be dedicated for park, recreation or open space purposes as a result of the application of this section shall be subject to review and approval of the planning commission for minimum size, shape, location, access, the character of any improvements and assurance of the permanence of the open space and its continued maintenance. 
(9) ?In submitting a proposed layout under this section, the sponsor of the development shall include, along with the site plan, the proposed building elevations and typical floor plans, an indication of existing and proposed public easements, soil information or data sufficient to determine the buildability of the site, topography drawn at a two-foot contour interval, all computations relative to acreage and density, and any other details which will assist in reviewing the proposed plan. 
(10) ?Approval of a site plan under this section shall be effective for a period of one year. Development not started in this period shall be considered as abandoned, and authorization shall expire requiring that any proposed development thereafter shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission. Any proposed change in site plan or building, after approval has been received, shall require review and approval by the planning commission prior to effecting said change. 
(11) ?Application of this option shall only be permitted when the site plan has been reviewed and approved by the planning commission. 
(12) ?Prior to taking action on a proposed one-family residential clustering option, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with section 50-546. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1403, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-402. - Condominium projects. 
    All condominium projects, including, but not limited to, attached condominium unit projects, single unattached site condominium unit projects, also known as site condominiums, and conversion condominium projects, shall conform to the requirements of this section and all other ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city, including, but not limited to, this article and the condominium act (MCL 559.101 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1404, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2003-1, 10-7-2003) 
Sec. 50-403. - Definitions. 
    In addition to the definitions set forth in section 50-3, the definitions set forth below and in the Michigan condominium act are incorporated herein and made a part hereof. 
    Attached condominium project means a division of land based upon condominium ownership which provides for multiple attached condominium units on each condominium units on each condominium lot. 
    Condominium documents means the master deed, recorded pursuant to the Condominium Act, and any other instrument referred to in the master deed or bylaws which affects the rights and obligations of a co-owner in the condominium. 
    Condominium lot means the area of land dedicated to the use of a structure that is either a single unattached condominium unit or a structure that contains two or more attached condominium units together with the limited common area dedicated to the respective unit or units. 
    Condominium structure or building means the principal building or structure constructed upon a lot intended for a single unattached condominium unit two or more attached condominium units. 
    Condominium subdivision (site condominium) means a method of subdivision where land ownership of sites is regulated by the condominium act, Public Act No. 59 of 1978 (MCL 559.101 et seq.), as opposed to the land division act , Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.), condominium subdivision shall be equivalent to the term "subdivision" as used in this chapter and the city subdivision regulations ordinance. 
    Setback, front, side and rear yard means the distance measured from the respective front, side and rear yard lines associated with the condominium lot. 
    Unattached condominium project or site condominium project means division of land based upon condominium ownership which provides for a single unattached condominium unit on each condominium lot. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1404(1), 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2003-1, 10-7-2003) 
Sec. 50-404. - General regulations. 
    The following regulations shall apply to all condominium projects permitted in any zoning district: 
(1) ?Attached condominium units on a condominium lot. Attached condominium units will be considered as one structure being constructed on a single lot for the purposes of determining dimensional requirements under this article and shall comply with all applicable regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(2) ?Unattached single condominium unit on a condominium lot. An unattached single condominium unit shall be considered as one structure being constructed on a single lot for the purpose of determining dimensional requirements under this article and shall comply with all applicable regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(3) ?Computation of minimum lot area. The area within public and private street rights-of-way shall not be included in the computation of minimum lot area. 
(4) ?One unattached condominium unit per condominium lot. Not more than one unattached condominium unit shall be located on a condominium lot with any other principal use. This requirement shall be incorporated into the condominium documents. 
(5) ?Yard requirements. Yard requirements shall be measured from the boundaries of the condominium lot and shall comply with all applicable regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(6) ?Utility connections. Each condominium unit shall be separately connected to all utilities including water, sanitary sewer, electrical, gas, telecommunications, and any other utility. 
(7) ?Relocation of lot boundaries. Relocation of condominium lot boundaries, if allowed in the condominium documents as permitted in section 48 of the condominium act, shall comply with all regulations of the zoning district in which they are located and shall be approved by the city planning commission in consultation with the city planner and city engineer. This requirement shall be included as part of the condominium documents. 
(8) ?Resulting lots. Each condominium lot which results from a division of another condominium lot as permitted by section 49 of the condominium act shall comply with all regulations of the zoning district within which it is located and shall be approved by the city planning commission in consultation with the city planner and city engineer. This requirement shall be included as a part of the condominium documents. 
(9) ?Land division requirements. The condominium project shall comply with the requirements of the land division act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) and the land division regulations and engineering standards of the city as may be amended from time to time. Attached condominium units and an unattached condominium unit may abut and have frontage on a private street provided that the condominium project complies with the requirements of this chapter and other ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city. 
(10) ?Design standards. The design standards as approved by the city council for water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, roads, sidewalks, streets, and other utilities shall apply, subject to such reasonable modifications as may be authorized by the city engineer based upon the location, topography, size, layout, and other site conditions of the proposed condominium project. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1404(2), 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2003-1, 10-7-2003) 
Sec. 50-405. - Specific regulations. 
    Condominium projects shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1) ?Unattached condominiums. Unattached condominiums, also known as site condominiums, shall be subject to all requirements and standards of the underlying zoning district, including, but not limited to, density, lot size, minimum floor area requirements, regulations governing the distance between buildings and the attachment of buildings, and other requirements as set forth in this article. All information and dimensions shall be depicted on the site plan so that the planning commission in consultation with the city planner and city engineer can determine that all applicable minimum requirements are met. These regulations shall be applied by requiring the condominium unit and a surrounding limited common element to be equal in area to the minimum lot area and lot width requirements for the district in which the project is located. The site condominium unit shall be equivalent to the area of the lot where a principal building can be constructed and there shall be a limited common element associated with each site condominium unit, which shall be at lease equivalent to the minimum yard area requirements for the district in which the project is located. 
(2) ?Street requirements in any condominium project. All streets and sidewalks in a residential condominium project shall conform at a minimum to the standards and specifications as determined by the city for a typical street in a single-family residential subdivision. All streets and sidewalks in nonresidential condominium project shall conform to reasonable requirements for such commercial uses as determined by the city planner and city engineer in light of the proposed land use. The amount of right-of-way to be dedicated as general common element for streets is the same amount required in a subdivision play by the city, but not less than 60 feet. 
(3) ?Commercial condominiums. Commercial attached or unattached condominium projects shall be subject to all requirements applicable to the appropriate underlying zoning district which exists for the property on which a commercial site condominium may be proposed, including minimum lot requirements and all other applicable requirements set forth in this article. The regulations shall be applied by requiring the condominium unit and a surrounding limited common element to be equal in area to the minimum lot area and lot width requirements for the district in which the project is located. The commercial condominium project must be appropriate to the underlying zoning for the project site. 
(4) ?Conversion condominiums. All conversion condominiums shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter and shall require final site plan approval by the planning commission prior to the occupancy of any converted condominium unit. The site plan shall include all existing conditions and clearly identify all proposed site modifications. The planning commission shall consider the site plan for a condominium as a new site plan and may revise any requirements of previous site plan approvals. 
(5) ?Location of condominium units. Unattached single-family residential condominium units shall be located in a single family residential zoning district. Attached single family residential condominium units shall be located in a multiple family residential zoning district. Commercial attached and unattached condominium units shall be located in a commercial zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1404(3), 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2003-1, 10-7-2003) 
Sec. 50-406. - Preliminary and final review for condominium projects. 
(a) ?Prior to the preparation of a preliminary site plan for a condominium project, the owner or the developer of the proposed project may request a meeting with the planning commission, city council or the city building official and at the direction of the city with the city engineer, city planner or attorney, to discuss the applicant's condominium project. The applicant is encouraged to submit a sketch to scale indicating the general location and configuration of the property to be divided; the alignment of streets and lots, and the relationship of the proposed site condominium to adjacent streets and neighboring properties. The prospective applicant should submit a written narrative that discusses how the project will be served by water and sanitary sewer, storm drainage and other utilities and that includes any additional information that will assist the city in evaluating the condominium project. 
(b) ?Prior to recording the master deed required by the condominium act, the condominium project shall undergo a two-step review and approval process involving preliminary and final review of the site plan and the condominium documents. Prior to the expansion or conversion of a condominium project to include additional land, site plan review and approval shall be required pursuant to the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1404(4), 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2003-1, 10-7-2003) 
Sec. 50-407. - Additional site plan requirements. 
    In addition to the requirements of section 50-462, the following information shall be included on or attached to the site plan and submitted to the building official at least 21 days prior to a meeting for preliminary site plan review, concurrently with the notice required to be given to the city pursuant to section 71 of the condominium act (MCL 559.171). The site plan and the condominium documents with exhibits shall be reviewed by the city planner, city engineer and the attorney: 
(1) ?The names, addresses, e-mail addresses and telephone numbers of: 
a. ?All persons with ownership interest in the land on which the condominium project will be located together with a description of the nature of each entity's interest in the land, including, for example, fee owner, optionee, lessee, or purchaser pursuant to a binding purchase agreement land contract vendee. 
b. ?All engineers, attorneys, architects, land surveyors, planners, or landscape architects associated with the condominium project. 
c. ?The developer or proprietor of the condominium project. 
(2) ?The tax identification numbers and legal descriptions of the parcels of property under consideration and a boundary survey and legal description of the assembled parcels, if applicable. 
(3) ?The purpose of the project such as, residential or commercial, unattached or attached site condominiums. 
(4) ?Approximate number of condominium units to be developed on the subject parcel. 
(5) ?A preliminary site plan, drawn to a reasonable scale, which shows the following information. 
a. ?The vehicular circulation system planned for the proposed development, including a designation of each street as to whether it is proposed to be private or dedicated to the public. 
b. ?The location of existing private and public street adjacent to the proposed development with an indication how they will connect with the proposed circulation system for the new development. 
c. ?The type and location of street signs. 
d. ?The proposed layout of the condominium units, utility easements, parking, open space and recreation and park areas. 
e. ?Proposed water and sanitary sewer service. 
f. ?Proposed storm water and drainage system. 
g. ?Proposed utility plans including electricity, gas, and telecommunications. 
h. ?Preliminary indication of the regulation proposed to be included in the condominium documents in the nature of restrictive covenants which regulate the use and maintenance of public areas, accessory structures, payment of assessments, and enforcement of condominium regulations. 
i. ?The applicant shall provide updated information regarding the above topics until the last certificate of occupancy has been issued pursuant to this article. 
(6) ?Plans for the following: 
a. ?Cross sections of roads, drive aisles and paved areas. 
b. ?Site drainage showing topography and flow directions, including retention and detention areas, if any. 
(7) ?Specific locations and dimensions of wetland areas and significant site features such as tree stands, unusual slopes, streams and water drainage areas. If deemed necessary because of site or soil conditions or because of the scope of the project being proposed, a detailed hydrology study may be required, subject to review by the city engineer. 
(8) ?Preliminary approval by the city engineer that sufficient capacity for water service and sanitary sewer service and storm drainage is available in the city to serve the condominium project. 
(9) ?Drafts of the condominium documents including the master deed. Condominium bylaws and condominium subdivision plan as required by the condominium act. 
(10) ?The site condominium site plan shall identify all necessary public easements proposed to be granted to the city for the purposes of constructing, operating, inspecting, maintaining, repairing, altering, replacing, or removing public pipelines, mains, conduits and other installations of a similar character for the purpose of providing public utilities, including conveyance of sewage, water and storm water run-off across, through and under the property subject to said easements, and excavating and refilling ditches and trenches necessary for the location of such public structures. 
(11) ?All information required to be furnished under the subsection above shall be kept updated until the last certificate of occupancy has been issued as required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1404(5), 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2003-1, 10-7-2003) 
Sec. 50-408. - Required improvements. 
    The same required improvements set out in the subdivision regulations ordinance regulating preliminary and final plats shall be applicable to condominium projects, unless otherwise directed by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1404(6), 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2003-1, 10-7-2003) 
Sec. 50-409. - Preliminary approval by the planning commission. 
(a) ?The planning commission shall consider whether to recommend to the city council that the council grant preliminary approval of the site plan and condominium documents for the proposed condominium project. Based upon the standards and requirements set forth in this article and other applicable local, state, and federal rules, regulations and statutes, the planning commission shall recommend and the city council shall do one of the following: 
(1) ?Grant preliminary approval; 
(2) ?Grant preliminary approval subject to conditions; or 
(3) ?Deny the proposed condominium project and site plan. 
(b) ?A denial shall mean that the proposed project and site plan do not meet the requirements of this article. Any denial shall specify the reasons for the denial and those requirements that have not been met. 
(c) ?A preliminary approval shall mean that the condominium project and site plan meet the requirements as set forth in this article and all other ordinances of the city. Subject to any conditions imposed by the planning commission as part of its motion, preliminary approval assures the applicant that the project and site plan will receive final approval if all state and county approvals are obtained, no negative comments are received from any governmental agency or public utility, and all local, state and federal laws have been met. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1404(7), 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2003-1, 10-7-2003) 
Sec. 50-410. - State and county approval. 
(a) ?All site condominium projects shall require the review and approval of the following agencies prior to final site plan approval: 
(1) ?The county road commission or the state department of transportation if any part of the project includes or abuts a county road or a state highway or includes streets or roads that connect with or lie within the right-of-way of such county or state highway. 
(2) ?The county drain commission. 
(3) ?The state department of environmental quality shall approve the extension of the water supply system, with state department of environmental quality reviews of sanitary, water, wetlands and other matters as required. 
(b) ?In addition to the specific required approvals, all site condominiums project site plans shall be submitted, to the extent required by law, to the state department of environmental quality, each of the public utilities serving the site, and any other state agency designated by the planning commission, for informational purposes. The planning commission shall consider any comments made by these agencies prior to the final site plan approval. Names of streets shall comply with the city's designation of street names for the purposes of 911 emergency communication. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1404(8), 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2003-1, 10-7-2003) 
Sec. 50-411. - Final approval. 
    Final approval shall be granted by the city council upon the receipt and approval of all the following: 
(1) ?A revised, dated site plan incorporating all of the changes, if any, required for preliminary approval or required by any state or local agencies. 
(2) ?Revised condominium documents required by the condominium act or by this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1404(9), 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2003-1, 10-7-2003) 
Sec. 50-412. - Master deed, restrictive covenants, "as built" survey, and Mylar copy. 
    The condominium project developer or proprietor shall furnish the building official and the city engineer with the following: 
(1) ?One copy of the recorded master deed with exhibits and two copies of an "as built" survey. 
(2) ?One copy of the site plan on a Mylar sheet of at least 13 inches by 16 inches with an image not to exceed 10½ inches by 14 inches and on a 3½-inch diskette or on a CD in AutoCAD Release 14 or higher format. 
(3) ?The "as built" survey shall be reviewed by the city engineer for compliance with city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1404(10), 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2003-1, 10-7-2003) 
Sec. 50-413. - Fees. 
    The applicant shall pay and deposit such fees as are required by the city council as set forth by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1404(11), 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2003-1, 10-7-2003) 
Sec. 50-414. - Monuments required. 
    All condominium projects shall be marked with monuments as follows: 
(1) ?Monuments shall be located in the ground and made according to the following requirements, but it is not intended or required that monuments be placed within the traveled portion of a street to mark angles in the boundary of the condominium project if the angle points can be readily reestablished by reference to monuments along the sidelines of the streets. 
(2) ?All monuments used shall be made of solid iron or steel bars at least one-half-inch in diameter and 36 inches long and completely encased in concrete at least four inches in diameter. 
(3) ?Monuments shall be located in the ground at all angles in the boundaries of the condominium project; at the intersection lines of streets and at the intersection of the lines of streets with the boundaries of the condominium project; at all points in the sidelines of streets and alleys; at all angles of an intermediate traverse line and at the intersection of all limited common elements and all common elements. 
(4) ?If the required location of a monument is an inaccessible place, or where the locating of a monument nearby and the precise location thereof be clearly indicated on the plans and referenced to the true point. 
(5) ?If a point required to be monumented is on a bedrock outcropping, a steel rod at least one-half-inch in diameter shall be drilled and grouted into solid rock to a depth of at least eight inches. 
(6) ?All required monuments shall be placed flush with the ground where practicable. 
(7) ?All unit corners shall be monumented in the field by iron or steel bars or iron pipes at least 18 inches long and one-half-inch in diameter, or other approved markers. 
(8) ?The city council may waive the placing of any of the required monuments and markers for a reasonable time, not to exceed one year, on the condition that the proprietor deposits with the city clerk cash or certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit running to the city, whichever the proprietor selects, in an amount approved by the city as sufficient to accomplish said placing of the required monuments and markers. Such cash, certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be returned to the proprietor upon receipt of a certificate by a surveyor that the monuments and markers have been placed as required within the time specified. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1404(12), 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2003-1, 10-7-2003) 
Sec. 50-415. - Temporary occupancy. 
    The city council, upon recommendation from the planning commission, may allow occupancy of the condominium project before all improvements required by this chapter are installed, provided that a bond or other suitable guarantee is submitted sufficient in amount and type to provide for the installation of improvements before the expiration of the temporary occupancy permit without expense to the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1404(13), 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2003-1, 10-7-2003) 
Sec. 50-416. - Condominium plan revision. 
    If the condominium subdivision plan is revised, the final site plan shall be revised accordingly and submitted for review by the planning commission before any building permit may be issued. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1404(14), 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2003-1, 10-7-2003) 
State Law reference— Condominium act, MCL 559.101 et seq. 
Secs. 50-417—50-445. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 50-446. - Conflicting regulations. 
    Whenever any provisions of this chapter impose more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other law or ordinance, than the provisions of this article shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other law or ordinance impose more stringent requirements than are imposed or required by this article, then the provisions of such law or ordinance shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1500, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-447. - Scope. 
    No building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed or altered and maintained and no new use or change shall be made or maintained of any building, structure or land or part thereof, except in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1501, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-448. - Nonconforming lots, uses of land, structures and uses of structures and premises. 
(a) ?Intent. 
(1) ?It is the intent of this article to permit legal nonconformities to continue until they are removed but not to encourage their survival. Within the districts established by this chapter or amendments that may later be adopted, there exist lots, structures and uses of land and structures which were lawful before this chapter was passed or amended but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this article or future amendment. Such uses are declared by this article to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this article that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, not be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. All nonconforming uses and structures are classified as Class B nonconforming uses or structures unless designated Class A nonconforming uses or structures. 
(2) ?A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this article by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the addition of other uses of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the district involved. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this article shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this article is derived and upon which actual construction has been diligently carried on. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner; except that where demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building involved. 
(b) ?Class A nonconforming uses or structures. Those nonconforming uses or structures which have been designated by the planning commission, after hearing, shall be designated Class A providing findings that the following conditions exist with respect to the use or structure: 
(1) ?The use or structure was lawful at its inception. 
(2) ?Continuance of the use or structure does not significantly depress property values of nearby properties. 
(3) ?Continuance of the use or structure would not be contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or the spirit of this article. 
(4) ?No useful purpose would be served by strict application of the provisions of this article with which the use or structure does not conform. 
(c) ?Class A conditions. The decision to grant a Class A designation shall be made in writing setting forth the findings and reasons on which it is based. Conditions may be attached, including time limits where deemed necessary to assure the use or structure does not become contrary to the public health, safety, or welfare or the spirit and purpose of this chapter and further to assure that at least the following standards are met. 
(1) ?Screening and landscaping should be provided in keeping with community standards to provide compatibility with adjacent uses. 
(2) ?Effects which may have a negative impact such as lighting, noise or visual impact should be minimized. 
(3) ?Where such use is in close proximity to homes, parking should not be permitted to utilize curb-side parking to an extent greater than the immediate property frontage of the nonconforming use. 
(4) ?New signage should meet zoning district requirements. Existing nonconforming signs may be required to be eliminated or reduced in size and number as the commission may, in its judgment, determine. 
(5) ?The exterior building materials utilized in any alteration to the building shall be harmonious with materials on abutting properties whenever practical. 
(6) ?Enlargement of a building may be allowed provided such enlargement does not create a more nonconforming yard setback condition which would impact on conforming properties in the immediate vicinity. 
(7) ?The commission may require such other safeguards and improvements as it may deem necessary to protect conforming uses in the surrounding area. 
a. ?Once the planning commission has conducted a hearing and designated a nonconforming use or structure to the person, firm or partnership requesting the designation, said Class A designation, said Class A designation shall be deemed temporary until the planning commission has received written verification from the building inspector that the party requesting the Class A designation has complied with all of the conditions set forth by the planning commission. 
b. ?Once the planning commission has received written verification from the building inspector, that the party requesting the Class A designation has complied with said conditions, the Class A designation shall become final, subject to other provisions of this article as hereinafter prescribed. 
c. ?No Class A nonconforming use or structure shall be resumed if it has been discontinued for six consecutive months or 18 months in any three-year period. No Class A nonconforming use or structure shall be used, altered or enlarged in violation of any condition imposed in its designation. 
d. ?No temporary Class A nonconforming use or structure which has not met with all the conditions set forth by the planning commission within six months from the date of the nonconforming use or structure received a temporary Class A designation shall receive final approval unless a request for extension of time in which to fulfill all of the conditions set forth by the planning commission is submitted in writing to the planning commission along with sufficient reasons as to why the temporary Class A designation should be extended. 
e. ?Upon a showing of good cause, the planning commission may extend the temporary Class A designation for the nonconforming use or structure for another six months. 
(d) ?Class B nonconforming uses or structures. All nonconforming uses or structures, not designated Class A, shall be Class B nonconforming uses or structures. Class B nonconforming uses and structures shall comply with all the provisions of this chapter relative to nonconforming uses and structures. 
(e) ?Nonconforming lots. In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this article, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this article is derived. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district; provided that yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Variance to yard requirements shall be obtained through approval of the board of appeals. 
(f) ?Nonconforming uses of land. Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this article is derived, lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this chapter as enacted or amended, such use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1) ?No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(2) ?No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(3) ?If such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than 30 days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this article for the district in which such land is located. 
(g) ?Nonconforming structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this article is derived that could not be built under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1) ?No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity. 
(2) ?Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 60 percent of its reasonable value exclusive of the foundation at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
(3) ?Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
(h) ?Nonconforming uses of structures and land. If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and land in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this article, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1) ?No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this article in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. 
(2) ?Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use, and which existed at the time of adoption or amendment of this article, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
(3) ?If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises, may be changed to another nonconforming use provided that the board of appeals, either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the board of appeals may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the purposes and intent of this article. 
(4) ?Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. 
(5) ?When a nonconforming use of structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or ceases to exist for six consecutive months or for 18 months during any three-year period, the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located. Structures, or structures and premises in combination, occupied by seasonal uses which are discontinued or cease to exist for 12 consecutive months and shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(6) ?Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. 
(i) ?Repairs and maintenance. On any building devoted in whole or in part to any non-conforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs or on replacements of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent not exceeding 50 percent of the assessed value of the building, provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this article shall not be increased. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. 
(j) ?Uses subject to special conditions not nonconforming uses. Any use for which a general exception or special approval is permitted as provided in this article shall not be deemed a nonconforming use but shall, without further action, be deemed a conforming use in such district. 
(k) ?Change of tenancy or ownership. There may be a change of tenancy, ownership or management of any existing nonconforming uses of land, structures, and premises, provided there is no change in the nature or character of such nonconforming uses except in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1502, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2001-3, 7-5-2001) 
State Law reference— Nonconforming uses or structures, MCL 125.3208. 
Sec. 50-449. - Accessory buildings structures and uses. 
    Accessory building structures and uses, except as otherwise permitted in this article, shall be subject to the following regulations. 
(1) ?Where the accessory garage or building is structurally attached to a main building, it shall be subject to and must conform to all yard regulations of this article applicable to main buildings. 
(2) ?In residential districts, detached accessory buildings shall not be erected in any required yard, except a rear yard. 
(3) ?Up to a total of two accessory buildings may be permitted on any lot and in total shall not occupy more than 35 percent of a rear yard and shall not exceed 720 square feet in total area. 
(4) ?No detached accessory building shall be located closer than ten feet to any main building, nor shall it be located closer than three feet to any side or rear lot line. In those instances where the rear lot line is coterminous with an alley right-of-way, the accessory building shall be no closer than one foot to such a rear lot line. In no instance shall an accessory structure be located within a dedicated easement right-of-way. 
(5) ?No detached accessory building in any residential district shall exceed one story or 14 feet in height. Such accessory building shall be constructed of exterior building materials compatible with the character of the neighborhood. A review by the planning commission of building material compatibility may be requested by the building inspector. Accessory buildings in all other districts may be constructed to equal the permitted maximum height of structures in such districts. 
(6) ?When an accessory building is located on a corner lot, the side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot to its rear, such building shall not project beyond the front yard line required on the lot to its rear, such building shall not project beyond the front yard line required on the lot in the rear of such corner lot. When an accessory building is located on a corner lot, the side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the side lot line of the lot to its rear, such buildings shall not project beyond the side yard line of the lot in the rear of such corner lot. 
(7) ?The parking/storage of boats and recreational equipment is prohibited with the following exceptions: 
a. ?The parking/storage of not more than the aggregate of three boats and/or items or recreational equipment currently registered and licensed to the owner or occupant shall be permitted subject to the following conditions: 
1. ?Parking/storage shall be within the confines of the rear yard subject to meeting the requirements of this section applicable to accessory buildings, insofar as distance from principal structures, lot lines and easements are concerned. 
2. ?In those instances where a rear yard is not accessible, the building administrator may allow side-yard parking/storage, provided such parking/storage shall be behind the front of the principal building and meets all setback requirements for a principal building. The building administrator, in writing, prior to any side-yard storage must approve a sketch plan showing the location of the side-yard parking/storage. 
3. ?Driveway parking of boats and recreation equipment not exceeding seven feet in cumulative height, 21 feet in length and eight feet six inches in width is permitted between the dates of April 1 through November 1, provided boats are on trailers with a current license and recreation equipment has a current license or registration as may be appropriate. Boats and recreation equipment shall not be parked closer than ten feet to a lot line bordering a street. 
4. ?On waterfront lots, boats may be stored/parked on the waterside. 
5. ?Recreational boats belonging to the owner of a lot, moored within navigable waterways adjacent to the lot, shall not be counted toward the boat and/or recreational equipment parking/storage limit total. 
6. ?Short-term parking of recreational motor homes and campers on driveways in the front yard is permitted for loading and unloading and for routine maintenance for periods not exceeding seven days in any 30-day period. The short-term parking of such motor homes and/or campers shall not be closer than ten feet to a lot line bordering a street. 
7. ?Owners of recreational vehicles who parked their recreational vehicles in their front driveway or side yard as of May 1, 2000, may apply to the building administrator for written approval to continue to so park said recreational vehicles after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Said approval shall be granted provided that the applicant meets all of the following provisions to the satisfaction of the building administrator: 
(i) ?The specific recreational vehicle (identified by the vehicle identification number) was regularly parked in the front driveway or side yard prior to May 1, 2000. 
(ii) ?The applicant is unable to otherwise park said recreational vehicle in compliance with the provisions of this section 50-449. 
(iii) ?Application is made within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
An approval granted pursuant to this section shall be limited to the specific recreational vehicle identified in the application and shall terminate when said recreational vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed of. Approval granted pursuant to this section is also subject to the provisions of subsections (7)b—f of this section. 
b. ?The parking/storage of boats and/or recreational equipment is prohibited on vacant lots or any public streets. 
c. ?Boats and/or recreational equipment parked or stored shall not be connected to sanitary facilities and shall not be occupied. Electrical hook-ups may only be provided for the purpose of maintaining charged batteries. 
d. ?Any boat or recreational equipment which serves as a collection point for pools or ponds of water, a breeding ground for mosquitoes or other insects, or a breeding ground for rats, rodents, vermin or other pests, while stored or parked is hereby declared a nuisance. 
e. ?Any wrecked damaged, inoperative, disassembled or disabled boat or recreational equipment, stored or parked in zoning districts other than those zoned for commercial repair is prohibited unless it is within the confines of any enclosed garage or accessory structure. 
f. ?The use of any recreational equipment or boat for the storage of materials, goods, or equipment other than those items considered to be a part of the unit or essential to its immediate use in any zoning district is prohibited. 
(8) ?Satellite dish antennas subject to the following: 
a. ?Satellite dish antennas are permitted in rear yards only and may not be located nearer than six feet from a lot line, and may not be located on or placed on an easement. 
b. ?In districts other than residential districts, when a satellite dish antenna cannot be installed in conformance to the requirements of this article, a satellite dish antenna is permitted in a side yard or upon the roof of a main building upon the expressed written approval of the building inspector. 
c. ?In districts that permit the sale of a satellite dish antenna, the owner of a business may display satellite dish antennas for sale purposes in the front yard or side yard of the business premises, provided such satellite dish antennas do not obstruct or hinder public access and are not located on a sidewalk or within a dedicated right-of-way. 
d. ?A three day non-renewable temporary use permit for a satellite dish antenna mounted to a mobile unit may be granted by the building inspector after application has been made therefore. 
(9) ?Wireless transmission antenna and towers subject to the following: 
a. ?A maximum height limit of 60 feet for towers and antenna is permitted in residential districts. 
b. ?No maximum height limit is required in nonresidential districts. 
c. ?In all districts, a tower or antenna shall be located on the parcel or lot in such manner that the base of the tower or antenna is set back from all property lines not less than the height of the tower or antenna. 
(10) ?A resident of a dwelling unit may have not more than one motorized vehicle for sale on the site of such dwelling unit at any time and in no instance shall vacant residential lots or parcels be utilized for the sale of vehicles. A resident may repair vehicles of the resident on the property of the resident's dwelling unit; however, in no instance shall a resident repair the vehicle of other than a resident of the dwelling unit on said property. In no instance shall vehicles for sale be displayed in a front yard other than on the driveway portion of such yard. The sale of vehicles from a residential property shall not exceed two vehicles in any one year. 
(11) ?Freestanding solar panels shall be considered an accessory building and shall be subject to the requirements for such, together with all other applicable building codes and ordinances. 
(12) ?Wind generators may be permitted in rear yards when the following conditions are met: 
a. ?The highest point of any portion of the generator shall not exceed 35 feet above the average grade of the lot. 
b. ?The generator device shall be places no closer to any side or rear lot line that the total distance between the grade of the lot at the base of the tower and the highest point of any portion of the generator. 
c. ?The maximum diameter formed by a circle encompassing the outermost portions of the blades or other wind activated surfaces shall not exceed 30 percent of the distance between the ground and the highest point of any portion of the wind generator. The generator shall be so located that no portion of the structure would penetrate the vertical plane of any adjacent property line if it were to topple over its normally assembled configuration. 
d. ?The construction of the tower, blades, base structure, accessory building and wiring shall meet all applicable local building codes and ordinances. 
(13) ?Trash receptacles are permitted provided that: 
a. ?The trash receptacle is located in a rear yard or interior side yard and is clearly accessible to vehicles. 
b. ?Trash receptacles shall be screened from view on all sides. Such screening shall consist of walls constructed of brick or finished concrete materials or earth mound either of which are not less than six feet in height or at least one foot above the height of the enclosed trash receptacle, whichever is greater. 
c. ?In nonresidential districts, trash receptacles and their screening enclosures shall be located as far as practicable from any adjoining residential district or use and shall in no instance be located within 20 feet of any single-family residential property line or district. 
d. ?The location of trash receptacles shall be indicated on site plans and the location and screening shall be subject to the approval of the planning commission when the planning commission reviews the site plan. Also see section 50-455(5). 
(14) ?One commercial vehicle may be parked as an accessory use to a dwelling subject to the following conditions: 
a. ?The vehicle is used as the principal means of transportation for a resident in the conduct of such resident's employment or profession or is the resident's sole means of transportation. 
b. ?The vehicle is not a dump truck, stake truck, tank truck, flatbed truck, step van, wrecker, car hauler or semitractor. 
c. ?No part of the vehicle exceeds eight feet in height measured from the ground. 
d. ?The vehicle has no more than one rear axle. 
e. ?The vehicle does not exceed 13,000 pounds gross weight. 
f. ?In any proceeding for violation of this article, where a motor vehicle displays commercial license registration plates, such registration shall constitute prima facie presumption that it is a commercial vehicle at the time of any alleged violation. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1503, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 98-2, 3-3-1998; Ord. No. 2000-05, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 2001-01, 5-15-2001; Ord. No. 2002-02, 2-19-2002; Ord. No. 2016-02, § 1, 6-18-2003; Ord. No. 2010-01, 2-2-2010; Ord. No. 2013-02, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 50-450. - Parking requirements. 
    There shall be provided in all districts at the time of erection or enlargement of any main building or structure, automobile off-street parking space with adequate access to all spaces. The number of off-street parking spaces in conjunction with all land or building uses shall be provided prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy as hereinafter prescribed. 
(1) ?Off-street parking for other than residential use shall be either on the same lot or within 300 of the building it is intended to serve, measured from the nearest point of the off-street parking lot. Ownership of all lots or parcels intended for use as parking by the applicant shall be shown. 
(2) ?Residential off-street parking spaces shall consist of a parking strip, parking bay, driveway, garage, or combination thereof and shall be located on the premises they are intended to serve and subject to the provisions of section 50-451. 
(3) ?Any area once designated as required off street parking shall not be changed to any other use, unless and until facilities are provided elsewhere. 
(4) ?Off-street parking existing at the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived in conjunction with the operation of an existing building or use shall not be reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a similar new building or use. 
(5) ?Two or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required off-street parking, in which case the required number of parking spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the several individual uses computed separately. 
(6) ?In the instance of dual function of off-street parking spaces where the operating hours of buildings do not overlap, the planning commission may grant an exception 
(7) ?The storage of merchandise, motor vehicles for sale, trucks or the repair of vehicles is prohibited. 
(8) ?For those uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be in accord with a use which is similar in type. 
(9) ?When units or measurements determining the number of required parking spaces result in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half shall require one parking space. 
(10) ?For the purpose of computing the number of parking spaces required, the definition of usable floor area in this chapter shall govern. 
(11) ?The minimum number of off-street parking spaces by type of use shall be determined in accordance with the following schedule: 
MINIMUM NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES 
Uses Spaces Per Unit of Measure a. Residential (1) Housing for the elderly One space for each two units; should units revert to general occupancy, then two spaces per unit. (2) Residential, one-family and two-family Two for each dwelling unit. (3) Residential, multi-family Two for each dwelling unit. (4) Mobile home park Two for each mobile home site, one for every three mobile home sites for visitors and one for each employee of the mobile home court. (5) Residential, multiple-family high rise (five or more stories) 1.75 for each dwelling unit, or 1.5 for each dwelling unit, provided that 0.25 space per unit is indicated as potential future parking, to be initially developed as landscape open space. The site plan shall show how the parking lot could be expanded to add the 0.25 space per dwelling unit if ever found necessary. (6) Bed and breakfast Two for each dwelling unit, plus one for each leasable bedroom (7) Child and adult care facilities (a) Family child care homes for up to six adults Two for each dwelling unit plus one off street parking space for each care giver. (b) Group child care home for up to 12 adults Two for each dwelling unit plus one off-street space for each caregiver. (c) Group child care home for children Two for each dwelling unit plus one off-street parking space for each care giver (d) Dependent child care center One off-street parking space for each care giver plus one space for each ten children in the facility. (e) Dependent day care center for adults One off-street parking space for each care giver plus one space for each 20 adults in the facility. b. Institutional (1) Churches or temples One for each three seats or six feet of pews in the main unit of worship. (2) Hospitals One for each one bed. (3) Homes for the aged, convalescent homes One for each two employees plus one for each four persons in residence. (4) Elementary and junior high schools One for each one teacher, employee or administrator in addition to the requirements of the auditorium. (5) Foster care facilities One for each two residents plus one for each employee. (6) High school One for each one teacher, employee or administrator and one for each ten students in addition to the requirements of the auditorium. (7) Private clubs or lodges One for each 45 square feet of usable floor space. (8) Stadium and sports arena or similar outdoor place of assembly One for each four seats or eight feet benches. (9) Theaters and auditoriums One for each three seats plus one for each two employees. (10) Private golf clubs, swimming pool clubs, tennis clubs or other similar uses One for each two-member families or individuals plus spaces required for each one accessory use such as a restaurant or bar. (11) Golf courses, open to the general public, except miniature or "par 3" courses Six for each one golf hole and one for each employee, plus spaces required for each accessory use such as a restaurant or bar. c. Business (1) Automobile repair Two for each service stall plus one for each employee. (2) Auto wash One for each one employee. In addition, reservoir parking spaces equal in number to five times the maximum capacity of the auto wash. Maximum capacity of the auto wash shall mean the greatest number of automobiles possible undergoing some phase of washing at the same time, which shall be determined by dividing the length in feet of each car wash line by 20. (3) Auto wash (self-service or coin operated) Three for each washing stall in addition to the stall itself. (4) Athletic clubs, exercise establishments, health studios studios, sauna baths, judo clubs and other similar uses One parking space for each three persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county or state fire, single state construction or health codes plus one space per employee. In those instances where memberships are provided for, not less than one space per each five memberships shall be provided plus one space per employee or one space for each two clothing lockers plus one space per employee, whichever is the larger. (5) Amusement arcade One for each one game table and one for each amusement device (6) Beauty parlor or barbershop Two spaces for each of the first two beauty or barber chairs, and 1½ spaces for each additional chair. (7) Bowling alleys Five for each one bowling lane plus spaces required for accessory uses such as a bar or restaurant. (8) Dancehalls, pool or billiard parlors, roller or skating rinks, exhibition halls, and assembly halls without fixed seats One for each three persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county or state fire, single state construction or health codes or one space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater. (9) Commercial outdoor recreation facilities Four for each batting cage, archery ranges or similar activity. (10) Drive-in restaurant One for each employee and one for each 25 square feet of usable floor area. (11) Drive through One for each employee and five stack-up spaces for each drive through window or station. (12) Carry-out (with no eating on premises) One for each employee and one for each 60 square feet of usable floor area with a minimum of four spaces. (13) Establishments for sale and consumption, on the premises, of beverages, food or refreshment One for each 75 square feet of usable floor area or one for each two persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county or state fire, single state construction or health codes, whichever is the greater (14) Furniture and appliance, household equipment, repair shops, showroom of a plumber, decorator, electrician, or similar trade, shoe repair, and other similar uses. One for each 800 square feet of usable floor area used in processing, one additional space shall be provided for each two persons employed therein. (15) Gasoline service stations (full-service) Two for each lubrication stall, rack or pit; and one for each service vehicle used by the service station, in addition to space provided at each fuel pump dispenser. Gasoline service stations providing car wash facilities, sale of food, beverages and other products shall provide additional off-street parking spaces based on the requirements for such uses. (16) Gasoline filing stations (service station) One parking space for each 50 square feet of floor area in the cashier and office areas in addition to space provided at each fuel dispenser. In no instance shall such facility provide fewer than three spaces for cashier's office use. Gasoline service stations providing car wash facilities, sale of food, beverages and other products shall provide additional off-street parking spaces upon the requirements for such uses. (17) Laundromats and coin operated dry cleaners One for each two washing and/or dry-cleaning machines. (18) Miniature or "par 3" courses Three for each one hole plus one for each one employee. (19) Gold driving range Two spaces for each driving tee plus three spaces for employees. (20) Mortuary establishments One for each 50 square feet of assembly room usable floor area. (21) Motel, hotel or other commercial loading establishments One for each one occupancy unit plus one for each one employee plus spaces as required for accessory uses such as a bar, restaurant, meeting rooms, etc. (22) Motor vehicle sales and service establishments One for each 200 square feet of usable floor area of sales room and one for each one auto service stall in the service room. (23) Retail stores except as otherwise specified herein One for each 150 square feet of usable floor space. (24) Open front stores such as, but not limited to: dairy bars and fruit and vegetable stands Six parking spaces plus one space per employee. (25) Tennis club, paddle-ball club, racquetball club and other such similar uses Four spaces per court, plus additional spaces as may be required herein for affiliated uses such as restaurants, plus one space per employee. d. Office (1) Banks One for each 100 square feet of usable floor area. (2) Banks (drive-through) One for each employee. In addition, reservoir waiting spaces at each service window or station shall be provided at the rate of five for each service window or station. Each waiting space shall measure not less than 20 feet in length. (3) Business offices or professional offices, except as indicated in the following item One for each 300 square feet of usable floor area. (4) Professional offices of doctors dentists One for each 50 square feet of usable floor area in waiting room, and one for each examining room, dental chair, laboratory, reception office or similar use area to be occupied by patients. There is an additional parking space required for each employee. e. Industrial (1) Industrial or research establishments and related accessory offices Five plus one for every 1½ employees in the largest working shift or one for each 450 square feet of usable floor area in those instances where shift size is not known. Space on the site shall also be provided for all construction workers during period of plant construction. (2) Warehouses and wholesale establishments and related accessory offices Five plus one for every one employee in the largest working shift, or five plus one for every 1,700 square feet of usable floor space, whichever is the greater. f. Parking for disabled (all districts) Shall comply with the provisions of the American's with Disabilities Act (ADA) and shall comply with the Michigan Barrier Free Design Law. The number and layout of spaces required shall comply with ADA accessibility guideline including the following: Accessible Parking Spaces * 
(Required Minimum) ? 
Accessible Spaces 1 to 25 1 26 to 50 2 51 to 75 3 76 to 100 4 101 to 150 5 151 to 200 6 201 to 300 7 301 to 400 8 401 to 500 9 501 to 1,000 2 ** 1,001 to over 20 ***  
* Accessible spaces are required to be eight feet wide, with an adjacent access aisle five feet wide. One in every eight accessible spaces shall have an access aisle eight feet eight inches wide (rather than five feet) and shall be signed "van accessible." 
** Percent of total. 
*** Plus one space for each 100 over 1,000. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1504, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-451. - Off-street parking space layout, standards, construction and maintenance. 
    Wherever the off-street parking requirements in section 50-450 require the building of an off-street parking facility or where P parking districts are provided, such off-street parking lots shall be laid out, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards and regulations: 
(1) ?No parking lot shall be constructed unless and until a permit therefor is issued by the building inspector. Application for a permit shall be submitted to the building department in such form as may be determined by the building inspector and shall be accompanied with two sets of plans for the development and construction of the parking lot showing that the provisions of this section will be fully complied with. 
(2) ?Plans for the layout of off-street parking facilities shall be in accord with the following minimum requirements: 
Parking 
Patterns 
(degrees) Parking 
Space 
Maneuvering 
Lane Width 
(feet) Parking 
Space 
Width 
(feet) Length 
(feet) Total 
Width 
of One 
Tier of 
Spaces Plus 
Maneuvering 
Lane 
(feet) Total 
Width 
of Two 
Tiers of 
Spaces Plus 
Maneuvering 
Lane 
(feet) 0 (parallel parking) 12 8½ 23 20 28 30 to 53 12 8½ 20 32 52 54 to 74 15 8½ 20 36½ 58 75 to 90 20 9½ 20 40 60  
(3) ?All spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of maneuvering lanes. Backing directly into a street shall be prohibited. 
(4) ?Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot by means of clearly limited and defined drives shall be provided for all vehicles. Ingress and egress to a parking lot lying in an area zoned for other than single-family residential use shall not be across land zoned for single-family residential use. 
(5) ?All maneuvering lane widths shall permit one-way traffic movement, except that the ninety-degree pattern may permit two-way movement. 
(6) ?Each entrance and exit to and from any off-street parking lot located in an area zoned for other than single-family residential use shall be at least 25 feet distant from any adjacent property located in any single-family residential district. 
(7) ?The off-street parking area shall be provided with a continuous and obscuring masonry wall not less than four feet six inches in height measured from the surface of the parking area. This wall shall be provided on all sides where the next zoning district is designated as a residential district and shall be subject further to the requirements of section 50-458. When a front yard setback is required, all land between the wall and the front property line or street right-of-way line shall be kept free from refuse and debris and shall be landscaped with deciduous shrubs, evergreen material and ornamental trees in accord with requirements of section 50-455. The ground area shall be planted and kept in lawn. All such landscaping and planting shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance. 

PARKING LAYOUTS 
(8) ?The entire parking area, including parking spaces and maneuvering lanes, required under this section shall be provided with asphaltic or concrete surfacing in accordance with specifications approved by the city engineer. The parking area shall be surfaced within one year of the date the permit is issued. Off-street parking areas shall be drained so as to dispose of all surface water accumulated in the parking area in such a way as to preclude drainage of water onto adjacent property or toward buildings. 
(9) ?All lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall be so installed as to be confined within and directed onto the parking area only. 
(10) ?In all cases where a wall extends to an alley which is a means of ingress and egress to an off-street parking area, it shall be permissible to end the all not more than ten feet from such alley line in order to permit a wider means of access to the parking area. 
(11) ?The planning commission, upon application by the property owner of the off-street parking area, may modify the yard or wall requirements where, in unusual circumstances, no good purpose would be served by compliance with the requirements of this section (see illustration). 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1505, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-452. - Off-street loading and unloading. 
    On the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles or materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained, on the lot, adequate space for standing, loading and unloading in order to avoid undue interference with public use of dedicated streets or alley. Such space shall be provided as follows: 
(1) ?All spaces in MB, CBD and GB districts shall be provided in the ratio required in article XIV of this chapter under "minimum yard setbacks." 
(2) ?All spaces shall be paid out in the dimension of at least ten feet by 50 feet or 500 square feet in area, with a clearance of at least 14 feet in height. Loading dock approaches shall be provided with a pavement having an asphaltic or Portland cement binder so as to provide a permanent durable and dustless surface. All spaces in I districts shall be provided in the following ratio of spaces to usable floor area. 
Gross Floor Area 
(in square feet) Loading and Unloading Spaces Required 
in Terms of Square Feet of Usable Floor Area 0—1,400 None 1,401—20,000 One space 20,001—100,000 One space plus one space for each 20,000 square feet in excess of 20, 001 square feet 100,001—500,000 Five spaces plus one space for each 40,000 square feet in excess of 100,001 square feet  
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1506, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-453. - Uses not otherwise included within a specific use district. 
    Because the uses hereinafter referred to possess unique characteristics making it impractical to include them in a specific use district classification, they shall be permitted by the board of appeals in the I District, under the conditions specified and after public hearing in accordance with section 50-543. In every case, the uses hereinafter referred to shall be specifically prohibited for R-1, R-2, R-3, RM-1 or RM-2 districts. These uses require special consideration since they service an area larger that the city and require sizable land areas, creating problems of control with reference to abutting use districts. Reference to those uses falling specifically within the intent of this section is as follows: 
(1) ?Outdoor theaters. Because outdoor theaters possess the unique characteristic of being used only after darkness and since they develop a concentration of vehicular traffic in terms of ingress and egress from their parking area, they shall be permitted in the I District. Outdoor theaters shall further be subject to the following conditions: 
a. ?The proposed internal design shall receive approval from the building inspector and the city engineer as to adequacy of drainage, lighting and other technical aspects. 
b. ?Points of ingress and egress shall be available to the outdoor theater from abutting major thoroughfares and shall not be available from any residential street. 
c. ?All vehicles waiting or standing to enter the facility shall be provided off-street waiting space. No vehicle shall be permitted to wait or stand within a dedicated right-of-way. 
d. ?The area shall be laid out so as to prevent the movie screen from being viewed from residential areas or adjacent major thoroughfares. All lighting used to illuminate the area shall be installed so as to be confined within and directed onto the premises of the outdoor theater site. 
(2) ?Commercial television and radio towers and public utility microwaves and public utility television transmitting towers. Radio and television towers, public utility microwaves and public utility television transmitting towers and their attendant facilities shall be permitted in the I District, provided said use shall be located centrally on a continuous parcel of not less than one times the height of the tower measured from the base of said tower to all points of each property line. The site shall in no instance be used for the storage of vehicles or any material not required for the principal use. Outdoor storage of any kind shall be expressly prohibited. 
(3) ?Towers and antennas. Towers and antennas for cellular telephone transmission may be permitted in industrial and marina business district and on municipally owned properties subject to the following conditions: 
a. ?Cellular towers and antennas shall not exceed 150 feet in height measured from the grade at the base of the tower. 
b. ?The base of the tower shall have a minimum setback of not less than the height of the tower from any property line. 
c. ?If located on the same zoning lot with another permitted use, such tower and any other structures connected therewith shall not be located in a front yard or side yard abutting a street. 
d. ?Cellular telephone antennas and supporting structures shall be permitted to be placed on the roofs of buildings subject to the following conditions: 
1. ?The principal use is a conforming use and the building is a conforming structure. 
2. ?The antenna shall not exceed the height of its supporting structure by more than 12 feet. 
3. ?The top of the supporting structure may exceed the maximum height of the district in which it is located by not more than ten feet. 
4. ?The supporting structure shall be set back from the outermost vertical wall or parapet of the building on which it is placed a distance equal to at least two times the height of such structure. 
e. ?The planning commission may permit such use after finding that the criteria for approving special land uses are met as well as the following: 
1. ?The petitioner demonstrated that operating requirements necessitate locating within the city and within the district, and that location on existing towers or buildings in districts where such facilities are permitted are not available. 
2. ?That, in the opinion of the planning commission, nearby residential areas will not be negatively influenced by the location of the tower. 
3. ?That the height of the tower and antenna not exceed 150 feet. 
f. ?Any cellular tower and antenna that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such tower or antenna shall remove same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the city notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure to remove an abandoned antenna or tower within said ninety days shall be grounds to remove the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1507, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-454. - Performance standards. 
    No use otherwise allowed shall be permitted within any district which does not conform to the following standards of use, occupancy and operation, which standards are hereby established as the minimum requirements to be maintained within such area: 
(1) ?Smoke. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit the emission of any smoke from any source whatever to a density greater than that density described as No. 2 on the Ringlemann Chart; provided that the following exceptions shall be permitted: 
a. ?Smoke, the shade or appearance of which is equal to, but not darker than, No. 3 on the Ringlemann Chart for a period or periods aggregating four minutes in any 30 minutes. 
b. ?Smoke, the shade or appearance of which is equal to, but not darker than No. 3 on the Ringlemann Chart for a period or periods aggregating three minutes in any 15 minutes, when building a new fire or when breakdown or equipment occurs such as to make it evident that the emission was not reasonably preventable. 
Method of measurement: for the purpose of grading the density of smoke, the Ringlemann Chart, as now published and used by the United States Bureau of Mines, which is hereby made a part of this chapter, shall be the standard. However, the umbrascope readings of smoke densities may be used when correlated with the Ringlemann Chart. 
(2) ?Dust, fire and fly ash. 
a. ?No person, firm or corporation shall operate or cause to be operated, maintain or cause to be maintained any process for any purpose or furnace or combination device for the burning of coal or other natural or synthetic fuels without maintaining and operating while using such process or furnace or combustion device any recognized and approved equipment, means, method, device or contrivance to reduce the quantity of gasborne or airborne solids or fumes emitted into the open air, which is operated in conjunction with such process, furnace, or combustion device so that the quantity of gasborne or airborne solids shall not exceed 0.20 grains per cubic foot of the carrying medium at a temperature of 500 degrees Fahrenheit. 
b. ?Methods of measurement: For the purpose of determining the adequacy of such devices, these conditions are to be conformed to when the percentage of excess air in the stack does not exceed 50 percent at full load. The foregoing requirement shall be measured by the ASME test code for dust-separating apparatus. All other forms of dust, dirt and fly ash shall be completely eliminated insofar as escape or emission into the open air is concerned. The building inspector may require such additional data as is deemed necessary to show that adequate and approved provisions for the prevention and elimination of dust, dirt and fly ash have been made. 
(3) ?Open storage. The open storage of any industrial equipment, vehicles and all materials including wastes shall be screened from public view, from a public street and from adjoining properties by an enclosure consisting of a wall not less than the height of the equipment, vehicles and all materials to be stored. Whenever such open storage is adjacent to a residential zone in either a front, side or rear lot line relationship, whether immediately abutting or across a right-of-way from such zone, there shall be provided an obscuring masonry wall or wood fence of at least six feet in height. 
(4) ?Glare and radioactive material. Glare from any process (such as or similar to arc welding or acetylene torch cutting) which emits harmful ultraviolet rays shall be performed in such a manner as not to be seen from any point beyond the property line and as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines. Radioactive materials and wastes and machine operation shall not be emitted to exceed quantities established as safe by the U.S. Bureau of Standards, when measured at the property line. 
(5) ?Fire and explosive hazards. 
a. ?In the I District, the storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning, as determined by the fire marshal, is permitted, subject to compliance with all other performance standards above mentioned. 
b. ?The storage, utilization or manufacture of materials, goods or products ranging from free active burning to intense burning, as determined by the fire marshal, is permitted, subject to compliance with all other yard requirements and performance standards previously mentioned and providing that the following conditions are met: 
1. ?Such materials or products shall be stored, utilized or produced within completely enclosed buildings or structures, having incombustible exterior walls which meet the requirements of the single state construction code. 
2. ?All such buildings or structures shall be set back at least 40 feet from lot lines, or in lieu thereof, all such buildings or structures shall be protected throughout by an automatic sprinkler system complying with installation standards prescribed by the National Fire Association. 
3. ?The storage and handling of flammable liquids, liquefied petroleum, gases and explosives shall comply with the state rules and regulations as established by Public Act No. 207 of 1941 (MCL 29.1 et seq.). 
(6) ?Noise. Objectionable sounds, including those of an intermittent nature shall be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses. 
(7) ?Odors. Creation of offensive odors shall be prohibited. 
(8) ?Wastes. 
a. ?No waste shall be discharged into the public sewer system which is dangerous to the public health and safety. The following standards shall apply at the point wastes are discharged into the public sewer. 
b. ?Acidity or alkalinity shall be neutralized within an average pH range of between 5.5 to 7.5 as a daily average on the volumetric bases, with a temporary variation of pH 4.50 to 10.0. 
c. ?Wastes shall contain no cyanide. Wastes shall contain no chlorinated solvents in excess of 0.1 ppm; no fluorides shall be in excess of ten ppm and shall contain no more than five ppm of hydrogen sulphide and shall contain not more than ten ppm of sulphur dioxide and nitrates, and shall contain not more than 25 ppm of chromates. 
d. ?Wastes shall not contain any insoluble substance in excess of 10,000 ppm or exceed a daily average of 500 ppm or fail to pass a number eight standard sieve or have a dimension greater than one-half inch. 
e. ?Wastes shall not have chlorine demand greater than 15 ppm. 
f. ?Wastes shall not contain phenols in excess of 0.05 ppm. 
g. ?Wastes shall not contain any grease or oil or any oily substance in excess of 100 ppm or exceed a daily average of 25 ppm. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1508, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-455. - Plant materials and landscaping requirements. 
    Whenever in this article a greenbelt or planting is required, it shall be planted to completion within three months, and no later than November 30, from the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy if said certificate is issued during April 1 to September 30 period; if the certificate issued during the October 1 to March 30 period, the planting shall be completed no later than the ensuing May 31; plantings shall thereafter be reasonable maintained, including permanence and health of plant materials to provide a screen to abutting properties and including the absence of weeds and refuse. Spacing, as required by this section, shall be provided in any greenbelt planting. 
(1) ?Site plan required. Whenever a greenbelt or planting screen is required under the provisions of this chapter, a site planting of the parcel to be developed, together with a detailed planting plan of said greenbelt, shall be submitted to the planning commission for approval prior to the issuance of a building permit. The site plan shall indicate, to scale, the proposed location and height of buildings and other structures, the location of public walks, roadways and utilities, and the proposed location of off-street parking, loading, service, and outside storage areas and points of ingress/egress to the site. The planting plan shall indicate, to scale, the location, spacing, starting size, and description for each unit of plant material proposed for use within the required greenbelt area, together with the finished grade elevations proposed therein. 
(2) ?Plant material spacing and size. 
a. ?Plant material shall not be located within four feet of the property line. 
b. ?Where plant materials are placed in two or more rows, plantings shall be staggered in rows. 
c. ?Evergreen trees shall not be less than six feet in height. When planted informally, they shall be spaced not more than 20 feet on centers. When planted in rows, they shall be placed not more than 12 feet on centers. 
d. ?Narrow evergreen trees shall not be less than five feet in height. When planted informally, they shall be spaced not more than ten feet on centers. When planted in rows, they shall be spaced not more than 12 feet on centers. 
e. ?Large shrubs shall not be less than 30 inches in height. When planted informally, they shall be spaced not more than six feet on centers. When planted in rows, they shall not be more than four feet on centers. 
f. ?Small shrubs shall not be less than 30 inches in spread. They shall be planted not more than four feet on centers. 
g. ?Large deciduous trees shall not be less than two inches in caliper. When placed informally, they shall be planted not more than 30 feet on centers. 
h. ?Small deciduous trees shall not be less than 1½ inches in caliper. When planted informally, they shall be spaced not more than 15 feet on centers. 
(3) ?Spacing requirements. A mixture of plant materials (evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs) is required in all landscape plans as a protective measure against disease and insect infestation. Plant materials used together informally shall meet the following on-center minimum spacing requirements: 
MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN PLANT MATERIALS 
Plant 
Material 
Types Evergreen 
Trees Narrow 
Evergreen 
Trees Large 
Deciduous 
Trees Small 
Deciduous 
Trees Large 
Shrubs Small 
Shrubs Evergreen 
trees Min. 10' Min. 12' Min. 20' Min. 12' Min. 6' Min. 5' Narrow 
evergreen 
trees Min. 12' Min. 5' Min. 15' Min. 10' Min. 5' Min. 4' Large 
deciduous 
trees Min. 20' Min 15' Min. 20' Min. 15' Min. 5' Min. 3' Small 
deciduous 
trees Min. 12' Min. 10' Min. 15' Min. 8' Min 6' Min. 3' Large shrubs Min. 6' Min. 5' Min. 5' Min. 6' Min. 4' Min. 5' Max. 6' Small shrubs Min. 5' Min. 4' Min. 3' Min. 3' Min. 5' Min. 3'  
(4) ?Parking lot landscaping and screening. 
a. ?Parking lots which are visible from a public right-of-way (excluding a public alley) shall have the following landscaping between the parking lot and the right-of-way: 
1. ?A landscape strip at least ten feet in width or wider as may be required in article XIV of this chapter. 
2. ?One tree for every 40 feet or fraction thereof of street frontage of the parking lot. 
b. ?Parking lots of greater than 5,000 square feet in area shall meet the following landscaping requirements for the interior of the parking lot: 
1. ?Within the interior of the parking lot there shall be one square foot of landscaped area for each 15 square feet of the parking lot. In computing the lot area for this subsection, the area 20 feet from the required perimeter landscaping may be excluded. 
2. ?Each interior landscaped area shall have at least 150 square feet. 
3. ?The landscaped areas shall be located in a manner that breaks up the expanse of paving throughout the parking lot. 
(5) ?Trash receptacle landscaping and screening. Trash receptacles shall be screened from public view as follows: 
a. ?In all nonresidential districts, trash receptacles shall be located at the rear of buildings and shall be screened with a constructed enclosure, earth berm or landscaping. In those instances where trash receptacles cannot be located in the rear of the buildings, location that is obscured from any abutting residential district and from public streets may be allowed by the planning commission. 
b. ?In residential districts, trash receptacles shall be located and screened with a constricted enclosure, earth berm or landscaping to effectively obscure the receptacle from abutting properties or public streets (also see section 50-449(13)). 
SUGGESTED PLANT MATERIALS 
Evergreen trees Pine Douglas-Fir Fir Hemlock Spruce Narrow evergreens Red cedar Arborvitae Junipers Large deciduous trees Oaks Ginkgo (male) Birch Linden Hard maples Beech Honeylocust (seedless and thornless) Ash (seedless) Small deciduous trees Hornbeam Hawthorn Magnolia Mountain Ash Redbud Flowering dogwood Flowering crabs 
(disease resistant varities) Large shrubs Deciduous: Honeysuckle Lilac Forsythia Border privet Buckthorn Sumac Pyracantha Barberry Flowering quince Sargent crabapple Dogwood 
(red osier, grey) Cotoneaster 
(Peking, spreading) Evergreen: Irish yew Hicks yew Mungo pine Pfitzer juniper Savin juniper Small shrubs Deciduous: Regal privet Fragrant sumac Japanese quince Potentilla Compact burning bush Cotoneaster 
(cranberry, rockspray) Evergreen: Dwarf mugo pine Big leaf winter creeper arborvite Low spreading junipers (Andorra, Hughes, tamarack, etc.) Speading yews (dense, Brown's, Ward's, etc.)  
TREES NOT SUGGESTED 
Box elder Willows Soft maples (red, silver) Poplars Horse chestnut (nut bearing) Tree of heaven Elms Catalpa Russian olive  
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1509, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-456. - Signs. 
    The primary function of signage, as it relates to this article, is to identify a particular use of a parcel of property. It is not the intent of this article, to have the open spaces and lines of vision created by public rights-of-way be used for unrestricted advertising through the use of signage. Signs will be allowed in such a manner as to provide those similar uses in similar zones the opportunity for identification exposure regardless of parcel size, although the location and size of buildings will influence the amount of signage permitted. This consistent approach is necessary to remove the need for the types of signs which compete for attention of the motorist, thereby creating traffic hazards as well as creating visual blight within the city. It is, therefore, within the health, safety and welfare responsibility of the city that this section is promulgated. 
(1) ?Sign definitions. The following definitions are related to signs: 
    Erect means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, affix or paint. 
    Sign means any announcement, declaration, display, billboard, illustration and insignia when designed and placed so as to attract general public attention. The term "sign" shall include any banner, bulbs or other lighting devices, streamer, pennant, inflated or deflated membrane device, propeller, flag (other than the official flag of any nation or state) and any similar device of any type or kind whether bearing lettering or not. 
1. ?Decorative display means a decorative, temporary display designed for the entertainment or cultural enrichment of the public and having no direct or indirect sales or advertising content. 
2. ?Freestanding sign means a sign, other than a ground sign or portable sign, which is not attached to a building and is capable of being moved from one location to another on the site on which it is located. 
3. ?Ground sign means a permanent display sign supported by one or more columns, uprights or braces or mounted directly in and upon the ground surface and having a height not in excess of six feet. 
4. ?Marquee sign means a sign or attached to a permanent overhanging shelter that projects from the face of the building and is supported entirely by the building. 
5. ?Portable sign means a sign and sign structure which is designed to facilitate the movement of the sign from one zoning lot to another. The sign may or may not have wheels, changeable lettering and/or hitches for towing. A sign shall be considered portable only if such sign is manifestly designed to be portable to facilitate its movement from one zoning lot to another. Signs utilized to be movable, other than from one zoning lot to another, shall be considered freestanding signs under this chapter. 
6. ?Projecting sign means a sign which is affixed to any building or structure, other than a marquee and any part of which extends beyond the building wall or structure more than 15 inches. 
7. ?Pole sign means a display sign supported by one or more columns, uprights or braces in the ground surface and having a height in excess of six feet. 
8. ?Temporary sign means a display sign, banner or other advertising device constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, plastic or other light temporary material, inflated devices with or without a structural frame, or any other sign intended for a limited period of display, but not including decorative displays for holidays or public events. 
9. ?Wall sign means a display sign which is painted on or attached directly to the building wall. 
    Sign, accessory, means a sign which pertains to the principal use of the premises. 
    Sign alteration means the changing, enlarging or relocating of any sign, excluding the changing of movable parts of an approved sign that is designed for such changes or the repainting or reposting of original of original display matter, shall be deemed an alteration. 
    Sign, nonaccessory, means a sign which does not pertain to the principal use of the premises. 
(2) ?General requirements for all signs. The following conditions shall also apply to all signs erected or located in any use district: 
a. ?All signs shall conform to all codes and ordinances of the city and, where required, shall be approved by the building inspector and a permit issued. 
b. ?Public right-of-way. No sign, except those established and maintained by the city, county state or federal governments, shall be erected, located or placed in, project into or overhang a public right-of-way or dedicated public easement. The owner of any sign which has been removed by the city from the right-of-way because it is in violation of this provision and shall pay to the city the actual costs of removal and storage or charges as adopted by resolution of the city council, whichever is greater. If such sign is not claimed within five days, it shall be destroyed. 
c. ?Directional. All directional signs required for the purpose of orientation, when established by the city, county, state or federal government, and directional signs for churches and public service organizations shall be permitted in all use districts. 
d. ?No sign otherwise permitted shall project above or beyond the maximum height limitation of the use district in which located and provided further that no freestanding sign shall exceed three feet in height. 
e. ?No sign above a height of two feet shall be located within, project into or overhang the triangular area formed at the intersection of street right-of-way lines by a straight line drawn between the right-of-way lines at a distance along each line of 25 feet from their point of intersection. 
f. ?Accessory signs shall be permitted in any use district and may be located in the required front yard except as otherwise provided herein. 
g. ?Nonaccessory signs shall be permitted only in I district, except that nonaccessory signs pertaining to real estate development located within the city and designed to promote the sale of lots or homes within a subdivision located with the city may be permitted on a temporary basis in any use district but shall not be located upon subdivided land unless such land is part of the subdivision being advertised for sale and shall be subject to the requirements and conditions of all codes and ordinances of the city. 
h. ?Illumination of signs shall be directed or shaded downward so as not to interfere with driver visibility, become hazardous to traffic or the vision of persons on adjacent streets or property. Flashing or intermittent type signs shall not be permitted. 
i. ?Signs used for advertising land or buildings for rent, lease and/or for sale shall be permitted on the land or building intended to be rented, leased and/or sold. 
j. ?Removal of certain signs. Any sign, including framing, now or hereafter existing, which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted or a product or entertainment, service commodity offered or sold on the lot, shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building or structure upon which such sign shall be found within 30 days after written notice from the building inspector. Notice shall be sent to the property owner of record, as indicated in city tax rolls, by certified mail. The owner may petition the zoning board of appeals for temporary approval to install blank sign faces when it can be demonstrated that the sign structure is likely to be reused by a future business and the sign framework is in sound structural condition. 
k. ?Connections to an energy source for lighting shall be in accord with all codes of the city and shall not be exposed in any way that may constitute a safety hazard to the public. 
(3) ?Permitted signs by zoning district. 
a. ?R-1, R-2, R-3, RM-1 and RM-2 district sign types allowed: 
1. ?For each dwelling unit, one nameplate not exceeding two square feet in area, indicating the name of the occupant. 
2. ?For structures other than dwelling units, one identification sign not exceeding ten square feet, except a church bulletin board not exceeding 18 square feet. 
3. ?For rental and/or management offices in a multiple housing development, an identification sign not exceeding six square feet. 
b. ?MB, CBD, GB and WP district sign types allowed. Ground, portable, pole, temporary and wall signs as defined in this section and subject to the following conditions: 

1. ?Ground sign. 
(i) ?One ground sign having a sign area of not more than 24 square feet for a single face and 48 square feet for a total of all sign faces shall be permitted. Such sign shall not exceed six feet in height. 
(ii) ?Not more than one ground sign may be erected accessory to any one development, regardless of number of buildings, separate parties, tenants or uses contained therein. 
(iii) ?The distance measured between the principal faces of any ground sign shall not exceed 18 inches. 
(iv) ?No ground sign shall be located nearer than 25 feet to any existing or proposed right-of-way line. 
(v) ?Ground signs shall be utilized only for identification of the uses allowed in the zoning district and shall not be utilized to advertise products for sale. 
(vi) ?Ground signs may be illuminated as required by subsection (2)k of this section. 
2. ?Portable sign. There shall be no more than one portable sign, and such portable sign shall be licensed as temporary signs for periods not to exceed seven days in a 30 consecutive day period on any one zoning lot and not to exceed 28 days in any one year. Such sign shall not exceed 15 square feet in area for each face of such sign and shall not exceed six feet in height. In no instance shall such sign be located so as to obstruct parking spaces or automobile or pedestrian travel lanes. Such signs shall not flash or be located so as to obstruct traffic vision, and lighting shall be of a type so as not to be confused with traffic controls and not to cause distraction to vehicle drivers. 
3. ?Pole sign. 
(i) ?Not more than one pole sign may be erected accessory to any one development, regardless of the number of buildings, separate parties, tenants or uses contained therein. 
(ii) ?It shall be unlawful to erect any pole sign to a height greater than 30 above the level of the street upon which the sign faces. The distance from the ground to the bottom shall be not less than eight feet, and the sign shall be so erected as not to obstruct traffic vision. 
(iii) ?Pole signs may be illuminated as required by subsection (2)k of this section. 
(iv) ?Time and temperature signs shall be permitted. 
(v) ?All pole signs shall be securely built, constructed and erected upon posts and standards at least 42 inches below the material surface of the ground and shall be embedded in concrete. Wood or wood products shall be of wolmanized or equal treatment. 
(vi) ?All letters, figures, characters, items or representations in cutout or irregular form maintained in conjunction with, attached to or superimposed upon any sign shall be safely and securely built or attached to the sign structure. Loose or missing letters, figures, characters or items shall constitute a maintenance violation. 
(vii) ?The distance measured between the principal faces of any pole sign shall not exceed 18 inches. 
(viii) ?Sign height, setback and size for pole signs. 
Maximum Height 
(in feet) Minimum Setback 
Required 
(in feet) Maximum * of 
Single Sign Face 
(in square feet) 13 15 50 14 18 56 15 20 62 16 22 68 17 24 74 18 26 80 19 28 86 20 30 92 21 32 98 22 34 104 23 36 110 24 38 116 25 40 122 26 42 128 27 44 134 28 46 140 29 48 146 30 50 150  
* In those instances where more than one sign face is proposed, the maximum area of all sign faces shall not exceed two times the area prescribed for a single-faced sign. 
4. ?Temporary signs. 
(i) ?For sale or rental of individual units, there shall be no more than one such sign, except that on a corner lot two signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted. No such sign shall exceed six square feet in area for each side of such sign. All such signs shall be removed within one week after a lease or sale contract has been signed. 
(ii) ?Signs advertising buildings under construction may be erected from the period of construction and shall not exceed a face area of 32 square feet for each side of such sign. Such signs shall be erected on the building or lot where such construction is being carried on and shall advertise only the architect, contractor, subcontractor, building or materials and equipment used. There shall be no more than one such sign. 
(iii) ?One temporary sign may be displayed for any new business or owner for a period of time not to exceed 28 consecutive days, except as otherwise permitted by the city council. 
(iv) ?No temporary sign may have a single-face area greater than 32 square feet nor be of greater height than the top of the wall to which 32 square feet nor be of greater height than the top of the wall to which it is attached. If the temporary sign is not attached to a wall, the sign shall be attached so the bottom edge of such sign is not less than seven feet six inches above grade and shall not exceed 12 feet in overall height. 
(v) ?No temporary sign shall be strung across any public right-of way, nor shall any temporary sign project beyond the property line except as authorized by the city council. 
(vi) ?Temporary signs shall be removed promptly at the end of the display period provided for above. 
(vii) ?Temporary signs found by the building inspector to be in a torn or damaged condition must be removed by the owner within three days after his receipt of notice to do so from the building inspector. Temporary signs found to be unsafe shall be removed immediately upon receipt of notice from the building inspector. 
(viii) ?Temporary signs advertising products for sale/and or special events and attached to building walls are permitted provided that the conditions in subsections (3)b.4(iv) through (vii) of this section are complied with along with the following: 
A. ?Signs shall be limited to not more than three signs for any single occupancy and for any tenant in a multiple occupancy building. Such signs may be located on not more than two walls of a building and shall not cover more than five percent or not exceed 96 square feet of wall surface of any wall whichever is the lesser. Signs may be allowed on other surfaces, for special circumstances, at the discretion of the city manager. 
B. ?A permit for posting such signs shall be required. 
5. ?Wall signs. 
(i) ?Wall signs may be provided on all street sides, front sides or parking lot sides of a building, and the total surface area of all wall signs shall not exceed ten percent of the area of the front elevation (including doors and windows) of the principal building of three square feet for each lineal foot of building frontage, or 100 square feet, whichever is less. Where a single principal building is devoted to two or more businesses or commercial uses, the operator of each such use may install a front wall sign. The maximum area of each such sign shall be determined by determining the proportionate share of the front face (including doors and windows) of the principal building occupied by each such use and applying such proportion of the total sign area permitted from the front wall of the building; or the percent agreed to by the occupants, total not to exceed the above area limitations. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide the required information when applying for a sign permit. 
(ii) ?Such sign may be illuminated as required by subsection (2)k of this section. 
(iii) ?Time and temperature signs shall be permitted. 
(iv) ?Materials required. All wall signs of a greater area than 50 square feet shall have a surface or facing of noncombustible material. 
(v) ?Limitation on placement. No wall sign shall cover wholly or partially any wall opening nor project beyond the ends or top of the wall to which it is attached. 
(vi) ?Projection and height. No wall sign shall have a greater thickness than 12 inches measured from the wall to which it is attached to the outermost surface. Wall signs may project over the public right-of-way not to exceed 12 inches, provided clearance of not less than seven feet six inches is maintained below such sign if such sign projects more than four inches. Such sign shall not project above the roof line. 
(vii) ?Supports and attachments . All wall signs shall be safely and securely attached to structural members of the building by means of metal anchors, bolts or expansion screws. In no case shall any wall sign be secured with wire, strips of wood or nails. The method of attachment shall be stated on the permit application. 
All plans for the erection of signs shall be submitted to the building inspector for review and approval and shall be further subject to all codes and ordinances of the city. 
c. ?I district sign types allowed. All sign types allowed and as controlled for business districts: 
1. ?Accessory freestanding signs, provided they shall not be located closer than 200 feet to any public right-of-way line and provided further that there shall be not less than 1,000 feet between nonaccessory signs located on the same side of a right-of-way. 
2. ?Nonaccessory signs shall be permitted but shall not be located closer than 200 feet to any public right-of-way line and provided further that there shall be not less than 1,000 between nonaccessory signs located on the same side of a right-of-way. 
d. ?Permitted signs accessory to churches, schools or nonprofit institutions; sign types allowed (all use districts). Churches, colleges, schools, buildings housing governmental functions and utilities of the city, county or state or any subdivision thereof are permitted to erect signs. Such signs, when of a permanent nature, shall meet all the requirements of this article and other ordinances of the city except as provided hereafter and may include ground, portable, real estate and temporary signs as defined in this chapter. During periods of special events, temporary signs advertising such events may be allowed for periods not to exceed two weeks. 
(4) ?Prohibited signs. The following signs are prohibited within the city: 
a. ?String lights used in connection with business premises for commercial purposes, other than holiday decorations. 
b. ?Any sign unlawfully installed, erected or maintained. 
c. ?Business signs erected on any post, tree, utility pole, public right-of-way or dedicated public easement or other object within any area, whether public or private. 
d. ?Any sign or banner erected upon or across any public right-of-way or dedicated public easement except by permission of the city council. 
e. ?Signs which incorporate in any manner any flashing lights. 
f. ?Any sign or other advertising structure upon which is displayed any obscene, indecent or immoral matter. 
g. ?Rotating signs. 
h. ?Signs on park-type benches. 
i. ?Freestanding signs. 
j. ?Any sign on the roof of any building. 
k. ?Marquee sign. 
l. ?Projecting signs. 
Any sign type that is not defined within this article shall be subject to review and approval by the city. 
(5) ?Nonconforming signs. 
a. ?All existing signs that do not conform to the provisions of this article shall be permitted to continue as nonconforming signs until such time as they are removed or until any changes are necessary, at which time they shall conform to the provisions of this article. The provision of this subsection shall not apply to electrical maintenance and repainting. 
b. ?A nonconforming use shall not be permitted to add additional signs to the building or premises other than those existing. Signs on nonconforming uses shall be maintained in good repair or be removed, and such removal shall be conditional to subsections (7) and (8) of this section. 
(6) ?Enforcement. This section shall be enforced by the building inspector or any employee designated by the city council. 
(7) ?Unsafe, damaged and unlawful signs. Signs shall be subject to inspections, and when the condition of a sign is questionable, the owner or occupant shall obtain a professional engineer's report, certifying the condition of the sign. Failure to submit the report and make any specified corrections is a direct violation which will result in court action and order for the sign removal. 
(8) ?Sign maintenance. The building inspector may forward to the prosecutor a violation report seeking a court order for the maintenance of the sign. 
a. ?Maintenance. All signs, including those for which a permit is not required, together with all their supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be maintained in good working order; and when not galvanized or constructed of approved corrosion-resistant, noncombustible materials shall be painted when necessary to prevent corrosion. The exteriors of all signs, supporting members, painted surfaces, advertising materials and lettering shall be kept painted and in good repair so as to present a neat and orderly appearance and so as not to create visual blight within the city. All bulbs or component parts of the sign, including the electrical switches, boxes and wiring used in the illumination of the sign, must be well maintained and in good repair. Loose or missing letters, figures, characters or items shall constitute a maintenance violation. Signs which lack maintenance shall be removed. 
b. ?Housekeeping. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner or lessee of every sign to maintain the immediate premises occupied by the sign in a clean, sanitary and healthful condition. 
(9) ?Sign permits required. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, repair, paint, alter or relocate any sign within the city, as defined in this section, without first obtaining a permit from the building inspector, with the exception of the following: 
a. ?Signs for which a permit is not required. 
1. ?Wall signs, which are used as nameplates, not exceeding two square feet in area; occupational signs denoting only the name and profession of the occupant in a commercial, public or other institutional building and not exceeding two square feet in area. 
2. ?Bulletin boards not over 20 square feet in area for governmental, educational and religious institutions when the same are located on the premises of said institutions; provided, however, if such signs are electrically illuminated, an electrical permit must be obtained. 
3. ?Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or aluminum. 
4. ?Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices, danger and such temporary emergency or nonadvertising signs as may be approved by the city. 
5. ?Signs advertising the rental, sale, lease or open house of the property upon which they are located. 
6. ?Flags of recognized federal, state, county or city governments. 
7. ?Decorative displays, provided any such display that occupies a public right-of-way shall be subject to city council approval. 
b. ?Application for sign permit. Applications for permits shall be made upon forms provided by the building inspector and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
1. ?Name, address, e-mail address and telephone number of the applicant. 
2. ?Location of building, structure or lot to which or upon which the sign or other advertising structure is to be attached or erected. 
3. ?Position and location of the sign or other advertising structure in relation to nearby buildings or structures. 
4. ?Two blueprints or drawings of the plans and specifications and methods of construction and attachment to the building or in the ground. 
5. ?Name of person, firm, corporation or association erecting the structure. 
6. ?Written consent of the owner where the sign is to be erected on vacant land. 
7. ?In all cases where wiring is to be used in connection with the structure, it shall comply with the city electrical code. The electrical inspector shall approve and affix his signature to the permit if it is deemed necessary by the electrical inspector. 
8. ?Insurance policy or bond as may be required by the city. 
9. ?Such other information as the building inspector shall require to show full compliance with this section and all other ordinances of the city. 
c. ?Sign permit fee. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or alter any sign, except those signs specifically exempted herein, unless a permit shall first have been obtained from the building inspector for such erection or alteration and a permit fee paid to the city according to the schedule as shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
d. ?Sign permit revocable at any time. All rights and privileges accrued under the provisions of this section or any amendment thereto are mere licenses and may be revoked upon the violation of any of the conditions contained herein. If the work authorized under an erection permit has not been completed within six months after the date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void and a new permit shall be necessary to continue the project. Partially completed signs, if abandoned, shall be removed by the erector upon notice from the building inspector. 
e. ?Permit number. Every sign hereafter erected shall have placed in a conspicuous place thereon, in letters not less than one-half-inch in height, the date of erection, the permit number and the voltage of any electrical apparatus used in connection therewith. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1510, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 98-4, § 1510(4)(h), 9-7-1999) 
State Law reference— Highway advertising act, MCL 252.301 et seq. 
Sec. 50-457. - Residential entranceway. 
    In residential districts, so-called entranceway structures, including, but not limited to, walls, columns and gates marking entrances to single-family subdivisions or multiple housing projects, may be permitted and may be located in a required yard, except as provided in section 50-458, provided that such entranceway structures shall comply with all codes and ordinances of the city, shall be approved by the building inspector and a permit issued. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1511, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-458. - Corner clearance. 
    No fence, wall, shrubbery, sign or other obstruction to vision above a height of three feet from the established street grades shall be permitted within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any street right-of-way lines by a straight line drawn between such right-of-way lines at a distance along each line of 25 feet from their point of intersection. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1512, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-459. - Exterior lighting. 
    All lighting for parking areas or for the external illumination of buildings and uses shall be directed away from and shall also be so arranged as to not adversely affect driver visibility on adjacent thoroughfares. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1513, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-460. - Residential fences. 
(a) ?Fences in all residential districts shall not exceed six feet in height, measured from the surface of the ground, and shall not extend beyond the front of a dwelling unit nor encroach upon a minimum front yard setback line. Those side yards that have common street lines with front yards on the same block shall be treated as front yards and shall not have a fence constructed within the minimum setback. 
(b) ?Fences in all residential districts shall not contain barbed wire, electric current or a charge of electricity. Fencing shall not utilize fence materials such as woven wire, chicken wire, or similar types of farm fencing. Snow fence shall not be utilized except during winter months for snow control purposes. 
(c) ?Fences which enclose public or institutional parks, playgrounds or public landscaped areas situated within an area developed with residential shall not exceed eight feet in height, measured from the surface of the ground, and shall not obstruct vision to an extent greater than 25 percent of their total area. 
(d) ?In those instances where in a one-family residential lot has a front, side or rear yard relationship with a major thoroughfare, the board of appeals may permit the construction of a fence along the major thoroughfare when the following conditions are met: 
(1) ?The fence shall be located along the common line formed by the lot line and the major thoroughfare right-of-way as defined on the thoroughfare plan. 
(2) ?The fence height shall be established by the board of appeals, and in no instance shall it be greater than six feet in height, measured from the adjacent centerline elevation of the road. 
(3) ?The fence shall be constructed of a permanent material similar to that used on the exterior wall of the house it obscured from the road and shall be compatible with adjacent houses, in both material used and in color. 
(4) ?The fence shall be designed so as to enable convenient extension and continuity along the road right-of-way and lot lines of adjacent residences. 
(5) ?Complete working drawings of the proposed fence as to location, height, material and color shall be submitted to the board of appeals for final approval prior to seeking of a building permit. 
(6) ?The board of appeals shall further make the determination that a fence will not create any hazards with reference to the obscuring of vision between residential driveways and the intersection thoroughfare. 
(e) ?No fence, wall, shrubbery or other obstruction to vision above a height of 30 inches from the established street grades shall be permitted within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any street right-of-way lines by a straight line drawn between such right-of-way lines at a distance along each line of 25 feet from their point of intersection. 
(f) ?Ornamental fences not exceeding three and one-half feet in height are permitted within front yards. 
(g) ?Ornamental fences not exceeding three and one-half feet in height are permitted in both front yards of corner lots. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1514, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-461. - Greenbelts and walls. 
(a) ?For those use districts and uses listed below there shall be provided and maintained on those sides abutting or adjacent to a residential district an obscuring wall or greenbelt equal to the dimensions specified below: 
Use Dimensions a. P, Parking District Four-foot six-inch-high wall b. Off-street parking area 
(other than P districts) Four-foot six-inch-high wall c. MB, CBD and GB districts Four-foot six-inch-high wall d. I district Four-foot six-inch-high wall or four-foot six-inch-high chainlink type fence and a 20-foot wide greenbelt, planted in accord with the minimum requirements of section 50-455 e. Utility buildings, station and/or substation Six-foot high chainlink type fence and a 20-foot wide greenbelt planted in accord with the minimum requirement of section 50-455 f. Hospital ambulance and delivery areas Six-foot high wall  
(b) ?Required walls shall be located on the lot line, except where this chapter requires conformance with front yard setback lines in abutting residential districts. Required wall may, upon approval of the board of appeals, be located on the opposite side of an alley right-of-way from a nonresidential zone that abuts a residential zone when mutually agreeable to affected property owners. The continuity of the required wall on a given block will be major consideration of the board of appeals in reviewing such request. 
(c) ?Such walls and screening barrier shall have no openings for vehicular traffic or other purposes, except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except such openings as may be approved by the chief of police and the building inspector. All walls herein required shall be constructed of materials approved by the building inspector to be durable, weather-resistant, rustproof and easily maintained; and wood or wood products shall be specifically excluded. Masonry walls shall be erected on a concrete foundation which shall have a minimum depth of 42 inches below a grade approved by the building inspector and shall be not less than four inches below wider than the wall to be erected. Masonry walls may be constructed with openings above 32 inches above grade, provided such openings are not larger than 64 square inches and do not comprise more than one-third of the total area of that part of the wall located more than 32 inches above grade. 
(d) ?The planning commission may waive or modify the foregoing requirements where cause can be shown that no good purpose would be served, provided that in no instance shall a required wall be permitted to be less than four feet six inches in height. In consideration of requests to waive wall requirements between non-residential and residential districts, the board of appeals shall refer the request to the planning commission for the determination as to whether or not the residential district is considered to be an area in transition and will become nonresidential in the future. In such cases as the planning commission determines the residential district to be a future nonresidential area, the board of appeals may temporarily waive wall requirements for an initial period not to exceed 12 months. Granting of subsequent waivers shall be permitted, provided that the planning commission shall make a determination as herein before described for such subsequent waiver prior to the granting of such waiver by the Board. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1515, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-462. - Site plan review (all districts). 
(a) ?A site plan shall be submitted to the planning commission for approval of: 
(1) ?Any use or development for which the submission of a site plan is required by any provision of this chapter. 
(2) ?Any development, except single-family and two-family residential, for which off-street parking areas are provided as required in section 50-450. 
(3) ?Any use in an RM-1, RM-2, MB, CBD, GB or WP district lying contiguous to, or across a street from a single-family residential district. 
(4) ?Any use except single- or two-family residential which lies contiguous to a major thoroughfare or collector street. 
(5) ?All residentially related uses permitted in a single-family district, such as, but not limited to, churches, schools and public facilities. 
(6) ?Building additions or accessory buildings shall not require planning commission review unless off-street parking in addition to that already provided on the site is required. 
(b) ?Every site plan submitted to the planning commission shall be in accordance with the requirements of this article. No site plan shall be approved until it has been reviewed by the building department, in coordination with the fire department and the police department, for compliance with the stands of the respective departments. 
(c) ?The following information shall be included on the site plan: 
(1) ?A scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet if the subject property is less than three acres and one inch equals 100 feet if three acres of more. 
(2) ?Date, northpoint and scale. 
(3) ?The dimensions of all lot and property lines, showing the relationship of the subject property to abutting properties. 
(4) ?The location of all existing and proposed structures on the subject property and all existing structures within 100 feet of the subject property. 
(5) ?The location of all existing and proposed drives and parking areas. 
(6) ?The location and right-of-way widths of all abutting streets and alleys. 
(7) ?The names and addresses of the architect, planner, designer, engineer or person responsible for the preparation of the site plan. 
(8) ?The elevations of buildings or structures shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one-fourth inch equals one foot and shall be sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of work proposed. 
(d) ?In the process of reviewing the site plan, the planning commission shall consider: 
(1) ?The location and design of driveways providing vehicular ingress to and egress from the site, in relation to streets giving access to the site and in relation to pedestrian traffic. 
(2) ?The traffic circulation features within the site and the location of automobile parking areas and may make such requirements with respect to any matters as will ensure: 
a. ?Safety and convenience of both vehicular and pedestrian traffic both within the site and in relation to access streets. 
b. ?Satisfaction and harmonious relationships between the development on the site and the existing and prospective development of contiguous land and adjacent neighborhoods. 
(3) ?The planning commission may further require landscaping, fences and walls in pursuance of these objectives, which shall be provided and maintained as a condition of the establishment and the continued maintenance of any use to which they are appurtenant. 
(4) ?In those instances where in the planning commission finds that an excessive number of ingress and/or egress points may occur with relation to major or secondary thoroughfares, thereby diminishing the carrying capacity of the thoroughfare, the planning commission may recommend marginal access drives. For a narrow frontage which will require a single outlet, the planning commission may recommend that money in escrow be placed with the city so as to provide for a marginal service drive equal in length to the frontage of the property involved. Occupancy permits shall not be issued until the improvement is physically provided or moneys have been deposited with the city clerk. 
(5) ?The plan for the proposed building or structure indicates the manner in which the structure is in harmony with the general character of the surrounding development and in general contributes to the image of the city as a place of beauty, balance, fitness, broad vistas and high quality. 
(6) ?The plan for the proposed building or structure indicates the manner in which the structure is reasonably protected against external and internal noises, vibrations and other factors which may tend to make the environment less desirable. 
(7) ?The proposed building or structure is not, in its exterior design and appearance, of inferior quality such as to cause the nature of the local environment to materially depreciate in appearance and value. 
(e) ?If the aforementioned criteria are met, the application shall be approved. Conditions may be applied when the proposed building or structure does not comply with the above criteria and shall be such as to bring such building or structure into conformity. If an application is disapproved, the commission shall detail in its findings the criterion or criteria that are not met. The action taken by the commission shall be reduced to writing. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1516, 3-5-1996) 
State Law reference— Submission and approval of site plan, MCL 125.3501. 
Sec. 50-463. - Boatwells in residential districts. 
    Four boatwells that border on rivers, channels or canals, the side yard between the side lot line and any excavation for boatwells, canals or any similar waterfront construction shall be not less than ten feet so as to allow for all structural elements of such construction to be provided for within the confines of the lot or parcel. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1517, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-464. - Grading, drains and drainage. 
(a) ?The finish grade of a building shall be set 18 inches above the road at a point adjacent to the building if the ground is level. 
(b) ?All buildings shall be located at such elevation that a sloping grade shall be maintained to cause the flow of surface water away from the walls of the building. This grade shall slope away from the building at a rate of not less than two percent (one foot per 50 feet of horizontal distance). The minimum finish elevation at the building walls shall be 580.3 NGVD (National Geodetic Vertical Datum). Allowances to this elevation can be made by the building inspector if unusual conditions exist. An elevation survey shall be required for all new construction. 
(c) ?When a new building is to be constructed on a vacant lot between two existing buildings or adjacent to an existing building, the established level of the existing buildings shall have priority in determining the level of the new building. The yard around the new building shall be graded to meet existing grades at the property line. Grades shall be subject to approval by the building inspector. Existing structures where the grade is extremely low, a new building may be constructed at a higher grade with positive drainage to be installed at the expense of the new building owner. The drainage plan shall be subject to the approval of the building inspector and/or city engineer. 
(d) ?Storm water runoff including that from building eaves or similar apparatus shall be channeled so that it shall not flow across other property. Grading of the property shall not cause runoff from properties to pool or pond on any property. 
(e) ?No person may alter, divert or block, or cause to be altered diverted, or blocked any drain, drainage course, or body of water, whether natural or artificial, public or private, which causes or which is likely to cause an increase in the runoff of water onto adjacent properties, beyond that which would occur without proposed action. 
(f) ?Prior to the issuance of a permit, the building inspector shall examine the application and plan, make a site inspection of the property involved and make a determination that the proposed action will not cause an increase in the runoff or flow of water onto adjacent properties beyond that which will occur without the proposed action. 
(g) ?Official flood hazard boundary and flood insurance rate maps as prepared by the Federal Insurance Administration, and other available and applicable sources of information regarding drainage matters shall be utilized in making the determination. 
(h) ?In no case shall a certificate of occupancy be issued when, in the opinion of the building official, the proposed action is likely to cause, or the completed action causes, an increase in the runoff or flow of water onto adjacent properties beyond that which would occur without the proposed or completed action. 
(i) ?In cases involving official county drains, sole jurisdiction shall rest with the county drain commissioner. In cases involving county road ditches, sole jurisdiction shall rest with the board of county road commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1518, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 98-2, 3-3-1998) 
State Law reference— Building and construction in floodplain, MCL 324.3108; soil conservation districts law, MCL 324.9301 et seq.; habitat protection, MCL 324.30101 et seq.; subdivision within or abutting floodplain, plat requirements, MCL 560.138; subdivision within floodplain, conditions for approval, MCL 560.194. 
Sec. 50-465. - Adult entertainment establishments. 
(a) ?Intent. It is recognized that there are some uses which, because of their very nature, are recognized as having serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances, thereby having deleterious effects upon the adjacent areas. Special regulations of these uses are necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood. These special regulations are itemized in this section. The primary control or regulation is for the purpose of preventing a concentration of these uses in any one area or next to residential zones. 
(b) ?Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult entertainment facilities means: 
(1) ?Adult bookstore means an establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, magazines and other periodicals with an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual areas" of "specified anatomical areas" (as described below), or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material and which excludes minors by virtue of age. 
(2) ?Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building, with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting material with an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined below), for observation by patrons therein and which excludes minors by virtue of age. 
(3) ?Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons, used for presenting materials with an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined below), for observation by patrons therein and which excludes minors by virtue of age. 
(4) ?Adult cabaret means an establishment which provides dancers or other live entertainment who display or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as described below), for observation by patrons therein. 
(5) ?Specified anatomical areas means: 
a. ?Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
1. ?Human genitals, pubic region; 
2. ?Buttock; and 
3. ?Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; 
b. ?Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(6) ?Specified sexual activities means: 
a. ?Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
b. ?Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy. 
c. ?Fondling or other touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts. 
(c) ?Location provisions. Except as provided in subsections (d) and (e) of this section, the following listed uses shall not be permitted to be established within 500 feet of a residential district: 
(1) ?Adult bookstores. 
(2) ?Adult motion picture theaters. 
(3) ?Adult mini-motion picture theaters. 
(4) ?Adult cabarets. 
(d) ?Waiver of location provisions. The city council, after receiving a report and recommendation from the planning commission, may waiver the locational provisions of subsection (c) of this section if the following findings are made: 
(1) ?That the proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or injurious to nearby properties, and that the spirit and intent of this article will be observed. 
(2) ?That the proposed use will not enlarge or encourage the development of a skid row area. 
(3) ?That the establishment of an additional regulated use in the area will not be contrary to neighborhood conversation. 
(4) ?That all applicable regulation of this article will be observed. 
(5) ?That the proposed use of any adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater or adult cabaret would not be established within 300 feet of a residentially zoned district, or that, in the alternative, the provision of subsection (c) of this section has been met. 
(e) ?Procedure for waiver. Prior to granting waiver of the locational restrictions set forth in subsection (c) of this section, and not less than five, nor more than 15 days before the request for waivers is considered or a public hearing held pursuant to this section, the city clerk shall publish, in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, one notice indicating that a request for waivers to establish a controlled use has been received, and shall send by mail or personal delivery, a copy of said notice to the owners of the property for whom waivers are being considered, and to all persons to whom any real property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of the premises in question and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification. 
(1) ?Notification need not be given to more than one occupant of a structure, except if the structure contains more than one dwelling or spatial area owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, one occupant of each dwelling unit or partial area shall receive notice. In the case of a single structure containing more than four dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure. 
(2) ?The notice of application shall inform the recipient of the applicant's name, describe the nature and type of use proposed, indicate the local address, the lot number and subdivision name of the property in question and provide the section of chapter 50 under which the proposal is being processed. Said notice shall also invite written comments, statements of opinions, and indicate the place and date upon which written comments concerning the proposed use must be received. 
(3) ?Said notice of application shall further indicate that a public hearing on the proposed controlled use may be requested by a property owner or occupant, no less than 18 years of age, of a structure located within 300 feet of the boundary of the property being considered for the controlled use. If the applicant or the planning commission requests a public hearing under this section any interested person may be represented by a person, firm, organization, partnership, corporation, board or bureau. 
(f) ?Filing. The planning commission shall not consider the waiver of locational requirements set forth in subsections (c) and (d) of this section until the procedure described in subsections (d) and (e) of this section have been filed with and verified by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1519, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-466. - Sidewalks. 
(a) ?Required generally. Sidewalks shall be required on all side streets of all lots and parcels of land on which new buildings or new uses of land are proposed, except as otherwise set forth by subsection (b) of this section. 
(b) ?Waiver. A property owner shall have the right to seek a waiver of the general requirement of subsection (a) of this section by submitting a written request to the building official on a form supplied by the city. Upon receipt of a waiver request, the building official shall promptly submit a recommendation to the city manager, who shall render a decision. If the waiver request is denied, the property owner shall have the right to appeal the city manager's denial of the waiver request to the zoning board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, § 1, 11-15-2016) 
Secs. 50-467—50-485. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - GENERAL EXCEPTIONS 

Sec. 50-486. - Area, height and use exceptions. 
    The regulations in this article shall be subject to the following interpretations and exceptions: 
(1) ?Essential services. Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and other ordinances of the city, it being the intent hereof to exempt such essential services from the application of this article. 
(2) ?Voting place. The provisions of this article shall not be so construed as to interfere with the temporary use of any property as a voting place in connection with a municipal or other public election. 
(3) ?Height limit. The height limitations of this article shall not apply to farm buildings, chimneys, church spires, flagpoles, public monuments or wireless transmission towers; provided, however, that the board of appeals may specify a height limit for any such structure when such structure requires authorization as a use permitted subject to special conditions or under section 50-453. 
(4) ?Lot area. Any lot existing and of record at the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived may be used for any principal use (other than uses permitted subject to special conditions for which special lot area requirements are specified in this article) permitted in the district in which such lot is located, whether or not such lot complies with the lot area requirements of this article, provided that all requirements other than lot area requirements prescribed in this chapter are complied with, and provided that not more than one dwelling unit shall occupy any lot except in conformance with provisions of this article for required lot area for each dwelling unit. 
(5) ?Lots adjoining alleys. In calculating the area of a lot that adjoins an alley or lane, for the purpose of applying lot area requirements of this article, one-half the width of such alley abutting the lot shall be considered as part of such lot. 
(6) ?Yard regulations. When yard regulations cannot reasonably be complied with, as in the case of a planned development in the multiple-family district, or where their application cannot be determined on lots existing and of record on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and on lots of peculiar shape, topography or due to architectural or site arrangement, such regulations may be modified or determined by the board of appeals. 
(7) ?Porches, terraces and decks. An enclosed and uncovered porch (i.e., one which is not roofed over) or paved terrace or deck may project into a required front yard or rear yard for a distance not exceeding eight feet. Paved terraces or decks not exceeding 24 inches in height may project into a required side or rear yard not to exceed a depth of 30 percent of the depth of the required side or rear yard. 
(8) ?Projections into yards. Architectural features such as, but not limited to, window sills, cornices, eaves, bay windows may extend or project into a required side yard not more than two inches for each one foot of width of such side yard and may extend or project into a required front yard or rear yard not more than three feet. Architectural features shall not include those details which are nominally demountable. 
(9) ?Multiple dwelling side yards. For the purpose of side yard regulations, a two-family terrace, a row house or any multiple dwelling shall be considered as one building occupying one lot. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1600, 3-5-1996) 
Secs. 50-487—50-510. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 50-511. - Administrative official. 
(a) ?Except where herein otherwise stated, the provisions of this article shall be administered by the city manager who shall appoint a building inspector who may be an employee of the city or an independent contractor providing contractual services to the city provided that said individual is properly licensed and certified. The building inspector shall have the power to: 
(1) ?Issue building permits. 
(2) ?Grant certificates of occupancy permits. 
(3) ?Make inspections of buildings and premises necessary to carry out the duties of administration and enforcement of this article. 
(4) ?Perform such other further functions necessary and proper to enforce and administer the provisions of this article. 
(b) ?The chief of police (or his designee) is hereby designated as the authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the city municipal ordinance violations bureau) for alleged violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1700, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-512. - Building permit application. 
(a) ?No building, fence, or structure including accessory buildings and structures within the city shall hereafter be erected, moved, repaired, altered or razed, nor shall any work be started to erect, move, repair or raze until a building permit shall have been obtained from the building inspector; nor shall any change be made in the use of any building or land without a certificate of occupancy having been obtained from the building inspector. In those instances where waterfront construction requires federal or state permits, copies of such permits shall be made available to the building inspector when seeking a building permit. The construction of seawalls shall not require a permit other than those required by federal or state agencies. 
(b) ?The building inspector shall record all nonconforming uses existing at the effective date of adoption for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of section 50-448. 
(c) ?The building inspector shall require that all applications for building permits for uses not covered by section 50-462 be accompanied by plans and specifications including a plot plan, in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the following: 
(1) ?The actual shape, location and dimensions of the lot, drawn to scale. 
(2) ?The shape, size and location of all buildings or other structures upon it including, in residential areas, the number of dwelling units the building is intended to accommodate. 
(3) ?Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this article are being observed. 
One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the building inspector after he shall have marked such copy either as approved or disapproved. The second copy shall be retained in the office of the building inspector. 
(d) ?The following shall apply in the issuance of any permit: 
(1) ?Permits not to be issued. No building permit shall be issued for the erection alteration or use of any building or structure or part thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all provisions of this article. 
(2) ?Permits for new use of land. No land heretofore vacant shall hereafter be used or an existing use of land be hereafter changed to a use of a different class or type unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained for the new or different use. 
(3) ?Permits for new use of buildings. No buildings or structure, or part thereof, shall be changed to or occupied by a use of a different class or type unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained for the new or different use. 
(4) ?Permits required. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be hereafter erected, altered, moved or required unless a building permit shall have been first issued for such work. The terms "altered" and "repaired" shall include any changes in structural parts, stairways, type of construction, type, class or kind of occupancy, light or ventilation, means of egress and ingress, or other changes affecting or regulated by the city single state construction code, housing law, or this article, except for minor repairs or changes not involving any of the aforesaid features. 
(e) ?Upon completion of the work authorized by a building permit, the holder thereof shall seek final inspection thereof by notifying the building inspector. 
(f) ?Building permits shall be effective for the following time periods: 
(1) ?Residential structures, 12 months. 
(2) ?Office, commercial and institutional structures, 18 months. 
(3) ?Industrial structures, 24 months. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1701, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2000-2, 3-21-2000) 
Sec. 50-513. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    No land, building, structure or part thereof shall be occupied by or for any use for which a building permit is required by this article unless and until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such new use. No land or building shall be occupied or reoccupied, used or changed in use until a certificate of occupancy and compliance shall have been issued by the building inspector stating that the land or building or proposed use of a building or land complies with all the provisions of this chapter. A copy of such certificate of occupancy and compliance shall be conspicuously posted and displayed on the premises used for any purposes other than residential. The following shall apply in the issuance of any certificate: 
(1) ?Certificates not to be issued. No certificates of occupancy pursuant to the single state construction code shall be issued for any building, structure or part thereof, or for use of any land, which is not in accordance with all the provisions of this article. 
(2) ?Certificates required. No building or structure or part thereof which is hereafter erected or altered shall be occupied or used or the same caused to be done unless and until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such building or structure. 
(3) ?Certificates including zoning. Certificates of occupancy as required by the building code for new buildings or structures or parts thereof, or for alterations to or changes of use of existing buildings or structures, shall also constitute certificates of occupancy as required by this article. 
(4) ?Certificates for existing buildings. Certificates of occupancy will be issued for existing buildings, structures or parts thereof or existing uses of land if, after inspection, it is found that such buildings, structures or parts thereof or such use of land are in conformity with the provisions of this article. It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to occupy any existing commercial and/or industrial building or premises located within the city which has been vacated by a tenant, lessee or owner unless such persons desiring to reoccupy such building or premises shall first make application for and obtain a certificate of occupancy from the building inspector. 
(5) ?Temporary certificates. Nothing in this article shall prevent the building inspector from issuing a temporary certificate of occupancy for a portion of a building or structure in process of erection or alteration, provided that such temporary certificate shall not be effective for a period of time in excess of six months or more than five days after the completion of the building ready for occupancy and provided further that such portion of the building, structure or premises is in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
(6) ?Records of certificate. A record of all certificates issued shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector, and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the property involved. 
(7) ?Certificates for dwelling accessory buildings. Buildings accessory to dwellings shall not require separate certificates of occupancy but may be included in the certificate of occupancy for the dwelling when shown on the plot plan and when completed at the time as such dwelling. 
(8) ?Application for certificate. Application for a certificate of occupancy shall be made in writing to the building inspector on forms furnished by the building department, and such certificate shall be issued if, after final inspection, it is found that the building or structure or part thereof or the use of land is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. If such certificate is refused for cause, the applicant therefore shall be notified in writing of such refusal and the cause thereof. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1702, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-514. - Fees. 
    Fees for zoning change review, site plan review and for projects requiring review under uses permitted subject to special conditions, inspection and the issuance of permits or certificates or copies thereof required or issued under the provisions of this article may be collected by the building inspector in advance of issuance. The amount of such fees shall be established by resolution of the city council and shall cover the cost of inspection and supervision resulting from enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1703, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-515. - Security for completion of improvements. 
    All improvements shown on the site plan shall be completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. However, where it would be impractical to delay occupancy prior to the completion of certain improvements, a temporary certificate of occupancy can be issued upon the approval of the building inspector if an adequate guarantee as required in section 50-553 is presented to the city to secure the improvements. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1704, 3-5-1996) 
State Law reference— Performance guarantee, MCL 125.3505. 
Sec. 50-516. - Public notice. 
(a) ?Public notification. All applications for development approval requiring a public hearing shall comply with the Michigan zoning enabling act, Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3101 et seq.) and the other provisions of this section with regard to public notification. 
(b) ?Responsibility. When the provisions of this chapter or the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act require that notice be published, the city clerk shall be responsible for preparing the content of the notice, having it published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and mailed or delivered as provided in this section. 
(c) ?Content. All mail, personal and newspaper notices for public hearings shall: 
(1) ?Describe nature of the request: Identify whether the request is for a rezoning, text amendment, special land use, planned unit development, variance, appeal, ordinance interpretation or other purpose. 
(2) ?Location: Indicate the property that is the subject of the request. The notice shall include a listing of all existing street addresses within the subject property. Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such addresses currently exist within the property. If there are no street addresses, other means of identification may be used such as a tax parcel identification number, identifying the nearest cross street, or including a map showing the location of the property. No street addresses must be listed when 11 or more adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning, or when the request is for an ordinance interpretation not involving a specific property. 
(3) ?When and where the request will be considered: Indicate the date, time and place of the public hearing(s). 
(4) ?Written comments: Include a statement describing when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. Include a statement that the public may appear at the public hearing in person or by counsel. 
(5) ?Handicap access: Information concerning how handicap access will be accommodated if the meeting facility is not handicap accessible. 
(d) ?Personal and mailed notice. 
(1) ?Generally. When the provisions of this chapter or state law require that personal or mailed notice be provided, notice shall be provided to: 
a. ?The owners of property for which approval is being considered, and the applicant, if different than the owner of the property. 
b. ?Except for rezoning requests involving 11 or more adjacent properties or an ordinance interpretation request that does not involve a specific property, to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of the property subject to the request, regardless of whether the property or occupant is located within the boundaries of the city. If the name of the occupant is not known the term "occupant" may be used in making notification. Notification need not be given to more than one occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses, or organizations, one occupant of each unit or spatial area shall receive notice. In the case of a single structure containing more than four dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure. 
c. ?All neighborhood organizations, public utility companies, railroads and other persons which have requested to receive notice pursuant to subsection (f) of this section. 
d. ?Other governmental units or infrastructure agencies within one mile of the property involved in the application. 
(2) ?Notice by mail/affidavit. Notice shall be deemed mailed by its deposit in the United States mail, first class, properly addressed, postage paid. The clerk shall prepare a list of property owners and registrants to whom notice was mailed, as well as of anyone to whom personal notice was delivered. 
(e) ?Timing of notice. Unless otherwise provided in the Michigan zoning enabling act, PA 110 of 2006, or this chapter where applicable, notice of a public hearing shall be provided as follows: 
(1) ?For a public hearing on an application for a rezoning, text amendment, special land use, planned unit development, variance, appeal or ordinance interpretation: not less than 15 days before the date the application will be considered for approval. This means it must be published in a newspaper of general circulation and for those receiving personal notice, received by mail or personal notice, not less than 15 days before the hearing. 
(2) ?For any other public hearing required by this chapter: 15 days. 
(f) ?Registration to receive notice by mail. 
(1) ?Generally. Any neighborhood organization, public utility company, railroad or any other person may register with the clerk to receive written notice of all applications for development approval pursuant to subsection (d) of this section, or written notice of all applications for development approval within the zoning district in which they are located. The clerk shall be responsible for providing this notification. Fees may be assessed for the provision of this notice, as established by the legislative body. 
(2) ?Requirements. The requesting party must provide the clerk information on an official form to ensure notification can be made. All registered persons must re-register bi-annually (or another period) to continue to receive notification pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1705, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2014-05, § 1(1705), 11-4-2014) 
Secs. 50-517—50-540. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - CITY PLANNING COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Michigan planning enabling act, MCL 125.3801 et seq. 

Sec. 50-541. - Powers and duties. 
    The city planning commission is hereby designated the commission as specified in the Michigan zoning enabling act, Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3101 et seq.) and shall perform the duties of said commission as provided in these acts, as amended, together with such other powers and duties as are given to such commission by the provisions of this article, including authority to act on all matters requiring approval or recommendation of such commission. One member of the planning commission shall serve as a member of the board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1900, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2014-05, § 1(1800), 11-4-2014) 
Sec. 50-542. - Authority to approve uses. 
    Whenever in this article the lawful exercise or existence of a use requires the approval of the city planning commission, such commission is hereby authorized and directed to investigate the matter requiring such approval, to conduct a hearing thereon, to make a determination, to either grant or refuse the approval and to do all things reasonably necessary to the making of such investigation and determination, subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1801, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-543. - Hearing notice. 
    Upon receipt of an application for a special land use approval, a conditional use approval, a planned development approval, a single-family cluster approval or any other land use approval which requires a decision on discretionary grounds, one notice that a request has been received shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and shall be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being considered, to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question, and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification. Notification need not be given to more than one occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, one occupant of each unit or spatial area shall receive notice. All notice requirements shall comply with the provisions of the Michigan zoning enabling act, Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3101 et seq.) and section 50-516. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1802, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2014-05, § 1(1802), 11-4-2014) 
Sec. 50-544. - Surveys and plans. 
    Where the planning commission is empowered to approve certain uses of premises under the provisions of this article or in cases where the commission is required to make an investigation, the applicant shall furnish such surveys, plans or other information as may be reasonably required by said commission for the proper evaluation and consideration of the matter. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1803, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-545. - Special land uses. 
(a) ?Whenever a special land use, namely, uses subject to special conditions, is requested pursuant to sections 50-82, 50-112, 50-142, 50-172, 50-230, 50-284 and 50-453, then the provisions and conditions of this section shall apply in addition to the provisions and conditions of the other aforesaid sections and the following sections. 
(b) ?The planning commission shall have the authority to grant special land use permits and to attach conditions to a permit. Only those uses listed in sections 50-82, 50-112, 50-142, 50-172, 50-230, 50-258, 50-284 and 50-453 shall be considered for special land use permit review and approval. 
(c) ?Application for a special land use permit shall be made by filing the application form, required information, and required fee with the building inspector. The fee shall be set by resolution by the city council, except that no fee shall be required for a special land use permit application for the construction of a single-family residence or of any governmental body or agency. No part of the fee shall be returnable to the applicant. The building inspector shall transmit a copy of the application and submitted information to the planning commission. 
(d) ?An application for a special land use permit shall contain the following information: 
(1) ?The applicant's name, address, e-mail address and telephone number. 
(2) ?The names, and addresses of all record owners and proof of ownership. 
(3) ?The applicant's interest in the property and if the applicant is not the fee-simple owner, the owner's signed authorization for the application. 
(4) ?Legal description, address, and tax parcel number of the property. 
(5) ?A scaled and accurate survey drawing correlated with a legal description and showing all existing buildings, drives, and other improvements. 
(6) ?A detailed description of the proposed use. 
(7) ?A site plan, if requested by the planning commission, which plan shall meet all the requirements of section 50-462. 
(e) ?The planning commission shall review the particular circumstances and facts of each proposed use in terms of the following standards and required findings, and with respect to any additional standards set forth in this article. The planning commission shall find and report adequate data, information, and evidence showing that the proposed use meets all required standards: 
(1) ?Will be harmonious, and in accordance with the objectives, intent, and purpose of this article. 
(2) ?Will be compatible with a natural environment and existing and future land uses in the vicinity. 
(3) ?Will be compatible with the city master plans. 
(4) ?Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services, such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage ways and structures, refuse disposal, or that the persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to provide adequately for such services. 
(5) ?Will not be detrimental, hazardous, or disturbing to existing or future neighboring uses, persons, property, or the public welfare. 
(6) ?Will not create additional requirements at public costs for public facilities and services that will be detrimental to the economic welfare of the community. 
(f) ?The planning commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny special land use permit application. The planning commission's decision, the basis for their decisions, and all conditions imposed, shall be described in a written statement which shall be made a part of the record of the meeting. 
(g) ?In granting a special land use permit, the planning commission shall impose any conditions it deems necessary to achieve the objective and standards of this chapter, the standards of the Michigan zoning enabling act, Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3101 et seq.), and the public health, safety, and welfare of the city. Failure to comply with such conditions shall be considered a violation of this article. An approved special land use permit, including all conditions, shall run with the parcel in the approval and shall remain unchanged except upon the consent of the planning commission. Any such changes shall be entered into city records and recorded in the minutes of the planning commission meeting at which the action occurred. The procedures required for an original application shall be followed with respect to any proposed changes. 
(h) ?An application for a special land use permit which has been denied wholly or in part by the planning commission shall not be resubmitted for a period of 365 days from the date of denial, except upon the consent of the planning commission to be valid. 
(i) ?A special conditional use approval runs with the land until such time as the use designated in the "approval" is changed by the occupant. The land then reverts back to only the uses permitted in that specific zoning district. 
(j) ?The decision of the planning commission with respect to a special land use permit shall not be appealable to the board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1804, 3-5-1996) 
State Law reference— Special land uses, MCL 125.3502 et seq. 
Sec. 50-546. - Hearings; matters to be considered. 
    In making any recommendations or approvals on special land uses, conditional uses, planned development districts, single family cluster developments or other matters authorized by law, the planning commission and the city council, where its approval is also required, shall consider and apply the following standards: 
(1) ?Whether or not the use involved is consistent with and promotes the intent and purpose of this article. 
(2) ?Whether or not the use involved is compatible with adjacent uses of land, the natural environment, and the capacities of public services and facilities affected by the land use. 
(3) ?Whether or not the use involved is consistent with the public health, safety and welfare of the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1805, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-547. - Conditions for approval. 
    Reasonable conditions may be required in conjunction with the approval of a special land use, conditional use, planned development district, single family cluster development or other land uses or activities permitted by discretionary decision. The conditions may include conditions necessary to insure that public services and facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads caused by the land use or activity, to protect the natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy, to ensure compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and to promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. 
(1) ?Conditions imposed shall do the following: 
a. ?Be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety and welfare, as well as the social and economic well-being of those who will use the land use or activity under consideration, residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed land use or activity, and the community as a whole. 
b. ?Be reasonably compatible with the city's master plan for future land use. 
c. ?Be related to the valid exercise of the policy power and purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity. 
d. ?Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of the zoning regulations, be related to the standards established in this article for the land use or activity under consideration, and be necessary to insure compliance with those standards. 
(2) ?The conditions imposed with respect to the approval of a land use or activity shall be recorded in the record of the approval action and shall remain unchanged except upon the mutual consent of the approving authority and the landowner. The approving authority shall maintain a record of changes granted in conditions. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1806, 3-5-1996) 
Secs. 50-548—50-572. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIX. - BOARD OF APPEALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Zoning board of appeals, MCL 125.3601 et seq. 

Sec. 50-573. - Created; membership. 
    There shall be established and appointed by the city council, in accordance with act 110 of the Public Acts of 2006, as amended, a zoning board of appeals (ZBA). Such board shall consist of seven members, one of whom shall be a member of the city council, one a citizen member of the planning commission with appointment by the council coinciding with his planning commission term, and five members who shall be appointed by the council. In the latter instance, one of such members shall be appointed for a one-year term; two of such members shall be appointed for a two-year term, and two of such members shall be appointed for a three-year term. Thereafter, each member shall be appointed to hold office for a full three-year term. No elected officer, other than the council member, or employee of the city shall be a member of the board. Any vacancy in the board shall be filled by the council for the remainder of the unexpired term. Compensation of the members of the board of appeals shall be fixed by the city council. 
(1) ?Any member who has a conflict of interest on any matter before the board of appeals may disqualify himself from voting thereon, and failure to do so may constitute misconduct in office. 
(2) ?The ZBA shall elect its own chairperson; however, a ZBA member who is also on the city council shall not be chairperson of the ZBA. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1900, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. ZOA-2015-03, § 1900, 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 50-574. - Rules of procedure. 
    The board shall annually elect its own chairman and at such other times as the board may determine by rule. The board shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall maintain a record of its proceedings which shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be a public record. The fees to be charged for appeals shall be set by resolution of the city council. In those instances wherein lot area and yard requirements in lots existing of record cannot be complied with and must therefore be reviewed by the board, the required fees for appeal, in whole or part, may be refunded to the petitioner at the discretion of the board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1901, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. ZOA-2015-03, § 1901, 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 50-575. - Procedures. 
(a) ?Meetings of the zoning board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the ZBA, in its rules of procedure, may specify. There shall be a fixed place of meeting and all meetings shall be open to the public. 
(b) ?A majority of the total membership of the zoning board of appeals shall vote on every matter (no abstentions) unless a member has a conflict of interest. A member of the ZBA shall request to be disqualified from a vote in which the member has a conflict of interest. The member shall state the nature of the conflict of interest and the ZBA shall vote whether to excuse the member from participation because of a conflict of interest. Failure to raise an issue of conflict of interest prior to discussion and vote on a matter before the ZBA shall constitute misconduct in office for which the member may be removed, following a hearing. 
(c) ?Conflict of interest may include, but is not limited to: considering property a ZBA member owns or has a legal or financial interest in or adjacent property; considering a request by a party a ZBA member has close ties with, such as a relative, friend, boss, co-worker or neighbor. A fundamental issue is whether the member of ZBA believes he can objectively consider the request before the ZBA. 
(d) ?The ZBA shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses, administer oaths, compel testimony and the production of books, papers, files, and other evidence pertinent to the matters before it, to the extent allowed by law. 
(e) ?All findings of the zoning board of appeals shall be in writing, with a record of its proceedings showing the action of the ZBA and the vote of each member of each question considered. 
(f) ?Determinations and findings of the ZBA shall be made in a reasonable time period. 
(g) ?The ZBA shall file a record of its proceedings in the office of the city clerk. The record of proceedings shall be a public record. 
(h) ?The zoning board of appeals may not conduct any business unless a majority of its membership is present. 
(i) ?A majority vote of the total membership is necessary to reverse any administrative decision or grant a dimensional (non-use) variance or make a decision in favor of an applicant. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1902, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 2014-05, § 1(1902), 11-4-2014; Ord. No. ZOA-2015-03, § 1902, 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 50-576. - Powers and duties. 
    The zoning board of appeals shall have the following powers and duties under this article: 
(1) ?Those duties described in Michigan zoning enabling act (Public Act 110 of 2006), as amended; 
(2) ?To review, hear, consider and approve, approve with conditions or disapprove variances; 
(3) ?To hear, review, consider, and affirm, modify or reverse any order, decision, determination or interpretation of the building inspector or any other administrative official made under the terms of this article; 
(4) ?To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of this article, requests for exceptions, for interpretations of the zoning map and for decisions on special approval situations on which this article specifically authorizes the board to pass. Any exception or special approval permit shall be subject to such conditions as the board may require to preserve and promote the character of the zoning district in question and otherwise promote the purposes of this article; 
(5) ?To permit the erection and use of a building or use of premises for public utility purposes and make exceptions therefore to the height and bulk requirements herein established which the board considers necessary for the public safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1903, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. ZOA-2015-03, § 1903, 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 50-577. - Temporary permits. 
(a) ?The zoning board of appeals may grant a permit for temporary buildings or permitted uses for periods not to exceed two years. 
(b) ?The granting of temporary permits shall be done under the following conditions: 
(1) ?The granting of a temporary permit shall in no way constitute a change in the basic zoning district and principal uses permitted therein. 
(2) ?The temporary permit shall be granted in writing, stipulating all conditions as to time, nature of development permitted and arrangements for removing the use at the termination of the temporary permit. 
(3) ?All setbacks, land coverage, off-street parking, lighting and other necessary requirements to be considered in protecting the public health, safety and general welfare of the people of the city shall be made at the discretion of the zoning board of appeals or as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1904, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. ZOA-2015-03, § 1904, 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 50-578. - Jurisdiction. 
(a) ?The zoning board of appeals shall not have the power to alter or change the zoning district classification of any property, nor to make any change in the terms of this article, but does have power to act on those matters where this article provides for an administrative review, interpretation, exception or special approval permit and to authorize a variance as defined in this section and laws of the state. 
(b) ?The zoning board of appeals, in conformity with the provisions of the this chapter and the Michigan zoning enabling act (Public Act 110 of 2006), as amended, may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirements, decision, or determination appealed from and shall make such an order, requirements, decision, or determination as, in its opinion, ought to be made and to that end, shall have all the powers to hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass under this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1905, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. ZOA-2015-03, § 1905, 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 50-579. - Appeals, interpretations, and variances. 
    Subject to the provisions of section 50-580, the board, after a public hearing, shall have the power to decide applications for appeals, interpretations, and variances filed as hereafter provided: 
(1) ?Where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error or misinterpretation in any order, requirement, decision, grant, or refusal made by the building inspector or other administrative office in the carrying out or enforcement of the provisions of this article, then an appeal or request for ordinance interpretation shall be filed with the zoning board of appeals on forms established for that purpose. In deciding a request for ordinance interpretation, the ZBA shall ensure that its interpretation is consistent with the intent and purpose of the ordinance, the article in which the language in question is contained, and all other relevant provisions of the ordinance. 
(2) ?Where, by reason of the exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property which existed on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary situation or condition of the land, building, or structure, or of the use or development of property immediately adjoining the property in question, the literal enforcement of the requirements of this article would involve practical difficulties, provided that the board shall not grant a variance on a lot of less area than the requirements of its zoning district, even though such lot existed at the time of the adoption of this article if the owner or members of his immediate family owned adjacent land which could, without practical difficulty, be included as part of the lot. 
(3) ?Where there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this chapter relating to the construction, structural changes in equipment, or alterations of buildings or structures, or the use of land, buildings, or structures so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1906, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. ZOA-2015-03, § 1906, 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 50-580. - Dimensional or non-use variances. 
    No variance in the provisions of this article shall be authorized unless the zoning board of appeals finds, from reasonable evidence, that all of the following standards have been met: 
(1) ?Such variance will not be detrimental to adjacent property and the surrounding neighborhood; 
(2) ?Such variance will not impair the intent and purpose of this article; 
(3) ?Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions apply to the property in question or to the intended use of the property that do not apply generally to other properties in the same zoning district. Such circumstances shall create a practical difficulty because of unique circumstances or physical conditions such as narrowness, shallowness, shape or topography of the property involved, or to the intended use of the property. See section 50-579(2); 
(4) ?Such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right similar to that possessed by other properties in the same zoning district and in the vicinity. The possibility of increased financial return shall not of itself be deemed sufficient to warrant a variance; 
(5) ?The condition or situation of the specific piece of property or of the intended use of said property, for which the variance is sought, is not of so general or recurrent a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation for such conditions or situation; 
(6) ?The condition or situation of the specific piece of property or of the intended use of said property, for which the variance is sought, shall not be the result of actions of the property owner. In other words, the problem shall not be self-created; 
(7) ?That strict compliance with area, setbacks, frontage, height, bulk or density would unreasonably prevent the owner from using the property for a permitted purpose, or would render conformity unnecessarily burdensome; 
(8) ?That the variance requested is the minimum amount necessary to overcome the inequality inherent in the particular property or mitigate the hardship; 
(9) ?That the variance will relate only to property under the control of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1907, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. ZOA-2015-03, § 1907, 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 50-581. - Use variances prohibited. 
(a) ?The zoning board of appeals is hereby prohibited from granting a use variance for a use not permitted within a particular zoning district. A use variance would allow a landowner to use the land for a purpose which is otherwise not permitted or is prohibited by the applicable zoning district regulations. 
(b) ?The zoning board of appeals shall only be authorized to issue dimensional or non-use variances in strict accordance with section 50-580. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1908, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. ZOA-2015-03, § 1908, 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 50-582. - Public hearing and notification requirement. 
    Upon receipt of an application for an appeal, interpretation, or variance, the zoning board of appeals shall hold at least one public hearing, in accordance with the public hearing and public notice requirements set forth in the Michigan zoning enabling act (Public Act 110 of 2006), as amended: 
(1) ?Responsibility. When the provisions of this chapter or the Michigan zoning enabling act require that notice be published, the building inspector shall be responsible for preparing the content of the notice, having it published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and mailed or delivered as provided in this section. 
(2) ?Content. All mail, personal and newspaper notices for public hearings shall: 
a. ?Describe the nature of the request. Identify whether the request is for a rezoning, text amendment, special approval use, planned unit development, variance, appeal, ordinance interpretation or other purpose. 
b. ?Location. Indicate the property that is the subject of the request. The notice shall include a listing of all existing street addresses within the subject property. Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such addresses currently exist within the property. If there are no street addresses, other means of identification may be used, such as a tax parcel identification number, identifying the nearest cross street, or including a map showing the location of the property. No street addresses must be listed when 11 or more adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning, or when the request is for an ordinance interpretation not involving a specific property. 
c. ?When and where the request will be considered. Indicate the date, time and place of the public hearing. 
d. ?Written comments. Include a statement describing when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. Include a statement that the public may appear at the public hearing in person or by counsel. 
e. ?Handicap access. Information concerning how handicap access will be accommodated if the meeting facility is not handicap accessible. 
(3) ?Personal and mailed notice. When the provisions of this chapter or state law require that personal or mailed notice be provided, notice shall be provided to: 
a. ?The owners of property for which approval is being considered, and the applicant, if different than the owner of the property; 
b. ?Except for rezoning requests involving 11 or more adjacent properties or an chapter interpretation request that does not involve a specific property, to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of the property subject to the request, regardless of whether the property or occupant is located within the boundaries of the city. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification. Notification need not be given to more than one occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses, or organizations, one occupant of each unit or spatial area shall receive notice. In the case of a single structure containing more than four dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure; 
c. ?All neighborhood organizations, public utility companies, railroads and other persons which have requested to receive notice pursuant to subsection (6) of this section. 
(4) ?Notice by mail/affidavit. Notice shall be deemed mailed by its deposit in the United States mail, first class, properly addressed, postage paid. The building inspector shall prepare a list of property owners and registrants to whom notice was mailed, as well as of anyone to whom personal notice was delivered. 
(5) ?Timing of notice. Unless otherwise provided in the Michigan zoning enabling act (Public Act 110 of 2006), as amended, or this chapter where applicable, notice of a public hearing shall be provided as follows: For a public hearing on a variance, appeal, or chapter interpretation, not less than 15 days before the date the application will be considered for approval. 
(6) ?Registration to receive notice by mail. 
a. ?Any neighborhood organization, public utility company, railroad or any other person may register with the building inspector to receive written notice of all applications for development approval pursuant to section (3)c of this section, or written notice of all applications for development approval within the zoning district in which they are located. The building inspector shall be responsible for providing this notification. Fees may be assessed for the provision of this notice, as established by the city council. 
b. ?Requirements. The requesting party must provide the building inspector information on an official form to ensure notification can be made. All registered persons must re-register bi-annually to continue to receive notification pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1909, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. ZOA-2015-03, § 1909, 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 50-583. - Standards for evaluation. 
    Each case before the zoning board of appeals shall be considered as an individual case and shall conform to the detailed application of the following standards in a manner appropriate to the particular circumstances of such case. All uses as listed in any district requiring board approval for a permit shall be of such location, size and character that, in general, it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the district in which it is situated and will not be detrimental to the orderly development of adjacent districts. The board shall give consideration to the following: 
(1) ?The location and size of the use. 
(2) ?The nature and intensity of the operations involved in or conducted in connection with it. 
(3) ?Its size, layout and its relation to pedestrian and vehicular traffic to and from the use. 
(4) ?The assembly of persons in connection with it will not be hazardous to the neighborhood or be incongruous therewith or conflict with normal traffic of the neighborhood. 
(5) ?Taking into account, among other things, convenient routes of pedestrian traffic, particularly of children. 
(6) ?Vehicular turning movements in relation to routes of traffic flow, relation to street intersections, site distance and the general character and intensity of development of the neighborhood. 
(7) ?The location and height of buildings, the locations, nature and height of walls, fences and the nature and extent of landscaping of the site shall be such that the use will not hinder or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings or impair the value thereof. 
(8) ?The nature, location, size, and site layout of the use shall be such that it will be a harmonious part of the district in which it is situated, taking into account, among other things, prevailing shopping habits, convenience of access by prospective patrons, the physical and economic relationship of one type of use to another and related characteristics. 
(9) ?The location, size, intensity and site layout of the use shall be such that its operations will not be objectionable to nearby dwellings by reason of noise, fumes or flash of lights to a greater degree than is normal with respect to the proximity of commercial to residential uses, nor interfere with an adequate supply of light and air, nor increase the danger of fire or otherwise endanger the public safety. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1910, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. ZOA-2015-03, § 1910, 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 50-584. - Conditions of approval. 
    In authorizing a variance, the zoning board of appeals may impose specific conditions regarding the location, character, fencing, buffering or landscaping, or such other design changes as are reasonably necessary for the furtherance of the intent and spirit of this chapter and to ensure the protection of the public interest and abutting properties. To ensure compliance with such conditions, the ZBA may require a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or surety bond per the requirements of section 50-659. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1911, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. ZOA-2015-03, § 1911, 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 50-585. - Lapse of approval. 
(a) ?No order of the ZBA permitting the erection of a building shall be valid for a period longer than one year, unless a building permit for such erection or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. 
(b) ?No order of the ZBA permitting a use of a building or premises shall be valid for a period longer than one year unless such permitted use is established within such period, provided, however, that where such permitted is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a building, such order shall continue in force and effect if a building permit for said erection or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1912, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. ZOA-2015-03, § 1912, 4-21-2015) 
Secs. 50-586—50-602. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XX. - ZONING COMMISSION 

Sec. 50-603. - Designated. 
    The city planning commission is hereby designated as the commission specified in section 301 of Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3301) and shall perform the duties of said commission as provided in the statue in connection with the amendment of this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, art. XX, 3-5-1996) 
State Law reference— Zoning commission, MCL 125.3301 et seq. 
Secs. 50-604—50-624. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXI. - CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Zoning adoption and enforcement, MCL 125.3401 et seq. 

Sec. 50-625. - Procedures. 
    The city council may from time to time on recommendation from the planning commission, on its own motion or on petition amend, supplement, modify or change this chapter in accordance with the authority of Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3101 et seq.), in accordance with the following procedural outline: 
(1) ?Upon presentation to the city council of a petition for amendment of this article by an owner of real estate to be affected, such petition shall be accompanied by a fee. The amount of such fee shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall be used to defray the expense of publishing required notices and related expenditures. Should no public hearing be held thereon; the fee shall be refunded to the petitioner. 
(2) ?All amendment proposals not originating with the planning commission shall be referred by the city council to the planning commission for a recommendation before any action is taken by the city council. 
(3) ?The planning commission shall study the proposed ordinance amendment and make written recommendation to the city council for approval, conditional approval, or disapproval. In the course of such study, the planning commission may hold public informational meetings on the proposed amendment. 
(4) ?The planning commission shall hold a public hearing thereon per the provisions of section 401 of Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3401). 
(5) ?In case a protest against a proposed amendment, supplement or change is presented, duly signed by the owners of at least 20 percent of the area of land included in the proposed change or by the owners of at least 20 percent of the area of land included within an area extending outward 100 feet from any point on the boundary of the land included in the proposed change, such amendment shall not be passed except by a three-quarters vote of the city council. Publicly owned land shall be excluded in calculating the 20 percent land area requirement. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, art. XXI, 3-5-1996) 
Secs. 50-626—50-653. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXII. - ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES AND OTHER REMEDIES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Certain violations as nuisance per se, MCL 125.3407. 

Sec. 50-654. - Violations. 
    Any firm, corporation or person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 2500, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-655. - Declaration of public nuisance. 
    Any building or structure which is erected, altered or converted, or any use of premises or land which is begun or changed subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and in violation of any of the provisions hereof is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 2501, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-656. - Fines, imprisonment, etc. 
    The owner of any building, structure or premises or part thereof where any condition in violation of this chapter shall exist or shall be created, and who has assisted knowingly in the commission of such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be liable to the fines and imprisonment herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 2502, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-657. - Each day a separate offense. 
    A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 2503, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-658. - Right and remedies cumulative. 
    The rights and remedies provided herein are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 2504, 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 50-659. - Performance bonds. 
(a) ?Where in this chapter there is delegated to the zoning board of appeals or the city planning commission the function of establishing certain physical site improvements as a contingency to securing a zoning amendment, site plan approval, special approval or variance, the zoning board of appeals or the city planning commission may, to ensure strict compliance with any regulation contained herein or required as a condition of the issuance of a permit, require the permittee to furnish a cash, performance or surety bond executed by a reputable surety company authorized to do business in the state, or irrevocable letter of credit, in an amount determined by the zoning board of appeals or the city planning commission to be reasonably necessary to ensure compliance hereunder; provided, however, that in fixing the amount of such cash, performance, surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit, the zoning board of appeals or city planning commission shall take into account the size and scope of the proposed improvement project, current prevailing cost of rehabilitating the premises upon default of the operator, estimated expenses to compel the operator to comply by court decree, and such other factors and conditions as might be relevant in determining the sum reasonable in the light of all facts and circumstances surrounding each application. 
(b) ?The performance guarantee shall be deposited with the city clerk at the time of the issuance of the permit authorizing the activity or project. The city may not require the deposit of the performance guarantee prior to the time when the city is prepared to issue the permit. 
(c) ?The city shall establish procedures whereby a rebate of any cash deposits, in reasonable proportion to the ratio of work completed on the required improvements, will be made as work progress. 
(d) ?As used in this section, the term "improvements" means those features and actions associated with a project which are considered necessary by the body or official granting approval to protect natural resources or the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city and future users or inhabitants of the proposed project or project area, including, but not limited to, roadways, paving, walls, curbing, striping, lighting utilities, sidewalks, screening and drainage. 
(e) ?A certificate of occupancy for any improvement will not be issued not shall the property be used or occupied in any way until the required physical site improvements are fulfilled. In instances where all improvements as required by this chapter are not completed and a temporary certificate of occupancy is requested, the cost of such remaining improvements shall be estimated by the building inspector, taking into account the criteria listed above. The building inspector may grant temporary occupancy if use of the premises does not constitute a hazard or nuisance. Temporary occupancy will not be granted until satisfactory cash bond or irrevocable letter of credit in the amount of the estimated cost of completion is filed with the city clerk. If the work is not completed by the date specified on the temporary occupancy permit, the city may use the cash, surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit to complete the improvements. Issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy is also subject to the provisions of section 50-513(5). 
(f) ?Should the applicant object to the amount of the performance guarantee as set by the planning commission, zoning board of appeals or building inspector as provided herein, he shall file with the city clerk his written objection thereto within 30 days of such determination. The city clerk shall forward any such written objection he shall receive to the city council, which may make such inquiry and determination as it deems to be in the interest of the city. The determination of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 2505, 3-5-1996) 
State Law reference— Performance guarantee, MCL 125.3505. 
Secs. 50-660—50-676. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIII. - SEVERANCE CLAUSE 

Sec. 50-677. - Validity of holdings. 
    Sections of this chapter shall be deemed to be severable, and should any section, paragraph or provision hereof be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such holdings shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or any part hereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, art. XXVI, 3-5-1996) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1988 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1988 Code, as supplemented, which are included herein. Sections of the 1988 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances and other legislation, see the table immediately following this table. 
1988 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 1-1 1-1 1-2 1-2 1-3 1-3 1-4 1-5 1-5 1-6 1-6 1-7 1-7 1-8 1-8 1-9 1-9 1-10 1-10 1-11 1-11 1-12 1-12 1-13 1-13 1-14 1-14 24-1 2-21 2-19 3-1 26-66 4-1 6-7 4-3 6-8 4-4 6-9 4-6 6-12 4-7 6-2 4-31 6-1 4-32 6-3 4-33 6-4 4-34 6-5 4-35 6-6 4-36 6-10 4-37 6-11 4-38 6-13 4-39 6-14 4-40 6-15 4-41 6-16 4-51 6-36 4-52 6-37 4-53 6-38 4-54 6-39 4-55 6-40 4-56 6-41 5-21 10-19 5-77 10-20 5-186 10-72 5-187 10-73 5-188 10-74 5-189 10-75 5-211 10-94 5-212 10-95 5-212.1 10-96 5-213 10-97 5-214 10-98 5-215 10-99 5-216 10-100 5-241 10-157 5-243 10-158 5-300 10-129 5-303 10-44 5-304 10-45 5-305 10-46 5-306 10-47 5-307 10-48 5-308 10-49 6-21 14-19 6-22 14-19 6-23 14-19 6-24 14-19 7-21 16-19 7-22 16-20 7-23 16-21 7-24 16-22 7-25 16-23 7-26 16-24 7-27 16-25 7-28 16-26 7-29 16-27 7-30 16-28 7-40 2-135 7-41 2-136 7-42 2-137 7-43 2-138 7-44 2-139 7-45 2-140 7-46 2-141 7-47 2-142 7-48 2-143 7-49 2-144 7-61 16-60 7-62 16-61 7-63 16-62 7-64 16-63 7-65 16-64 7-66 16-65 7-67 16-66 8-1 20-1 8-21 20-21 8-22 20-22 8-26 20-23 8-46 20-50 8-47 20-51 8-48 20-52 8-52 2-198 8-60 20-53 8-61 20-54 8-62 20-55 8-63 20-56 8-64 20-57 8-65 20-58 8-66 20-59 9-1 10-182 9-2 10-183 9-3 10-184 9-4 10-185 9-5 10-186 9-6 10-187 9-7 10-188 9-8 10-189 9-9 10-190 9-10 10-191 9-11 10-192 9-36 10-223 9-37 10-224 9-38 10-225 9-39 10-226 9-40 10-227 9-61 10-248 9-62 10-249 9-63 10-250 9-64 10-251 9-76 10-281 9-77 10-282 9-78 10-283 9-79 10-284 9-80 10-285 9-81 10-286 9-82 10-287 9-83 10-288 9-84 10-289 9-96 10-312 9-98 10-313 9-99 10-314 10-1 32-1 10-21 32-21 10-22 32-22 10-23 32-23 10-24 32-24 10-25 32-25 10-26 32-26 10-27 32-27 10-28 32-28 10-29 32-29 10-30 32-30 10-31 32-31 11-1 12-1 11-2 12-2 11-3 12-3 11-4 12-4 11-5 12-5 11-6 12-6 11-8 12-7 11-9 12-8 11-10 12-9 11-11 12-10 11-13 12-12 11-14 12-13 11-15 12-14 11-16 12-15 11-21 8-1 11-22 8-2 11-23 8-3 11-24 8-4 11-25 8-5 11-26 8-6 11-27 8-7 11-28 8-8 11-30 30-19 11-31 30-20 11-32 30-21 11-33 30-22 11-34 30-23 11-35 30-24 11-40 4-19 11-41 4-20 11-42 4-21 11-43 4-22 11-44 4-23 — 50-230 — 50-258 11-45 4-24 11-46 4-25 11-47 4-26 11-48 4-27 11-49 4-28 11-50 4-29 12-1 18-19 12-2 18-20 12-3 18-21 12-4 18-22 12-5 18-23 13-1 26-19 13-21 26-44 13-22 26-45 13-45 26-64 13-47 26-65 — 26-67 13-48 26-68 13-49 26-69 13-50 26-70 13-51 26-99 13-52 26-100 13-53 26-101 13-54 26-102 13-55 26-103 13-56 26-104 13-57 26-105 13-58 26-20 13-59 26-106 13-60(a) 18-82 13-60(b) 18-83 13-60(c) 18-84 13-81 26-126 13-82 26-127 13-83 26-129 13-84 26-130 13-106 26-159 13-107 26-160 13-108 13-162 13-109 13-162 13-131 26-191 13-132 26-192 13-134 26-193 13-156 26-225 13-157 26-226 13-186 26-248 13-187 26-249 13-188 26-250 13-211 26-279 13-212 26-280 13-213 26-281 13-213a 26-282 13-214 26-283 13-215 26-284 13-216 26-285 13-217 26-286 13-218 26-287 13-219 26-308 13-220 26-309 13-221 26-310 13-222 26-311 13-240 26-341 13-241 26-342 14-1 4-47 14-2 4-48 14-3 4-49 14-4 4-50 14-5 4-51 14-6 4-52 14-7 4-53 14-8 4-54 14-9 4-55 14-10 4-56 14-11 4-57 14-12 4-58 14-13 4-59 14-14 4-60 15-1 28-1 15-2 28-2 15-3 28-3 15-4 28-4 15-5 28-5 15-6 28-6 15-7 28-7 15-7a 28-8 15-8 28-9 15-9 28-10 15-10 28-11 15-11 28-12 15-12 28-13 15-13 28-14 15-14 28-15 15-15 28-16 15-16 28-17 15-17 28-18 15-18 36-1 17-21 2-99 17-22 2-100 17-23 2-101 17-24 2-102 17-25 2-103 18-21 24-54 18-22 24-54 18-23 24-54 18-24 24-54 19-1 34-1 19-2 34-2 19-3 34-3 19-4 34-4 19-5 34-5 19-6 34-6 19-7 34-7 19-8 34-8 19-9 34-9 19-10 34-10 19-11 34-11 19-12 34-12 19-13 34-13 19-14 34-14 19-15 34-15 19-16 34-16 19-17 34-17 19-18 34-18 19-19 34-19 19-20 34-20 19-21 34-21 20-21 36-21 20-22 36-22 20-23 36-23 20-24 36-24 20-25 36-25 20-26 36-26 20-27 36-27 20-28 36-28 20-51 36-60 20-52 36-61 20-53 36-62 20-54 36-63 20-55 36-64 20-61 36-96 20-62 36-97 20-63 36-98 20-64 36-99 20-65 36-100 20-66 36-101 20-67 36-102 20-68 36-103 20-69 36-104 20-70 36-105 20-71 36-106 20-72 36-107 20-73 36-108 20-74 36-109 20-75 36-110 20-76 36-111 20-77 36-112 20-78 36-113 20-79 36-114 20-80 36-115 20-81 36-116 20-82 36-117 20-100 38-19 20-101 38-20 20-102 38-21 20-103 38-22 20-104 38-23 20-105 38-24 20-106 38-25 20-107 38-26 20-108 38-27 20-109 38-28 20-110 38-29 20-111 38-30 20-112 38-31 20-113 38-32 20-114 38-33 20-115 38-34 20-116 38-35 20-117 38-36 20-118 38-37 20-119 38-38 20-201 36-148 21-1 22-19 21-2 22-20 21-3 22-21 21-4 22-22 21-5 22-23 21-26 22-50 21-27 22-51 21-28 22-52 21-29 22-53 21-30 22-54 21-51 22-82 21-52 22-83 21-53 22-84 21-54 22-85 21-55 22-86 21-56 22-87 21-57 22-88 21-81 22-120 21-82 22-121 21-83 22-122 21-84 22-123 21-106 22-145 21-107 22-146 21-108 22-147 21-131 22-178 21-132 22-179 23-1 42-19 23-46 42-48 23-71 42-70 23-72 42-71 23-73 42-72 23-74 42-73 23-75 42-74 23-76 42-75 23-77 42-76 23-101 42-96 23-102 42-97 23-103 42-98 23-104 42-99 23-105 42-100 23-106 42-101 23-107 42-102 23-108 42-103 23-109 42-104 23-131 18-50 23-132 18-51 23-133 18-52 23-134 18-53 23-135 18-54 24-81 44-40 24-82 44-41 24-83 44-42 24-84 44-43 24-85 44-44 24-86 44-45 24-111 44-68 24-131 44-95 24-132 44-96 24-133 44-97 24-134 44-98 24-135 44-99 24-136 44-100 24-137 44-101 24-138 44-102 24-139 44-103 24-161 44-135 24-162 44-136 24-163 44-137 24-164 44-138 24-165 44-139 24-166 44-140 24-167 44-141 24-168 44-142 24-169 44-143 24-170 44-144 24-171 44-145 24-172 44-146 24-173 44-147 24-174 44-148 24-175 44-149 24-176 44-150 24-177 44-151 24-178 44-152 24-179 44-153 24-180 44-154 24-181 44-155 24-182 44-156 24-183 44-157 24-184 44-158 24-185 44-159 24-186 44-160 24-187 44-161 24-188 44-162 25-21 46-19 25-22 46-20 25-46 46-44 25-47 46-45 25-48 46-46 25-49 46-47 25-50 46-48 26-1 48-1 26-2 48-2 27-1 24-21 27-2 24-22 27-3 24-23 27-4 24-24 27-5 24-25  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances and other legislation which are included herein. Ordinances and other legislation not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Legislation Date Section Section 
this Code Ord. No. 61 6-2-1924 1 20-1 2 20-1 Ord. No. 88 9-21-1953 1 36-60 2 36-61 3 36-62 4 36-63 6 36-64 Ord. No. 100 7-6-1959 1 26-159 Ord. No. 102 11-2-1959 1 32-1 2 32-1 Ord. No. 106 4-17-1961 1 48-1 2 48-1 Ord. No. 107 4-16-1962 art. II 2-99—2-102 art. III 2-103 Ord. No. 119 5-16-1967 1 26-45 2 26-45 Ord. No. 120 8-15-1967 1 44-95 2 44-96 3 44-97 4 44-98 5 44-99 6 44-100 7 44-101 8 44-102 9 44-68 10 44-103 Ord. No. 122 5-21-1968 art. I 44-135 art. II 44-136 301 44-137 302 44-138 303 44-140 304 44-141 305 44-142 306 44-143 307 44-144 308 44-145 309 44-146 310 44-147 311 44-148 312 44-139 313 44-149 401 44-150 402 44-150 403 44-150 404 44-151 405 44-151 406 44-152, 44-153 407 44-154 408 44-155 409 44-156 410 44-157 501 44-158 601 44-159 701 44-160 702 44-161 801 44-162 Ord. No. 123 12-3-1968 101 22-20 200 22-19 art. III 22-50 300 22-51 301 22-52 302 22-53 303 22-54 400 22-83 401 22-84 402 22-85 403 22-86 404 22-87 405 22-88 art. V 22-120—22-123 500 22-145 501 22-146 502 22-147 art. VI 22-21 art. VII 22-22 art. VIII 22-23 1200 22-178 1201 22-179 Ord. No. 124 12-3-1968 1 16-19 2 16-20—16-22 3 16-26 4 16-23—16-25 5 16-27 6 16-28 Ord. No. 125 3-17-1970 — 48-2 Ord. No. 131 4-20-1971 1 16-19 Ord. No. 115A 4-4-1972 1 10-157 3 10-158 Ord. No. 132 4-4-1972 art. 1 10-94 art. 2 10-95 art. 3 10-97 art. 4 10-73 art. 5 10-74 art. 6 10-98 art. 7 10-99 art. 8 10-100 art. 9 10-75 — 10-72 Ord. No. 134 4-4-1972 2 10-20 Ord. No. 136 1-26-1973 1 6-7 7 6-8 8 6-2 Ord. No. 91A 5-2-1973 1 26-104 2 26-104 Ord. No. 137 5-25-1973 1 44-40 2 44-41 3 44-42 4 44-43 5 44-44 6 44-45 Ord. No. 138 6-7-1973 1 34-1 2 34-2 3 34-3 4 34-4 5 34-5 6 34-6 7 34-7 8 34-8 9 34-9 10 34-10 11 34-11 12 34-12 13 34-13 14 34-14 15 34-15 16 34-16 17 34-17 18 34-18 19 34-19 20 34-20 21 34-21 Ord. of 6-19-1973 6-19-1973 — 48-2 Ord. No. 140 9-3-1974 1 24-54 2 24-54 3 24-54 4 24-54 Ord. No. 141 11-12-1974 1 18-51 2 18-52 3 18-50 4 18-53 5 18-54 Ord. No. 144 5-6-1975 1 6-12 2 6-12 3 6-12 4 6-9 Ord. No. 145 4-6-1976 1 36-21 2 36-22 3 36-23 4 36-24 5 36-25 6 36-25 7 36-26 8 36-26 9 36-28 11 36-27 Ord. No. 120A 2-15-1977 — 44-95 — 44-97 — 44-102 Ord. No. 122A 2-15-1977 — 44-158 Ord. No. 147 4-19-1977 1 28-1 2 28-2 3 28-3 4 28-4 5 28-5, 28-6 6 28-7 7 28-9 8 28-10 9 28-11 10 28-12 11 28-13, 28-14 12 28-15 13 28-16 14 28-17 15 28-18 Ord. No. 92-13 10-4-1977 1(C) 26-126 Ord. No. 92-B 10-4-1977 1(B) 26-101 — 26-129 1(D) 26-100 — 26-102 1(E) 26-101 1(F) 26-127 1(G) 26-99 1(H) 26-67 1(I) 26-130 1(J) 26-225 1(M) 26-160 1(N) 26-68 1(O) 26-69 Ord. No. 149 1-3-1978 art. 1, § A 10-183 art. 1, § B 10-184 art. 1, § C 10-185 art. 1, § D 10-186 art. 2 10-182 art. 3, § A 10-187 art. 3, § B 10-188 art. 3, § C 10-225 art. 3, § D 10-189 art. 3, § E 10-190 art. 3, § F 10-191 art. 3, § G 10-192 art. 4, § A 10-223 art. 4, § B 10-224 art. 4, § C 10-226 art. 4, § D 10-227 art. 5, § A 10-248 art. 5, § B 10-249 art. 5, § C 10-250 art. 5, § D 10-251 Ord. of 3-7-1978 3-7-1978 1 26-100 — 26-102 — 26-126 Ord. of 4-3-1979 4-3-1979 — 28-11 Ord. No. 152 6-19-1979 2.01—5.03 14-19 Ord. No. 148A 7-17-1979 1 26-191 2 26-192 Ord. No. 153 7-17-1979 1 42-96 2 42-97 3(a) 42-98 3(b) 42-99 3(c) 42-100 3(d) 42-101 4(a) 42-102 4(b) 42-103 5 42-48 6 42-48 — 42-104 Ord. No. 48A 7-17-1979 6 26-226 Ord. of 11-20-1979 11-20-1979 — 44-97 Ord. No. 156 6-17-1980 1 42-70 2(a) 42-71 2(b) 42-72 2(c) 42-73 3(a) 42-74 3(b) 42-75 4 42-76 Ord. of 7-15-1980 7-15-1980 — 44-95 Ord. of 4-21-1981 4-21-1981 — 44-138 Ord. of 9-1-1981(2) 9-1-1981 — 44-97 Ord. of 10-4-1983 10-4-1983 — 28-11 Ord. No. 160 6-3-1986 1 26-248 2 26-249 3 26-250 Ord. No. 161 4-7-1987 1 26-103 Ord. of 8-4-1987 8-4-1987 — 44-143 Ord. No. 164 1-5-1988 art. I, § (1) 32-21 art. II, § (1) 32-22 art. III, § (1) 32-26 art. IV, § (7) 32-27 art. V, § (4) 32-28 art. VI, § (2) 32-24 art. VII, § (2) 32-25 art. VIII, § (4) 32-23 art. IX, § (2) 32-30 art. XI, § (1) 32-29 Ord. No. 165 1-5-1988 1(A) 26-279 1(B) 26-280 2 26-281 3 26-283 4 26-284 5 26-285 6 26-286 8 26-287 Ord. No. 166 3-1-1988 1 46-46 2 46-47 3 46-44 4 46-20 5 46-45 6 46-19 7 46-48 Ord. No. 167 3-1-1988 1 10-19 Ord. No. 171 3-1-1988 1 20-21 3 20-22 Ord. No. 172 4-19-1988 1 8-1 2 8-2 3 8-7 4 8-8 5 8-3 6 8-4 7 8-5 8 8-6 Ord. No. 173 6-7-1988 — 26-70 Ord. No. 179 2-21-1989 — 6-1 — 6-3—6-6 — 6-10, 6-11 — 6-13—6-16 Ord. No. 184 6-6-1989 — 26-105 Ord. No. 186 8-2-1989 — 6-36—6-41 Ord. No. 187 8-2-1989 — 26-106 Ord. No. 188 8-2-1989 — 26-20 Ord. No. 189 12-5-1989 — 26-19 Ord. No. 190 12-5-1989 — 26-193 Ord. No. 191 3-6-1990 — 2-135—2-144 Ord. No. 193 5-15-1990 — 20-21, 20-22 Ord. No. 196 5-15-1990 — 10-129 Ord. No. 200 4-16-1991 — 18-82—18-84 Ord. No. 91-07 9-17-1991 — 44-95 — 44-97 Ord. No. 92-02 1-21-1992 — 30-19—30-24 Ord. No. 92-03 2-4-1992 — 10-44—10-49 Ord. No. 93-02 9-7-1993 — 32-27 Ord. No. 94-01 3-1-1994 — 10-129 Ord. No. 94-02 3-1-1994 — 20-21, 20-22 Ord. No. 94-07 7-5-1994 — 20-22 Ord. No. 94-11 7-5-1994 — 2-198 Ord. No. 95-2 10-17-1995 — 32-27 Ord. No. 95-03 11-21-1995 — 4-19—4-29 — 50-230 — 50-258 Ord. No. 96-01 1-9-1996 1 1-2 — 1-14 Ord. No. 96-02 1-9-1996 1 24-21—24-25 Ord. No. 96-03 1-9-1996 1 26-66 2 6-16 3 32-1 4 30-24 6 42-48 Ord. No. 96-5 3-5-1996 100 50-1 200 50-2 201 50-3 202 50-3 203 50-3 204 50-3 205 50-3 206 50-3 207 50-3 208 50-3 209 50-4 300 50-33 301 50-34 302 50-35 303 50-36 304 50-37 305 50-38 306 50-39 307 50-40, 50-41 308 50-42 308(1) 50-43 308(2) 50-44 308(3) 50-45 308(4) 50-46 308(5) 50-47 308(6) 50-48 308(7) 50-49 308(8) 50-50 308(9) 50-51 308(10) 50-52 308(11) 50-53 art. IV, preamble 50-80 400 50-81 401 50-82 402 50-83 art. V, preamble 50-110 500 50-111 501 50-112 502 50-113 art. VI, preamble 50-140 600 50-141 601 50-142 602 50-143 art. VII, preamble 50-170 700 50-171 701 50-172 702 50-173 art. VIII, preamble 50-200 800 50-201 801 50-202 art. IX, preamble 50-228 900 50-231 901 50-230 art. X, preamble 50-256 1000 50-257 1001 50-258 1002 50-259 art. XI, preamble 50-282 1100 50-283 1101 50-284 1102 50-285 art. XII, preamble 50-304 1200 50-305 1201 50-306 1202 50-307 1203 50-308 1204 50-309 art. XIII, preamble 50-337 1300 50-338 1301 50-339 1350 50-367 1351 50-368 1352 50-369 1353 50-370 1354 50-371 1355 50-372 1356 50-373 1357 50-374 1358 50-375 1359 50-376 1360 50-377 1400 50-398 1401 50-399 1402 50-400 1403 50-401 1404 50-402 1404(1) 50-403 1404(2) 50-404 1404(3) 50-405 1404(4) 50-406 1404(5) 50-407 1404(6) 50-408 1404(7) 50-409 1404(8) 50-410 1404(9) 50-411 1404(10) 50-412 1404(11) 50-413 1404(12) 50-414 1404(13) 50-415 1404(14) 50-416 1500 50-446 1501 50-447 1502 50-448 1503 50-449 1504 50-450 1505 50-451 1506 50-452 1507 50-453 1508 50-454 1509 50-455 1510 50-456 1511 50-457 1512 50-458 1513 50-459 1514 50-460 1515 50-461 1516 50-462 1517 50-463 1518 50-464 1519 50-465 1600 50-486 1700 50-511 1701 50-512 1702 50-513 1703 50-514 1704 50-515 1705 50-516 1801 50-542 1802 50-543 1803 50-544 1804 50-545 1805 50-546 1806 50-547 1900 50-541 — 50-573 1901 50-574 1902 50-575 1903 50-576 1904 50-577 1905 50-578 1906 50-579 1907 50-580 1908 50-581 1909 50-582 1910 50-583 1911 50-584 1912 50-585 art. XX 50-603 art. XXI 50-625 art. XXII 50-5 art. XXIII 50-6 art. XXIV 50-7 2500 50-654 2501 50-655 2502 50-656 2503 50-657 2504 50-658 2505 50-659 art. XXVI 50-677 Ord. No. 96-06 10-1-1996 3 26-308 4 26-309 5 26-310 6 26-311 Ord. No. 96-10 12-17-1996 — 10-129 Ord. No. 96-9 12-17-1996 — 20-21, 20-22 Ord. No. 97-02 3-18-1997 1 10-96 2 10-47 Ord. No. 97-03 6-3-1997 1 36-96 2 36-97 3 36-98 4 36-99 5 36-100 6 36-101 7 36-102 8 36-103 8a 36-104 9 36-105 10 36-106 11 36-107 12 36-108 13 36-109 14 36-110 15 36-111 16 36-112 17 36-113 18 36-113 19 36-114 20 36-114 21 36-115 22 36-116 23 36-116 24 36-117 Ord. No. 97-05 7-15-1997 2 10-281 3 10-282 4 10-283 5 10-284 6 10-285 7 10-286 8 10-287 10 10-289 Ord. No. 98-05 7-15-1997 9 10-288 Ord. No. 98-1 2-17-1998 — 26-226 Ord. No. 98-2 3-3-1998 — 50-3 — 50-449 — 50-464 Ord. No. 98-3 3-17-1998 — 24-1 Ord. No. 98-4 4-21-1998 1 26-44 2 26-64 3 26-159 Ord. No. 98-5 4-21-1998 — 20-23 Ord. No. 98-6 6-16-1998 — 20-50—20-52 Ord. No. 98-2 3-3-1999 — 50-3 Ord. No. 99-3 8-17-1999 1 36-1 Ord. No. 98-4 9-7-1999 1510(4)(h) 50-456 Ord. No. 2000-1 2-15-2000 1 10-19 Ord. No. 2000-2 3-21-2000 — 50-3 — 50-512 Ord. No. 2000-3 3-21-2000 1 42-19 Ord. No. 2000-4 6-6-2000 1 42-75 Ord. No. 2000-05 8-15-2000 — 50-3 — 50-449 Ord. No. 2000-7 12-19-2000 1 26-341, 26-342 Ord. No. 2001-01 5-15-2001 50-449 Ord. No. 2001-2 6-5-2001 1 10-129 Ord. No. 2001-3 7-5-2001 — 50-448 7-6-2001 — 50-112 Ord. No. 2002-02 2-19-2002 — 50-449 Ord. No. 2002-1 4-2-2002 1 16-60 2 16-61 4 16-62 5 16-63 6 16-64 7 16-65 8 16-66 Ord. No. 2002-5 12-17-2002 1 38-19—38-38 Ord. No. 2003-1 4-1-2003 1350 50-367 1351 50-368 1352 50-369 1353 50-370 1354 50-371 1355 50-372 1356 50-373 1357 50-374 1358 50-375 1359 50-376 1360 50-377 Ord. No. 2016-02 6-18-2003 1 50-449 Ord. No. 2003-1 10-7-2003 — 50-402 — 50-404—50-416 Ord. of 5-6-2005 5-6-2005 — 50-4 Ord. No. 2006-1 6-6-2006 1 42-48 — 42-72 — 42-76 Ord. No. 2006-02 9-5-2006 — 50-3 — 50-82 Ord. of 9-15-2006 9-15-2006 — 50-83 Ord. No. 2007-01 6-5-2007 1 2-19 Ord. No. 2007-02 6-5-2007 1 32-31 Ord. No. 2003-1 10-7-2003 — 50-403 Ord. No. 2008-01 1-8-2008 1 13-162 Ord. No. 2008-02 1-22-2008 1 4-47—4-59 2 4-47—4-59 Ord. No. 2008-03 12-2-2008 1 36-148 Ord. No. 2009-01 2-3-2009 1 26-65 2 26-65 Ord. No. 48 6-17-2009 1 26-66 Ord. No. 2009-02 8-18-2009 1 50-53 Ord. No. 2010-01 2-2-2010 — 50-449 Ord. No. 2010-02 4-20-2010 1 10-312 3 10-313 4 10-314 Ord. No. 2010-03 8-3-2010 1 50-40 Ord. No. 2010-04 10-5-2010 1 26-226 Ord. No. 2011-02 5-17-2011 1 2-100 Ord. No. 2011-03 7-5-2011 1 4-60 Ord. No. 2011-05 9-6-2011 1 44-97 Ord. No. 2011-06 12-20-2011 1 1-14 Ord. No. 2011-07 12-20-2011 1 42-76 Ord. No. 2011-08 12-20-2011 1 42-102 Ord. No. 2011-09 12-20-2011 1 42-104 Ord. No. 2011-10 12-20-2011 1 42-74 Ord. No. 2012-01 6-19-2012 1 20-53—20-59 Ord. No. 2012-02 7-3-2012 3 42-19 Ord. No. 2012-03 9-18-2012 1 20-21 Ord. No. 2012-04 10-16-2012 1 20-22 Ord. No. 2012-05 12-4-2012 1 26-282 Ord. No. 2012-06 12-18-2012 1 28-8 Ord. No. 2013-01 5-21-2013 1 18-19—18-23 Ord. No. 2013-02 6-18-2013 — 50-449 Ord. No. 2013-03 6-18-2013 1 12-6 — 12-8 — 12-11 Ord. No. 2013-04 10-1-2013 1 26-20 Ord. No. 2014-01 2-4-2014 1 30-19 Ord. No. 2014-02 7-1-2014 1 2-196, 2-197 — 2-199—2-205 Ord. No. 2014-03 8-19-2014 1 44-46, 44-47 Ord. No. 2014-05 11-4-2014 1(1705) 50-516 1(1800) 50-541 1(1802) 50-543 1(1902) 50-575 Ord. No. 2015-01 1-20-2015 1 10-47 Ord. No. 2015-02 1-20-2015 1 10-96 Ord. No. 2015-03 1-20-2015 1 42-122—42-129 Ord. No. ZOA-2015-01 4-21-2015 — 50-228 900 50-229 901 50-230 902 50-231 Ord. No. ZOA-2015-02 4-21-2015 — 50-256 1000 50-257 1001 50-258 1002 50-259 Ord. No. ZOA-2015-03 4-21-2015 1900 50-573 1901 50-574 1902 50-575 1903 50-576 1904 50-577 1905 50-578 1906 50-579 1907 50-580 1908 50-581 1909 50-582 1910 50-583 1911 50-584 1912 50-585 Ord. No. 2015-05 10-6-2015 1(16-1) 40-1 1(16-10) 40-2 1(16-20) 40-3 1(16-21) 40-4 1(16-30) 40-5 1(16-31) 40-6 1(16-32) 40-7 1(16-35) 40-8 1(16-40) 40-9 1(16-41) 40-10 1(16-42) 40-11 1(16-50) 40-12 1(16-51) 40-13 1(16-52) 40-14 1(16-53) 40-15 1(16-54) 40-16 Ord. No. 2016-01 3-2-2016 1 42-20—42-22 Ord. No. ZOA-2016-01 7-5-2016 — 50-41 Ord. No. 2016-02 11-15-2016 1 50-466 Ord. No. 2017-01 5-16-2017 1 6-1 Ord. No. 2017-02 5-16-2017 1 28-5 Ord. No. 2017-03 12-5-2017 1—8       Added Adopting Ord., p. xi Ord. No. 2018-02 4-17-2018 1 26-340—26-343 Ord. No. 2018-03 6-5-2018 1 26-226 Ord. No. ZOA-2018-04 7-10-2018 1 50-229(12) Ord. No. 2018-05 10-16-2018 1       Added 42-130—42-134 Ord. No. 2018-06 11-20-2018 1       Added 42-140—42-145 Ord. No. 2018-07 12-4-2018 1       Added 12-20—12-24  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Michigan Compiled Laws (MCL). 
MCL 
Section Section 

this Code 8.3 et seq. Char. § 16.3 — 1-2 14.301 et seq. Ch. 40 (note) 15.231 et seq. Char. § 6.5 — Char. § 16.2 — Ch. 2 (note) — 10-163 — 38-22 — 38-35 15.261 et seq. Char. § 6.1 — Char. § 6.2 — Char. § 6.3 — Char. § 9.9 — Ch. 2 (note) — 10-163 — 36-148 15.321 et seq. Char. § 6.5 15.341 et seq. Char. § 6.5 — Ch. 2 (note) 24.201 et seq. 10-227 — 42-20 28.251 et seq. Ch. 24 (note) 28.421 et seq. 26-159 28.451 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. IV — 20-54 — 26-160 28.601 et seq. Ch. 24 (note) 29.1 et seq. Ch. 20 (note) — 50-454 29.417 et seq. Ch. 32 (note) 35.441 Ch. 40 (note) 37.2101 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) 37.2501 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. II — 14-19 41.801 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V, 
Div. 2 — 2-196 117.1 et seq. Char. (note) — Ch. 2 (note) 12-22 117.21 et seq. Char. § 16.10 117.3(a) Char. § 3.5 — Char. Ch. 4 — Char. § 4.1 — Char. § 4.6 — Char. § 4.11 — Char. § 4.12 — Char. § 4.13 — Char. § 9.6 117.3(b) Char. § 3.9 117.3(c) Char. Ch. 3 117.3(d) Char. § 4.2 — Char. § 4.3 — Char. § 4.5 — Char. § 5.1 — Char. § 5.9 117.3(e) Char. § 3.3 117.3(f) Char. § 9.2 117.3(g) Char. § 9.1 117.3(h) Char. § 8.2 — Char. § 8.4 117.3(i) Char. Ch. 9 — Char. § 9.5 — Char. § 9.8 — Char. § 9.19 117.3(j) Char. § 6.7 117.3(k) Char. Ch. 7 117.3(k) Char. § 7.4 — Char. § 7.5 — Char. § 7.6 — 10-129 — 14-19 — 20-21 — 24-54 — 42-19 117.3(l) Char. § 6.1 — Char. § 16.2 117.3(m) Char. § 6.5 117.4a Char. Ch. 11 117.4a(1) Char. Ch. 10 — Char. § 10.1 117.4a(2) Char. § 10.2 117.4c Char. Ch. 13 117.4d Char. § 11.1 — Ch. 34 (note) 117.4i(g) Char. § 3.17 — Char. § 7.9 117.4i(h) Char. Ch. 15 117.4i(i) Char. § 5.10 117.4i(k) Char. § 7.5 — 1-14 117.4l Ch. 24, Art. II 117.4j(3) Char. § 2.2 117.5 Char. Ch. 11 — Ch. 34 (note) 117.5(f) Char. § 12.2 117.5(i) Char. § 14.1 117.5b Char. § 7.2 — Char. § 7.8 — 1-1 117.5h 26-128 117.61 et seq. Char. § 1.1 123.51 et seq. Ch. 28 (note) 123.161 et seq. Char. § 13.4 123.361 et seq. Ch. 32 (note) 123.731 et seq. 44-100 123.742(2) 44-99 123.811 et seq. Ch. 24 (note) 123.1101 et seq. 26-159 124.1 et seq. Char. § 2.3 124.281 et seq. Ch. 44 (note) 125.71 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 125.538 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. VI 125.538 10-158 125.539 10-157 125.540 10-159 125.541 10-160 125.541a 10-161 125.541b 10-162 125.541c 10-163 125.542 10-164 125.601 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 125.651 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) — 16-26 125.653 Ch. 16, Art. II 125.901 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 125.981 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 125.1201 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 125.1231 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 125.1401 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 125.1501 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) — 10-312 125.1504b 8-7 125.1508b 10-19 125.1508b(6) 10-313 125.1601 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 125.1651 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) — Ch. 16, Art. III — 16-61 125.1801 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 125.3101 et seq. Char. § 4.17 — Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 — 2-103 — Ch. 50 — 50-516 — 50-541 — 50-543 — 50-545 — 50-625 125.3204 50-81 125.3206 50-81, 50-82 125.3208 50-448 125.3301 50-603 125.3401 et seq. Ch. 50, Art. XXI 125.3401 50-625 125.3405 50-42 — 50-45 — 50-49 — 50-52 125.3407 Ch. 50, Art. XXII 125.3501 50-462 125.3502 et seq. 50-545 125.3503 22-86 — Ch. 50, Art. XIII 125.3505 50-515 — 50-659 125.3506 22-86 125.3601 et seq. Ch. 50, Art. XIX 125.3801 et seq. Char. § 4.17 — Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 — 2-103 — Ch. 22 (note) — Ch. 50 (note) — Ch. 50, Art. XVIII 129.12 Char. § 8.6 129.121 et seq. Char. § 10.3 141.101 et seq. Char. Ch. 10 141.2101 et seq. Char. Ch. 8 — Char. Ch. 10 — Ch. 2, Art. V 141.421 et seq. Char. Ch. 8 — Ch. 2, Art. V 168.1 et seq. Char. Ch. 3 — Char. § 3.2 168.24a et seq. Char. § 3.14 168.25 Char. § 3.7 168.322 Char. § 3.9 168.323 Char. § 3.14 168.327 Char. § 5.2 168.542 et seq. Char. § 3.11 168.544a Char. § 3.10 168.552a Char. § 3.9 168.555 Char. § 3.12 168.631 Char. § 3.6 168.639 Char. § 3.6 168.642 Char. § 3.4 168.653a Char. § 3.2 168.654 et seq. Char. § 3.3 168.706 Char. § 3.13 168.851 Char. § 3.15 168.852 Char. § 3.15 168.861 et seq. Char. § 3.16 168.951 et seq. Char. § 3.17 201.37 Char. § 5.3 211.1 et seq. Char. Ch. 9 — Char. § 9.2 — 10-160 211.2 Char. § 9.4 211.7 et seq. Char. § 9.3 211.10 et seq. Char. § 9.4 211.24 et seq. Char. § 9.5 211.28 et seq. Char. § 9.6 211.30a Char. § 9.10 — Char. § 9.8 211.39 Char. § 9.12 211.40 Char. § 9.14 211.43b Char. § 8.6 — Ch. 2, Art. V 211.44 et seq. Char. § 9.13 211.47 Char. § 9.17 211.55 et seq. Char. § 9.18 211.78 Char. § 9.18 211.741 et seq. Char. Ch. 11 — Ch. 34 (note) — 34-8, 34-9 211.744 Char. § 11.7 211.746 Char. § 11.5 211.761 et seq. Char. Ch. 11 — Char. § 11.8 — Ch. 34 (note) 247.171 et seq. Ch. 36 (note) 247.291 et seq. Ch. 36 (note) 247.321 et seq. Ch. 36 (note) 247.651 et seq. 38-31 247.659 42-142 252.201 et seq. Ch. 30 (note) 252.301 et seq. 26-66 — 50-456 257.301—257.329 42-131 257.1 et seq. Ch. 42 (note) — 42-19 257.319(2) 26-226 257.605 Ch. 42 (note) 257.606 Ch. 42 (note) 257.606(1)(a) Ch. 42, Art. III 257.610 Ch. 42 (note) 257.624a 26-226 257.624b 26-226 257.625 26-226 257.625(1)(c) 42-19 257.648 42-132 257.672 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. III 257.941 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. III, 
Div. 3 — 42-96 257.951 42-20 287.261 et seq. 6-13 287.266 et seq. 6-3 287.270 et seq. 6-13 287.286a 6-14 287.290 Ch. 6 (note) 287.321 et seq. 6-10 324.101 et seq. Ch. 18 (note) 324.3108 Ch. 10, Art. VII — 50-464 324.4301 et seq. Ch. 32 (note) — Ch. 44 (note) 324.80176 26-226 324.81129 42-142 324.81134 26-226 324.82127 26-226 324.8901 et seq. 28-9 — Ch. 32 (note) — 32-1 324.9301 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. VII — 50-464 324.11101 et seq. Ch. 32 (note) 324.11501 et seq. Ch. 32 (note) 324.11522 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. III 324.14501 et seq. Ch. 32 (note) 324.19101 et seq. Ch. 32 (note) 324.20101 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V, 
Div. 2 — 2-199 324.30101 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. VII — 50-464 324.32301 et seq. 10-183 324.40101 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 324.43701 et seq. 28-12 324.51501 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. III 324.80101 et seq. Ch. 48 (note) 324.80111 Ch. 48 (note) 330.1100a 26-226 333.5111 6-14 333.6103 26-341 333.6230 26-226 333.7101 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. VIII — 26-193 — 26-282 — 28-4 333.7106 26-193 — 26-282 333.7451 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. VIII, 
Div. 4 333.20106 26-226 333.20904 26-226 333.26201 et seq. Ch. 32 (note) 338.2301 et seq. 10-163 339.2401 et seq. 10-157 399.1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 3 399.171 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 3 399.201 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 3 400.271 et seq. Ch. 40 (note) 400.701 et seq. 50-82 400.703(4) 50-82 400.733 50-82 400.1101 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 408.651 et seq. Ch. 4 (note) 408.681 et seq. Ch. 28 (note) 434.151 et seq. 24-54 436.1101 et seq. 4-53 — Ch. 26, Art. VIII — 28-4 436.1701 26-226 — 26-227 436.1701(1) 26-226 436.1703 26-226 436.1707 26-226 436.1801 26-226 436.1915 26-191 445.111 et seq. Ch. 40 (note) 445.371 et seq. Ch. 40 (note) 445.401 et seq. Ch. 30 (note) 445.481 et seq. Ch. 30 (note) 446.201 et seq. Ch. 30 (note) 460.721 et seq. Ch. 36 (note) 484.2101 et seq. Ch. 38 (note) 484.2102 38-21 484.2251 38-22 484.3101 et seq. Ch. 38 (note) — Ch. 38, Art. II — 38-19 — 38-21 484.3103 38-21 484.3104(2) 38-34 484.3104(3) 38-25 484.3105(3) 38-22 484.3106(1) 38-22 484.3106(6) 38-23 484.3106(7) 38-26 484.3108 38-28—38-30 484.3110(4) 38-31 484.3110(5) 38-32 484.3113(1) 38-29 484.3113(5) 38-30 484.3113(6) 38-33 484.3115(2) 38-36 484.3115(3) 38-23 484.3115(5) 38-27 484.3201 et seq. Ch. 38 (note) 484.3301 et seq. Ch. 38 (note) 500.3101 42-132 559.101 et seq. Ch. 22 (note) — 50-3 — 50-402, 50-403 — 50-416 559.166 50-3 559.171 50-3 — 50-407 560.101 et seq. Ch. 22 (note) — 22-19 — 50-3 — 50-403, 50-404 560.108 22-19 — 50-3 560.109 22-19 — 50-3 560.112—560.119 22-53 560.113—560.118 22-51 560.114 22-51 560.115—560.117 22-51 560.118 22-51 560.138 Ch. 10, Art. VII — 50-464 560.194 Ch. 10, Art. VII — 50-464 600.101 et seq. 24-21 600.3801 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. II 600.8396 24-21 — 24-25 600.8701 et seq. 1-2 — Ch. 24, Art. II 600.8705 24-23 — 24-25 600.8707(6) 24-21 600.8709 24-25 691.1401 et seq. Char. § 16.1 691.1402 Ch. 36 (note) 712A.2 26-308 712A.18m 26-226 722.1—722.6 26-226 722.111 et seq. 50-82 722.641 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. X 722.673 26-128 722.751 et seq. 26-104 750.1 et seq. Ch. 26 (note) 750.33 et seq. 26-66 750.49 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 750.50 6-12 750.71 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. III 750.81 et seq. 26-44 750.116 26-69 750.141 26-225 750.145 Ch. 26, Art. IX 750.167 26-99 750.167a 26-226 750.167(1)(e) 26-100 750.167(1)(f) 26-129 750.200 et seq. Ch. 20 (note) 750.217a et seq. 26-67 750.222 et seq. 26-159 750.237 26-226 750.240 et seq. Ch. 20 (note) 750.241 20-1 750.280 26-67 750.301 et seq. 26-130 750.335a 26-127, 26-128 750.356 et seq. 26-68 750.377a et seq. 26-64, 26-65 — 28-1 — 44-158 750.448 et seq. 26-126 750.463 et seq. Ch. 4 (note) 750.479 26-20 750.479c 26-19 750.520b—750.520g 26-226 750.540e 26-45 750.546 et seq. 26-70 752.362 26-128 752.541 et seq. 26-102 764.9c 24-1 769.1f Ch. 2, Art. V, 
Div. 2 769.1j 26-226 771.3 26-226  
