CODE OF ORDINANCES CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF BRANDON, OAKLAND COUNTY, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Published in 2010 by Order of the Township Board 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF 
BRANDON, OAKLAND COUNTY, MICHIGAN 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Kathy Thurman 
Supervisor 
____________ 
Jeannie McCreery 
Clerk 
____________ 
Tyrone Beltramo 
Treasurer 
____________ 
David King 
Robert DeWitt 
Tom Stowell 
Trustees 
____________ 
Stu Cooney 
Attorney 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Charter Township of Brandon, Oakland County, Michigan. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1989 Compiled Ordinances, as supplemented, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the Township Board. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1989 Compiled Ordinances, as supplemented, and any ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODECD1:1CODE APPENDIXCDA:1CODE COMPARATIVE TABLESCCT:1STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLESLT:1CODE INDEXCDi:1 
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Bill Carroll, Senior Code Attorney, and Ricardo Lewis, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Stuart B. Cooney, Township Attorney, and Timothy Palulian, former Director of Planning and Building, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the Township readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the Township's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Charter Township of Brandon, Oakland County, Michigan. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Charter Township of Brandon, Oakland County, Michigan. 
(c)  Copyrighted material.
Municipal Code Corporation and the Charter Township of Brandon, Oakland County, Michigan. 2010. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No.Date
AdoptedInclude/OmitSupp. No.129 2- 1-2010Omit1131-11 7- 5-2011Include1132-11 7- 5-2011Include1133-11 7- 5-2011Include1134-11 7- 5-2011Include1135-11 7- 5-2011Include1136-11 7- 5-2011Include1137-11 8- 1-2011Include1141-11 8- 1-2011Include1113-1112-19-2011Omit1139-1112-19-2011Include1138-12 2- 6-2012Include1140-12 2- 6-2012Include1142-12 2- 6-2012Include1143-12 2- 6-2012Include1144-12 3- 5-2012Include1145-12 5- 7-2012Include1146-12 7-30-2012Include1147-1210-29-2012Include1113-1212- 1-2012Omit1113-13 1- 7-2013Omit1148-13 1- 7-2013Include1149-13 1- 7-2013Include1150-13 1- 7-2013Include1151-13 1- 7-2013Include1152-1310- 7-2013Include2161-14 1- 6-2014Include2153-14 4- 7-2014Include2154-14 4- 7-2014Include2155-14 4- 7-2014Include2156-14 4- 7-2014Include2157-14 4- 7-2014Include2158-14 4- 7-2014Include2159-14 4- 7-2014Include2160-14 4- 7-2014Include2162-15 5- 4-2015Include2163-15 5- 4-2015Include2164-15 5- 4-2015Include2165-15 5- 4-2015Include2 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, Charter Township of Brandon, Oakland County, Michigan," and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as the "Brandon Charter Township Code." 
State Law reference- Authority to codify ordinances, MCL 41.186, 42.20. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to this Code and to all ordinances and resolutions unless the context requires otherwise: 
    Generally. When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general. All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the township board may be effectuated. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words, technical phrases and words and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings. 
    Agencies, officers. Any reference to any local, state or federal agency or officer includes any successor agency or officer. 
    Civil infraction. The term "civil infraction" means an act or omission prohibited by law which is not a crime and for which civil sanctions may be ordered. 
    Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, Charter Township of Brandon, Oakland County, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. In computing a period of days, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any period or a fixed or final day is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period or day is extended to include the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. 
    Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events, which items, conditions, provisions, or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or," or "either...or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)	The term "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions, or events apply. 
(2)	The term "or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions, or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)	The term "either...or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
    County. The term "county" means Oakland County, Michigan. 
    Crime. The term "crime" means an act or omission forbidden by law that is not designated as a civil infraction and that is punishable, upon conviction, by any one or more of the following: 
(1)	Imprisonment.
(2)	A fine not designated as a civil fine.
(3)	Other penal discipline.
    Delegation of authority. A provision that authorizes or requires a township officer or township employee to perform an act or make a decision authorizes such officer or employee to act or make a decision through subordinates. 
    Gender. Words of one gender include the other genders. 
    Health department and department of public health. The terms "health department" and "department of public health" mean the county health department. 
    Health officer. The term "health officer" means the director of the county health department. 
    Highway. The term "highway" includes any street, alley, highway, avenue, or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass or causeway, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Includes and including. The terms "includes" and "including" are terms of enlargement and not of limitation or exclusive enumeration, and the use of the terms does not create a presumption that components not expressed are excluded. 
    Joint authority. A grant of authority to three or more persons as a public body confers the authority on a majority of the number of members as fixed by statute or ordinance. 
    May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
    May not. The term "may not" states a prohibition. 
    MCL. The abbreviation "MCL" means the Michigan Compiled Laws, as amended. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Number. The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
    Oath, affirmation, sworn, affirmed. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases where an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. In similar cases, the term "sworn" includes the term "affirmed." 
    Officers, departments, etc. References to officers, departments, board, commissions, or employees are to township officers, township departments, township boards, township commissions, and township employees. 
    Owner. The term "owner," as applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of such property. With respect to special assessments, however, the owner shall be considered to be the person whose name appears on the assessment roll for the purpose of giving notice and billing. 
    Person. The term "person" means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, club, joint venture, estate, trust, limited liability company, governmental unit, and any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the individuals constituting such group or unit. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" means any property other than real property. 
    Preceding and following. The terms "preceding" and "following" means next before and next after, respectively. 
    Premises. The term "premises," as applied to real property, includes lands and structures. 
    Property. The term "property" means real and personal property. 
    Public acts. References to public acts are references to the Public Acts of Michigan. For example, a reference to Public Act No. 359 of 1947 is a reference to Act No. 359 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1947. Any reference to a public act, whether by act number or by short title, is a reference to the act as amended. 
    Real property, real estate, land and lands. The terms "real property," "real estate," "land," and "lands" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Roadway. The term "roadway" means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The term "state" means the State of Michigan. 
    Street. The term "street" means any street, alley, highway, avenue, or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass or causeway, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Swear. The term "swear" includes affirm. 
    Tense. The present tense includes the past and future tenses. The future tense includes the present tense. 
    Township. The term "township" means the Charter Township of Brandon, Oakland County, Michigan. 
    Township board, township board of trustees, board of trustees and board. The terms "township board of trustees," "township board," "board of trustees" and "board" mean the governing body of the Charter Township of Brandon, Oakland County, Michigan. 
    Week. The term "week" means seven consecutive days. 
    Written. The term "written" includes any representation of words, letters, symbols or figures. 
    Year. The term "year" means 12 consecutive months. 
State Law reference- Definitions and rules of construction applicable to state statutes, MCL 8.3 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes; state law references. 
(a)	The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and are not titles of such sections, or of any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any such section, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(b)	The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code have no legal effect and only indicate legislative history. State law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)	Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code. 
State Law reference- Catchlines in state statutes, MCL 8.4b. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)	Unless specifically provided otherwise, the repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance originally repealed nor impair the effect of any saving provision in it. 
(b)	The repeal or amendment of an ordinance does not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor does such repeal or amendment affect any rights, privileges, suit, prosecution, or proceeding pending at the time of the amendment or repeal. 
State Law reference- Effect of repeal of state statutes, MCL 8.4. 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)	All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal, or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of the Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. Portions of this Code repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)	Amendments to provisions of this Code may be made with the following language: "Section (chapter, article, division, or subdivision, as appropriate) ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, Charter Township of Brandon, Oakland County, Michigan, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." 
(c)	If a new section, subdivision, division, article, or chapter is to be added to the Code, the following language may be used: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, Charter Township of Brandon, Oakland County, Michigan, is hereby created to read as follows:...." 
(d)	All provisions desired to be repealed should be repealed specifically by section, subdivision, division, article, or chapter number, as appropriate, or by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance. 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the township. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may: 
(1)	Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units.
(2)	Supply appropriate catchlines, headings, and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, and sections to be included in the Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings, and titles or in any such catchlines, headings, and titles already in the Code. 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, and sections to be added to the Code. 
(4)	Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections. 
(5)	Change the words "this ordinance" or similar words to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section," or "sections ____________ to ____________" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code). 
(6)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in the Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this Code or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid or unconstitutional, the invalidity or unconstitutionality does not affect other provisions or application of this Code that can be given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Code are severable. If any provision of this Code or its application to any person or circumstance is held to be over broad, that provision or application will nevertheless be enforced to the fullest extent permitted by law. 
State Law reference- Severability of state statutes, MCL 8.5. 
Sec. 1-8. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously adopted by the township relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions as to state statutes, MCL 8.3u. 
Sec. 1-9. - Code does not affect prior offenses or rights. 
(a)	Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)	The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a structure or premises which was in violation of any township ordinance on the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)	Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any ordinance or portion of any ordinance: 
(1)	Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(2)	Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement.
(3)	Granting any right or franchise.
(4)	Making or approving any appropriation or budget.
(5)	Providing for the duties of township officers or employees not codified in this Code.
(6)	Providing for salaries or other employee benefits.
(7)	Adopting or amending a master plan.
(8)	Levying or imposing any special assessment.
(9)	Dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing, or vacating any street, sidewalk, or alley. 
(10)	Establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk.
(11)	Dedicating, accepting, or vacating any plat or subdivision.
(12)	Not codified in this Code that levies, imposes, or otherwise relates to taxes, exemptions from taxes and fees in lieu of taxes. 
(13)	Pertaining to rezoning.
(14)	That is temporary, although general in effect.
(15)	That is special, although permanent in effect.
(16)	The purpose of which has been accomplished.
(b)	The ordinances or portions of ordinances designated in subsection (a) of this section continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)	In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following:
(1)	Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, or a violation by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)	Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)	Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, or a violation or by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)	Any provision of this Code that is made or declared to be a misdemeanor, civil infraction or municipal civil infraction is a violation of this Code. 
(c)	In this section the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a township officer or township employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(d)	Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person convicted of a violation of this Code is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and costs of prosecution or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. However, unless otherwise provided by law, a person convicted of a violation of this Code which substantially corresponds to a violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of imprisonment is 93 days shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and costs of prosecution or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 93 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(e)	Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, with respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. As to other violations, each violation constitutes a separate offense. 
(f)	The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(g)	Violations of this Code that are intermittent or ongoing are a nuisance per se and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief or civil or quasijudicial enforcement. 
(h)	All remedies available to the township under this Code and state law shall be deemed to be cumulative and not exclusive. 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, MCL 42.21; municipal civil infractions, MCL 600.8701 et seq. 
Sec. 1-12. - Municipal civil infractions. 
    The sanction for a municipal civil infraction shall be a civil fine in the amount as provided by this section, plus any costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions, as authorized under chapter 87 of Public Act No. 236 of 1961 (MCL 600.8701 et seq.), and other applicable laws. 
(1)	The civil fine for a first violation within a three-year period shall be $75.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. 
(2)	Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeated violations by a person of any requirement or provision of this Code. As used in this section, the term "repeat offense" means a second (or any subsequent) municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision committed by a person within three years and for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. The increased fine for a repeat offense under this Code shall be as follows: 
a.	The civil fine for a second violation within a three-year period shall be $150.00, plus costs and other sanctions. 
b.	The civil fine for a third violation within a three-year period shall be $300.00, plus costs and other sanctions. 
c.	The civil fine for a fourth or subsequent violation within a three-year period shall be $500.00, plus costs and other sanctions. 
(3)	In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and expenses, the judge or magistrate shall be authorized to issue any judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce or enjoin a violation of this Code. 
(4)	Each act of violation, and each day upon which any such violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(5)	In addition to any remedies provided for in this Code, any equitable or other remedies available may be sought. 
(6)	The judge or magistrate shall also be authorized to impose costs, damages and expenses as provided by law. 
(7)	A municipal civil infraction shall not be a lesser included offense of a criminal offense or of a Code violation which is not a civil infraction. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Townships generally, MCL 41.1a et seq.; charter townships, MCL 42.1 et seq.; open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq.; freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TOWNSHIP BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Township board, MCL 42.5; township meetings, MCL 42.7 et seq.; standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.; open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq.; freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq.

Secs. 2-19-2-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Township officers, MCL 42.9 et seq.; standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.

Secs. 2-40-2-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 

Secs. 2-67-2-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Local government fiscal responsibility act, MCL 141.1201 et seq.; revised municipal finance act, MCL 141.2101 et seq.; uniform budgeting and accounting act, MCL 141.421 et seq.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-91. - Fiscal year period established. 
    The fiscal year of the township shall extend from January 1 of each year until December 31 of the same year. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 12.051; Ord. No. 53, § 1, 2-5-1979)
State Law reference- Authority to determine the fiscal year, MCL 42.25. 
Secs. 2-92-2-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ALCOHOL/CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE EMERGENCY RESPONSE COST RECOVERY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Expenses for which court may order person convicted to reimburse the local unit of government, MCL 769.1f.

Sec. 2-111. - Purpose and intent. 
    This division is adopted for the purpose and intent of requiring the reimbursement of costs incurred by the township in making responses by township police, fire or other personnel to accidents or incidents involving persons who operate motor vehicles or engage in other actions while under the influence of or impaired by intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance, or a combination thereof. 
(Ord. No. 112, § 1.1, 11-6-2006)
Sec. 2-112. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emergency response means the dispatch, provision or utilization of police, firefighting, emergency medical, rescue services and/or other personnel by the township or by a law enforcement agency or private individual or entity operating at the request or direction of the township in connection with an incident resulting in a traffic stop or arrest, personal injury, property damage and/or controlling or operating a motor vehicle where one or more of the participants or drivers were acting while impaired by, or under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance. 
    Expense of an emergency response means the direct and reasonable costs incurred by the township, or a private person or entity operating at the request or direction of the township, when making an emergency response to the accident or incident, including the costs of providing law enforcement, firefighting and emergency medical and/or rescue services at the scene. These costs further include, but are not limited to, all of the salaries and wages of the personnel responding to the incident, all salaries and wages of the township personnel engaged in investigation, supervision and report preparation, all costs connected with supervision and report preparation, all costs connected with the administration and provision of all chemical tests to blood, breath or urine and all costs related to any prosecution of the person involved in the incident. 
    Person responsible. Any person is liable for the expense of an emergency response, if while under the influence of an intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance, or the combined influence of an intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance, such person's operation of a motor vehicle or other action proximately creates or causes any enforcement action, personal injury/property damage incident or accident resulting in an emergency response. 
    Presumptions means, for the purpose of this division, a person is under the influence of an intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance, or the combined influence of an intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance, when his physical or mental abilities are impaired to a degree that he no longer has the ability to operate a motor vehicle with the caution characteristic of a sober person of ordinary prudence. Further, it shall be presumed that a person's ability to operate a motor vehicle was impaired or under the influence of an intoxicating liquor if a chemical analysis of his blood, urine or breath indicates that the amount of alcohol in his blood was in excess of five one-hundredths of one percent. 
(Ord. No. 112, §§ 3.1-3.3, 11-6-2006)
Sec. 2-113. - Assessment of cost. 
(a)	Charge against person. The expense of an emergency response shall be a charge against the person liable for the expenses under this division. The charge constitutes a debt of that person and is collectible by the township for incurring those costs in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract, express or implied. Additionally, the 52/2 judicial district court is authorized to collect the above-described debt for the township and may charge a service fee for such collection in an amount mutually agreed upon by the court and the township. 
(b)	Cost of recovery schedule. The township shall, by resolution, adopt a schedule of the costs included within the expense of an emergency response. This schedule shall be available to the public from the township clerk. 
(c)	Billing. The township clerk or his designee, within 30 days of receiving the itemized costs, or any part thereof, incurred by the township for emergency response, submit a bill for these costs by first class mail or personal service to the person liable for the expenses as enumerated under this division. The bill shall require full payment in 30 days from the date of service. 
(Ord. No. 112, §§ 4.1-4.3, 11-6-2006)
Sec. 2-114. - Cost recovery. 
    Any failure, by the person described in this division as liable for the expense of an emergency response, to pay the bill within 30 days of service shall be considered an act of default. The failure to pay may further be considered a violation of probation if the payment was ordered by the court at the time of sentencing. The township may commence civil suit to recover the expenses and all costs allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 112, § 5.1, 11-6-2006)
Secs. 2-115-2-141. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HAZARDOUS MATERIAL SPILL COST RECOVERY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Expenses for which court may order person convicted to reimburse the local unit of government, MCL 769.1f; remediation, MCL 324.20101 et seq.

Sec. 2-142. - Purpose. 
    In order to protect the township from incurring extraordinary expenses resulting from the utilization of township resources to respond to an incident involving the spill, release or discharge of hazardous materials, or the improper handling or storage of hazardous materials, the township board shall recover from the responsible parties the reasonable and actual costs incurred by the township in responding in connection with hazardous materials release. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 1, 8-6-2007)
Sec. 2-143. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Costs and township costs means any and all expenses incurred by the township fire, township police, and/or any other department hired by or cooperating with the township to supply services, whether direct or indirect, and shall include, but not be limited to, expenses attributable to the response, control or abatement of any hazardous materials release, including costs of equipment, operation and personnel, costs of material utilized, fringe benefit costs overhead and administrative costs, cost of meals for all personnel, costs involved in the incident, costs of specialists, medical expenses for exposures, injuries or illnesses resulting from the incident, costs of experts or other contract labor services not in fulltime employment of the township, costs incurred by fire departments requested to assist and all other costs incurred by the township as a result of said incident including costs and reasonable actual attorney fees for enforcement of this division. 
    Facility means any area, place or property where a hazardous material has been released, deposited, stored or disposed of or otherwise comes to be located. 
    Fire department means any fire department rendering service to the township. 
    Hazardous materials means any of the following: 
(1)	Substances or materials in quantity or form which, in the determination of the township fire chief or the principal officer of a fire department responding to the release of hazardous materials or his authorized representative, pose an unacceptable risk or danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, the environment, or property, and shall include, but not be limited to, such substances as chemicals, explosive, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products, gases, poisons etiologic or biologic agents, flammables and corrosives. 
(2)	Hazardous substances as defined in the federal Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act. 
(3)	Hazardous substances as defined in Part 201 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.20101 et seq.). 
(4)	Hazardous waste as defined in Part 111 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.11101 et seq.). 
(5)	Regulated substance as described in Part 213 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.21301 et seq.). 
    Release means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing of a hazardous substance into the environment, or the improper handling or storage thereof, or the abandonment or discharging of barrels, containers, or other receptacles containing a hazardous substance. 
    Responsible party means any person who accidentally, negligently or intentionally causes or is responsible for any release, spill, or improper handling or storage of any hazardous materials in the township shall be responsible and liable for the abatement, control, capture, removal and proper storage or disposal of such hazardous materials and for all costs associated therewith. 
    Threatened release means any circumstances that may reasonably be anticipated to cause a release. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 2, 8-6-2007)
Sec. 2-144. - Responsibility for abatement, control and costs; use of outside contractors or municipal forces. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of any responsible party to remove immediately hazardous materials released and undertake and complete a total cleanup of the area of the release in such a manner as to ensure that the hazardous materials are fully removed and the area is fully restored to its condition prior to the release of such hazardous materials, or to conditions or standards established by the state department of environmental quality pursuant to Part 201 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.20101 et seq.), or other applicable law or environmental law or regulation. 
(b)	Any responsible party who fails to comply completely with the provisions of this division shall be liable to the township, its agents, contractors, and employees and cooperative departments for any costs incurred in the removal and cleanup of any and all hazardous materials and the restoration of the affected property. 
(c)	In the event that any responsible party fails to remove immediately such hazardous material, the township shall have the right but not the duty to enter on to the property involved with the release and remove and conduct a cleanup of all hazardous materials either by township employees or by contractors and agents of the township. 
(d)	Where the HazMat Unit is used for any aspect of the removal, cleanup, control or monitoring of any release or other incident involving hazardous materials, the responsible party shall be liable to the township for costs incurred in using the HazMat Unit. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 3, 8-6-2007)
Sec. 2-145. - Recovery costs. 
(a)	The township shall be entitled to recover all assessable costs in connection with a public safety or fire emergency incident from any responsible parties jointly or severally. 
(b)	The township supervisor or his designee shall determine the total assessable costs and shall in consultation with other township personnel involved in responding to a public safety or fire emergency incident determine whether to assess any, all or part of such costs against any of the responsible parties. In making such determination, the following shall be considered: 
(1)	The total assessable costs;
(2)	The risk the incident imposed on the township, its residents and their property;
(3)	Whether there was any injury or damage to persons or property;
(4)	Whether the public safety or emergency incident required evacuation;
(5)	The extent the public safety or emergency incident required an unusual or extraordinary use of township personnel and equipment; and 
(6)	Whether there was any damage to the environment.
(c)	After determining to assess costs against a responsible party, the township clerk shall mail an itemized invoice to the responsible party at its last known address. Such invoice shall be due and payable within 30 days of the date of mailing and any accounts unpaid after such date shall bear a late payment fee equal to seven percent per annum for any period that the amount due and any previously imposed late payment fee remains unpaid. A responsible party may appeal the amount due within the 30-day period to the township board and shall be entitled to a hearing thereon. 
(d)	In the event that said costs are not paid, the township may take whatever collection steps may be deemed appropriate, including the placement of all such charges on the tax roll for said property and to levy and collect such costs in the same manner as provided for the levy and collection of real property taxes against such property. 
(e)	If the responsible party fails to pay the township for costs incurred within 30 days of the date of the invoice sent by the township to the responsible party, the township may institute legal action to collect the costs due, including expenses, costs and reasonable attorney's fees incurred to collect those costs. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 4, 8-6-2007)
Sec. 2-146. - Other remedies. 
    The township shall be entitled to pursue any other remedy or may institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction as permitted by law to collect assessable costs from a responsible party. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 5, 8-6-2007)
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, MCL 436.1101 et seq.

Sec. 4-1. - Adoption of Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998. 
    All alcoholic liquor traffic, including among other things, the manufacture, sale, offer for sale, possession and/or transportation thereof within the township, shall comply with the provisions of Public Act No. 58 of 1998 (MCL 436.1101 et seq.). 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.702; Ord. No. 9, § 2, 7-31-1962; Ord. No. 63, 11-14-1981)
Sec. 4-2. - Inspection. 
(a)	The township building and fire departments shall inspect not less than annually all liquor establishments licensed under the Liquor Control Act of the State of Michigan and report the results of all inspections promptly to the township board. The township enforcement officers shall further promptly investigate all complaints received by them concerning violation or improper operations and practices concerning alcoholic liquor traffic within the township, and report the same to the township board and, where appropriate under the Michigan Liquor Control Act, to the Michigan Liquor Control Commission for appropriate proceedings against the violator. 
(b)	All inspectors shall carry appropriate cards issued by the township clerk, clearly identifying them as township inspectors and shall present said cards to the owner or manager of every place inspected by them when making an inspection, upon demand for identification by such owner or manager. 
(c)	Inspectors shall have the right to inspect any place in the township where alcoholic liquor is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, kept for sale, possessed or transported, or where the inspectors suspect the same is being thus manufactured, sold, offered for sale, kept for sale, possessed, or transported. Whenever possible, all inspection reports shall be made on Liquor Law Enforcement Inspection forms furnished by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission or on similar forms otherwise obtained by the township. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.704; Ord. No. 9, § 4, 7-31-1962)
Sec. 4-3. - Violations as municipal civil infractions. 
    Violation of this chapter is a municipal civil infraction. 
Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1-6-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RECREATION HALLS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Owner means any person which owns, operates or maintains any recreation hall. 
    Promoter means any person who regularly or frequently engages in competition for value or prize with patrons of recreation halls, and shares the value of prizes received with the owner or manager of the recreation hall. 
    Recreation hall means any business or recreation establishment that offers to the general public for business or recreational purposes the use of any ping-pong games, pool and billiard games, archery, juke boxes, dance contests or open dancing and all mechanical games. This definition does not include the term "amusement centers" or "arcades" as regulated in article III of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 20.574-20.576; Ord. No. 61, §§ 2.4-2.6, 10-5-1981)
Sec. 6-20. - Inspection. 
    Any recreation hall licensed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be open to inspection at any time by any law enforcement officer of the state, county or any municipality. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.595; Ord. No. 61, § 5.1, 10-5-1981)
Sec. 6-21. - Persons under 16 years of age. 
    No person under the age of 16 years shall be permitted to attend and be present in such recreation hall, without being accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.601; Ord. No. 61, § 6.1, 10-5-1981)
Sec. 6-22. - Business hours. 
    The permissible business hours for a recreation hall licensed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be from 12:00 noon to 12:00 midnight, at which later time said premises shall be completely vacated by all customers and closed. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.602; Ord. No. 61, § 6.2, 10-5-1981)
Sec. 6-23. - Persons under 17 years of age; presence during school hours. 
    No person under the age of 17 years of age shall be allowed to occupy the licensed premises during the hours when school is in session. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.604; Ord. No. 61, § 6.4, 10-5-1981)
Sec. 6-24. - Alcoholic liquors. 
    No alcoholic liquors shall be either drunk or sold on the premises, or persons under the influence of alcoholic liquors permitted to frequent, be in, or remain on the premises. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.605; Ord. No. 61, § 6.5, 10-5-1981)
Sec. 6-25. - Controlled substances. 
    No controlled substances shall be sold, used or found on the premises or on the person of anyone on the premises, nor shall persons under the influence of controlled substances be permitted to frequent, be in, or remain on said premises. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.606; Ord. No. 61, § 10-5-1981)
Sec. 6-26. - Promoters. 
    No licensee shall be permitted to employ, use or otherwise take advantage of a promoter, herein previously defined. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.607; Ord. No. 61, § 6.6, 10-5-1981)
Sec. 6-27. - Gambling. 
    No gambling in any form shall be permitted on the premises. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.608; Ord. No. 61, § 6.7, 10-5-1981)
Sec. 6-28. - Neglect of premises. 
    The recreation hall shall not be neglected in the management or control of the premises which results in the premises becoming a nuisance to the surrounding environs. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.610; Ord. No. 61, § 6.9, 10-5-1981)
Sec. 6-29. - Presence of adult required. 
    No recreation hall licensed pursuant to this article shall be open for business unless an adult agent or employee of the owner shall be on the premises at all times. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.611; Ord. No. 61, § 6.10, 10-5-1981)
Sec. 6-30. - Exemptions. 
    Nothing contained in this article as to the making of application for a license and the payment of a license fee shall be construed to apply to any fraternal lodge, church or organization incorporated under the laws of the state or chartered by a superior governing body incorporated under the laws of the state, organized exclusively for fraternal, religious or charitable purposes, and conducting its affairs in a room or auditorium occupied by and under the control of such lodge or church organization: provided, however, that the exemption herein contained shall not extend so as to exempt such lodge or church or organization from the prosecution for violation of any provisions of this article whether licensed under the article or not. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.620; Ord. No. 61, § 7.4, 10-5-1981)
Sec. 6-31. - Violations as municipal civil infractions. 
(a)	Violation of this article is a municipal civil infraction.
(b)	Each business day the amusement center or recreation hall is operated contrary to any provision of this article shall be adjudicated as a separate and distinct violation, and each such violation shall be triable and punishable separately. The term "business day" is defined as the period commencing with the opening for business and concluding with the next following closing of business, irregardless of the difference between the actual days on which these respective events occur. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 20.626, 20.627; Ord. No. 61, §§ 9.1, 9.2 10-5-1981; Ord. No. 124, § 2, 7-7-2008) 
Secs. 6-32-6-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 6-51. - Required. 
    No person shall operate or maintain a recreation hall without having first secured a license from the board in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.580; Ord. No. 61, § 3.1, 10-5-1981)
Sec. 6-52. - Application; fee. 
    All applications for a license under the provisions of this division shall be in writing, duly verified by the applicant, on a form furnished by the board, and shall be filed with the township clerk, and be accompanied by the annual license fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the township board from time to time, which, if the application is approved and the license issued, shall be paid into the general fund of the township, otherwise to be returned to the applicant if said application is not approved. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.586; Ord. No. 61, § 4.1, 10-5-1981)
Sec. 6-53. - Application information. 
    Any and all applications for a license to operate a recreation hall regulated under the terms of this division shall provide the following information: 
(1)	The names in full, dates of birth, current addresses, motor vehicle operator's license number and type of legal interest of all owners or managers. 
(2)	The criminal record, if any, of any owner or manager, giving the date, place and nature of all felonies and misdemeanors, including local ordinance violations, with the exception of traffic offenses. 
(3)	The business address, legal description and telephone number of the recreation hall to be licensed. 
(4)	The serial number, type and location of devices regulated hereunder.
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.587; Ord. No. 61, § 4.2, 10-5-1981)
Sec. 6-54. - Reports requested. 
    The township clerk shall, upon the receipt of said application, request the following: 
(1)	A written report from the township fire chief that the location or proposed location of said recreation hall and devices therein will not create a fire hazard, and that all fire prevention regulations are satisfied. 
(2)	A written report from the township building inspector that all electrical, pneumatic and hydraulic connections to each device complies with the state construction code, and that all building and zoning regulations have been satisfied. 
(3)	A written report from the township chief of police or designated agent that the applicant, owner or manager has not been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude, nor has the reputation as a gambler, or promoter of vice and immorality. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.588; Ord. No. 61, § 4.3, 10-5-1981)
Sec. 6-55. - Refusal to issue license; probationary license. 
    In the event that any of the above reports establish existing unsatisfactory conditions endangering the public health, safety and welfare, the board shall refuse to issue a license to the applicant. The board shall have the authority to issue conditional or probationary licenses. The failure to provide any of the required information for license shall constitute sufficient reason to refuse issuance of the license. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.589; Ord. No. 61, § 4.4, 10-5-1981)
Sec. 6-56. - Board hearing. 
    All applications for licenses under this division shall be presented by the clerk to the board at a regular or special meeting called for the purposes of considering such application. The board may, if it deems advisable, adjourn the hearing on any application for the purpose of holding public hearings, or, securing additional information regarding the application. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.590; Ord. No. 61, § 4.5, 10-5-1981)
Sec. 6-57. - License; issuance, period. 
    In the event that the application and subsequent reports are satisfactory and the board is satisfied that the issuance of such a license would not be detrimental to the health, safety and morals of the citizens of the township, the board shall grant a license to the applicant if the majority of the members of the board approves said application. The license shall be for a period of one year, ending December 31 of the year granted. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.591; Ord. No. 61, § 4.6, 10-5-1981)
Sec. 6-58. - Transfer of license. 
    It shall be unlawful to transfer any license from the designated licensee to any other person or premises. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.603; Ord. No. 61, § 6.3, 10-5-1981)
Sec. 6-59. - Grounds for revocation. 
    Any license issued hereunder may be revoked by the board for any violation by the licensee of the laws of the state or the ordinances of the township, or the provisions of this division. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.616; Ord. No. 61, § 7.1, 10-5-1981)
Sec. 6-60. - Hearing. 
    Upon receiving information of any such violation, the board shall fix a date for hearing thereon, and the clerk shall give the licensee written notice thereof at least five days in advance of such hearing. Notice of said hearing may be made by personal service or, in lieu of personal service, by certified mail and the licensed premises shall be posted of the notice of said hearing. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.617; Ord. No. 61, § 7.2, 10-5-1981)
Sec. 6-61. - Finding of board; revocation. 
    Upon the date of hearing, or any adjournment thereof, the board shall hear the evidence produced concerning the alleged violations of the licensed premises and, if the evidence produced at said hearing is sufficient to support a finding by the board that the licensed premises is being conducted in a manner contrary to the laws of the state, ordinances of the township or provisions of this division hereunder or that the licensee has violated the laws of the state, ordinances of the township or provisions of this division, then the board shall revoke said license and shall not be liable for the return of the license fee paid by the licensee. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.618; Ord. No. 61, § 7.3, 10-5-1981)
Secs. 6-62-6-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT CENTERS/ARCADES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-81. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Coin operated amusement center or arcade means any establishment with three or more coin operated amusement devices as defined herein, whether or not such establishment has other business purposes of any nature whatsoever. It is intended that this definition exclude pool and/or billiard rooms where such establishments are to be licensed and regulated under state law, except as such rooms or establishments shall otherwise require licensing hereunder. 
    Coin operated amusement device or device means any amusement machine or device whether mechanically, electrically, hydraulically, pneumatically, or otherwise activated or operated by means of the insertion of a coin, token, or similar object for the purpose of amusement, skill or competition with or between one or more players. This definition shall also include all devices and machines which may, by mechanical adjustment, be set in motion or operated by any means other than the insertion of a coin, where a fee is charged. The term "coin operated amusement device" or "device" does not include vending machines in which there are not incorporated gaming, amusement or competitive features. Further, this definition does not include machines designed solely for the purpose of playing music. 
    Owner means any and all persons which hold any ownership or lessee interest in, or which operates or maintains any coin operated amusement center. 
    Promoter means any person who regularly or frequently engages in competition on coin operated amusement devices for value or prize with patrons of coin operated amusement centers or arcades, and shares the value of prizes received with the owner or manager of the coin operated amusement center. Any person who is provided coins, tokens, or other means of activating such coin operated amusement devices by the owner or manager for the purpose of engaging in such competition shall also be deemed a promoter hereunder. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 20.911, 20.913-20.915; Ord. No. 65, §§ 2.1, 2.3-2.5, 5-3-1982)
Sec. 6-82. - Inspection. 
    Any coin operated amusement center licensed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be open to inspection at any time by any law enforcement officer of the state, county or any municipality. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.935; Ord. No. 65, § 5.1, 5-3-1982)
Sec. 6-83. - Persons under 14 years of age. 
    No person under the age of 14 years shall be permitted to attend and be present in such coin operated amusement center, without being accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.941; Ord. No. 65, § 6.1, 5-3-1982)
Sec. 6-84. - Business hours. 
    The permissible business hours for a coin operated amusement center licensed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be from 12:00 noon to 12:00 midnight, at which later time said premises shall be completely vacated by all customers and closed. In no event shall any person under the age of 18 years be allowed on such premises after 10:00 p.m., without being accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.942; Ord. No. 65, § 6.2, 5-3-1982)
Sec. 6-85. - Persons under 17 years of age. 
    No person under the age of 17 years of age shall be allowed to occupy the licensed premises during the hours when school is in session. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.944; Ord. No. 65, § 6.4, 5-3-1982)
Sec. 6-86. - Intoxicating liquor. 
    No intoxicating liquors shall be either drunk or sold on the premises, nor shall persons under the influence of intoxicating liquors be permitted to frequent, be in, or remain on the premises. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.945; Ord. No. 65, § 6.5, 5-3-1982)
Sec. 6-87. - Controlled substances. 
    No drugs or narcotics shall be sold, used or found on the premises or on the person of anyone on the premises, nor shall persons under the influence of controlled substances be permitted to frequent, be in, or remain on said premises. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.946; Ord. No. 65, § 6.6, 5-3-1982)
Sec. 6-88. - Promoters. 
    No licensee shall be permitted to employ, use or otherwise take advantage of a promoter, herein previously defined. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.947; Ord. No. 65, § 6.7, 5-3-1982)
Sec. 6-89. - Gambling. 
    No gambling in any form shall be permitted on the premises. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.948; Ord. No. 65, § 6.8, 5-3-1982)
Sec. 6-90. - Conduct of business. 
    The coin operated amusement center shall not be conducted in a manner generally reputed in the immediate vicinity thereof as being immoral and a detriment or menace to the morals and good citizenship of the community or be frequently or habitually occupied by persons of low repute. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.949; Ord. No. 65, § 6.9, 5-3-1982)
Sec. 6-91. - Condition of premises. 
    The coin operated amusement center shall not be neglected in the management or control of the premises which results in the premises becoming a nuisance to the surrounding environs. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.950; Ord. No. 65, § 6.10, 5-3-1982)
Sec. 6-92. - Adult on premises. 
    No coin operated amusement center licensed pursuant to this article shall be open for business unless an adult agent or employee of the owner shall be on the premises at all times within the room housing the amusement devices. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.951; Ord. No. 65, § 6.11, 5-3-1982)
Sec. 6-93. - Competition between persons. 
    The licensee and/or any agent of the licensee shall not advertise or award prizes to customers based upon competition between persons using the coin operated amusement devices. Provided, however, nothing herein shall be interpreted to make unlawful tournament prizes or prizes or awards of nominal value based upon one person's competition or scoring results with a coin operated amusement device illegal. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.952; Ord. No. 65, § 6.12, 5-3-1982)
Sec. 6-94. - Amount of vacant floor space. 
    For each one square foot of floor space occupied by coin operated amusement devices there shall be a minimum of ten square feet of vacant space immediately attendant to such machine for the purpose of permitting room for patrons and to provide free access to emergencies. The board may, on recommendation of the fire department and building department, for good cause shown, increase this ratio. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.954; Ord. No. 65, § 6.14, 5-3-1982)
Sec. 6-95. - Exempt organizations. 
    Nothing contained in this article as to the making of an application for a license and the payment of a license fee shall be construed to apply to a fraternal lodge, public school or church organization incorporated under the laws of the state or chartered by a superior governing body incorporated under the laws of this state, where such organization is organized exclusively for fraternal, religious or charitable purposes, and conducting its affairs in a room or auditorium occupied by and under the control of such lodge or church organization; provided, however, that the exemption herein contained shall be as to licensing only and shall not extend so as to exempt such lodge, school or church organization from the prosecution for violation of any provisions of this article whether licensed under this article or not. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.965; Ord. No. 65, § 9.1, 5-3-1982)
Sec. 6-96. - Violations as municipal civil infractions. 
(a)	Violation of this article is a municipal civil infraction.
(b)	Each business day the coin operated amusement center is operated contrary to any provision of this article shall be adjudicated as a separate and distinct violation, and each such violation shall be triable and punishable separately. The term "business day" is defined as the period commencing with the opening for business and concluding with the next following closing of business, regardless of the difference between the actual days on which these respective events occur. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 20.971, 20.972; Ord. No. 65, §§ 10.1, 10.2, 5-3-1982; Ord. No. 124, § 2, 7-7-2008) 
Sec. 6-97. - Restraining order. 
    In addition to the provision of section 6-96, the township may seek a restraining order restraining the operation of any establishment in violation hereof. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.973; Ord. No. 65, § 10.3, 5-3-1982)
Secs. 6-98-6-122. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 6-123. - Required. 
    No person shall operate or maintain a coin operated amusement center without having first secured a license from the board in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.920; Ord. No. 65, § 3.1, 5-3-1982)
Sec. 6-124. - Application; fee. 
    All applications for a license under the provisions of this division shall be in writing, duly verified by the applicant, on a form furnished by the board, and shall be filed with the township clerk, and be accompanied by the annual license fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the township board from time to time within the center, which, if the application is approved and the license issued, shall be paid into the general fund of the township. Such annual fee shall also be paid for any machines brought into the center following the approval of any license issued hereunder. If the application is not approved, the per device charge shall be returned to the applicant. Applications made after July 1 of each year shall be accompanied by a fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the township board from time to time. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.926; Ord. No. 65, § 4.1, 5-3-1982)
Sec. 6-125. - Application information. 
    Any and all applications for a license to operate a coin operated amusement center regulated under the terms of this division shall provide the following information: 
(1)	The names in full, dates of birth, current addresses, motor vehicle operator's license numbers and type of legal interest of all owners or managers, as well as all lessors of equipment or fixtures. 
(2)	The criminal record, if any, of the owner and manager, giving the date, place and nature of all felonies and misdemeanors, including local ordinance violations, with the exception of traffic offenses. 
(3)	The business address, legal description and telephone number of the coin operated amusement center to be licensed. 
(4)	The serial number, type and location of the coin operated amusement devices to be installed on the premises and any other devices regulated hereunder. 
(5)	A site, building and procedural operation plan.
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.927; Ord. No. 65, § 4.2, 5-3-1982)
Sec. 6-126. - Reports from fire chief, building inspector, police. 
    The township clerk shall, upon the receipt of said application, request the following: 
(1)	A written report from the township fire chief that the plan for the location or proposed location of said coin operated amusement center and devices therein will not create a fire hazard and that all fire prevention regulations are satisfied. 
(2)	A written report from the township building inspector that all electrical, pneumatic and hydraulic connections to each device complies with the state construction code, and that all building, zoning and applicable safety regulations have been satisfied. 
(3)	A written report from the township police agency that the applicant and the owner and the manager have not been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude, nor have the reputation as a gambler or promoter of vice and immorality. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.928; Ord. No. 65, § 4.3, 5-3-1982)
Sec. 6-127. - License refusal; hearing. 
    In the event that any of the reports outlined in section 6-126, or a review of the plan, establish existing unsatisfactory conditions endangering the public health, safety and welfare, the board shall refuse to issue a license to the applicant and state the reason therefor. The applicant may request a hearing on said denial. The board shall have the authority to issue conditional or probationary licenses. The failure to provide any or all of the required information for license shall constitute sufficient reason to refuse issuance of the license. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.929; Ord. No. 65, § 4.4, 5-3-1982)
Sec. 6-128. - Consideration of license application. 
    All applications for licenses under this division shall be presented by the clerk to the board at a regular or special meeting called for the purposes of considering such application. The board may, if it deems advisable, adjourn the hearing on any application for the purpose of holding public hearings or, securing additional information regarding the application. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.930; Ord. No. 65, § 4.5, 5-3-1982)
Sec. 6-129. - Granting of license; license period. 
    In the event that the application and subsequent reports are satisfactory and the board is satisfied that the issuance of such a license would not be detrimental to the health, safety and morals of the citizens of the township, the board shall grant a license to the applicant if the majority of the members of the board approves said application. The license shall be for a period of one year, ending December 31 of the year granted. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.931; Ord. No. 65, § 4.6, 5-3-1982)
Sec. 6-130. - Requirement for uniformed guards. 
    The board may require as a condition to issuing an operating license that a particular business or named enterprise supply uniformed guards in a number to be determined by the board. The same may also be required subsequent to the issuance of an operating license and/or commencement of business upon a determination by the board that such guards are necessary to maintain order, assist in crowd control, to control traffic and parking on the premises. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.932; Ord. No. 65, § 4.7, 5-3-1982)
Sec. 6-131. - Transfer of license. 
    It shall be unlawful to transfer any license from the designated licensee to any other person or premises. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.943; Ord. No. 65, § 6.3, 5-3-1982)
Sec. 6-132. - Payment of annual fee. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate and/or use devices for which the annual fee as required in section 6-124 has not been paid. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.953; Ord. No. 65, § 6.13, 5-3-1982)
Sec. 6-133. - License renewal and annual report. 
    Prior to January 1 of each year, the board may renew the license for another year upon: 
(1)	The filing of an annual report by the licensee detailing any change in ownership or management, and providing a current list of the serial number, type and location of all coin operated amusement devices on the premises. The renewal of the license shall otherwise be subject to all of the requirements of this division; and 
(2)	Payment of the annual license and machine fee.
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.955; Ord. No. 65, § 7.1, 5-3-1982)
Sec. 6-134. - Cause. 
    Any license issued hereunder may be revoked by the board for any violation by the licensee of the laws of this state or the ordinances of the township, or the provisions of this division. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.961; Ord. No. 65, § 8.1, 5-3-1982)
Sec. 6-135. - Hearing. 
    Upon receiving information of any such violation, the board shall fix a date for hearing thereon, and the clerk shall give the licensee written notice thereof at least five days in advance of such hearing. Notice of such hearing may be made by personal service or, in lieu of personal service, by certified mail and the licensed premises shall be posted with a notice of such hearing. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.962; Ord. No. 65, § 8.2, 5-3-1982)
Sec. 6-136. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
    Upon the date of hearing, or any adjournment thereof, the board shall hear the evidence produced concerning the alleged violations of the licensed premises and, if the evidence produced at such hearing is sufficient to support a finding by the board that the licensed premises is being conducted in a manner contrary to the laws of the state, ordinances of the township or provisions of this division or that the licensee has violated the laws of the state, ordinances of the township or provisions of this division, the board shall suspend or revoke said license for a period of time or permanently in the board's discretion and shall not be liable for the return of the license fee paid by the licensee. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.963; Ord. No. 65, § 8.3, 5-3-1982)
Sec. 6-137. - Blending of fees. 
    Should the applicant require licensing under this and other township ordinances, the board may, in its discretion, blend the fees herein with the fees required under the other ordinances so as to eliminate double charges for like licensed functions. However, no such blending shall be permitted to reduce the amount of fees charged below the amount that would be due hereunder in the same manner as would apply if this were the only license being issued. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.982; Ord. No. 65, § 12.2, 5-3-1982)
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Wildlife conservation, MCL 324.40101 et seq.; endangered species protection, MCL 324.36501 et seq.; crimes relating to animals and birds, MCL 750.49 et seq.; local authority to adopt animal control ordinance, MCL 287.290.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Definitions 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal control officer means the township animal control officer and shall also include all members of any police department authorized by law to patrol the township. 
    Dog means any dog, or canine such as a wolf, fox, or the like, when domesticated, whether male, female or unsexed. 
    Owner means and includes every person having a right in or to or control of a dog. Every person who keeps or harbors a dog, or who permits a dog to remain in, on or about the premises occupied by such person shall be presumed to be the owner of such dog. Further, any person accompanied by a dog in a public place, which dog is subject to the command of such person, shall be presumed to be the owner of such dog. To be an owner for the purpose of this chapter, the person need only have control over or command of the animal. 
    Reasonable control means a secure leash of suitable strength and length, in the hands of one able to restrain or move the animal if necessary, so as to enable the attendant to bring the animal to the attendant's side immediately on command; in addition, an enclosed vehicle or container, or the owner's occupied property, shall be deemed reasonable control. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 35-013-35.015, 35-017; Ord. No. 51, §§ 1.3-1.5, 1.7, 1-2-1978)
Sec. 8-2. - Enforcement. 
(a)	The township shall employ such animal control officers as it deems necessary for the purpose of enforcing this chapter, and in addition, this chapter may be enforced by any police officer, constable, dog warden, or ordinance enforcement officer. 
(b)	Any animal control officer appointed for the purpose of enforcing this chapter shall meet at least the following standards: 
(1)	Such requirements for physical, educational, mental and moral fitness as the township board and the township department of police services shall provide by regulation. 
(2)	A minimum course of study of not less than 100 instructional hours as prescribed by the state department of agriculture. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 35-071, 35-072; Ord. No. 51, §§ 6.1, 6.2, 1-2-1978)
Sec. 8-3. - Cruelty prohibited. 
(a)	No person shall cruelly treat any animal in the township in any way; any person who inhumanely beats, underfeeds, overloads, or abandons any animal shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section. 
(b)	Any dog warden is hereby authorized to seize and impound any cruelly treated animal pending prosecution of the person reasonably thought to be in violation of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 35-021, 35-022; Ord. No. 51, §§ 2.1, 2.2, 1-2-1978)
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, MCL 750.50. 
Sec. 8-4. - Dangerous animals; wild animals. 
    No person shall permit any dangerous animal or vicious animal of any kind to run at large within the township; exhibitions or parades of animals which are ferae naturae in the eyes of the law may be conducted only upon securing a permit from the township. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-023; Ord. No. 51, § 2.3, 1-2-1978)
State Law reference- Dangerous animals, MCL 287.321 et seq. 
Sec. 8-5. - Disturbing the peace. 
    No person shall harbor or keep any animals which disturb the peace by loud noises at any time of the day or night. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-024; Ord. No. 51, § 2.4, 1-2-1978)
Sec. 8-6. - Animals running at large; tying in streets. 
    No person shall permit any cattle, horses, swine, sheep, goats, or poultry to run at large in the township; any such animal running at large in any public place in the township shall be impounded by any dog warden or in accordance with county regulations. It shall further be unlawful to picket or tie any such animal in any of the streets of the township for the purpose of grazing or feeding. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-025; Ord. No. 51, § 2.5, 1-2-1978)
Sec. 8-7. - Killing dangerous animals. 
    Any dog warden is hereby authorized to kill any dangerous animal of any kind when it is necessary for the protection of any person or property. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-026; Ord. No. 51, § 2.6, 1-2-1978)
Sec. 8-8. - Diseased animals. 
(a)	No person shall allow any domestic animal afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease to run at large, or to be exposed in any public place whereby the health of man or beast may be affected; nor shall such diseased animal be shipped or removed from the premises of the owner thereof, except under the supervision of the director of police services. 
(b)	It is hereby made the duty of the director of police services to secure such disposition of any diseased animal and such treatment of affected premises as to prevent the communication and spread of the contagion or infection, except in cases where the state veterinarian is empowered to act. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-027; Ord. No. 51, § 2.7, 1-2-1978)
Secs. 8-9-8-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dog law, MCL 287.261 et seq.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-35. - Vicious or sick dogs. 
    No person shall permit any vicious or ferocious dog or dog sick with or liable to communicate rabies or other contagious or infectious disease to be in any public place or to be otherwise exposed to or a threat to any person or property. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-051; Ord. No. 51, § 4.1, 1-2-1978)
Sec. 8-36. - Reasonable control. 
    Each owner shall keep his dog within the township under reasonable control at all times. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-052; Ord. No. 51, § 4.2, 1-2-1978)
Sec. 8-37. - Disturbing neighborhood. 
    No owner shall suffer or permit such dog to disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood by barking, whining, making other loud or unusual noises, or by running through or across cultivated gardens or fields. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-053; Ord. No. 51, § 4.3, 1-2-1978)
Sec. 8-38. - Nuisance. 
    In addition to any penalty imposed on any owner or other person, any dog found in the township either without a license or running at large under conditions set forth in section 8-37 is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be impounded at the direction of the dog warden. Any impounding shall be governed by the rules, regulations and fees established by the county. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-054; Ord. No. 51, § 4.4, 1-2-1978)
Sec. 8-39. - Biting. 
    Whenever any dog bites a person, the owner of the dog shall immediately notify the dog warden, who shall order the dog held on the owner's premises or shall have it impounded for a period of two weeks. The dog shall be examined immediately after it has bitten anyone and again at the end of the two-week period. If, at the end of two weeks, a veterinarian is convinced that the dog is then free from rabies the dog shall be released from quarantine or from the pound as the case may be. If the dog dies in the meanwhile, it shall be sent to the state department of health for examination for rabies. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-055; Ord. No. 51, § 4.5, 1-2-1978)
Secs. 8-40-8-66. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Dog licensing, MCL 287.266 et seq.

Sec. 8-67. - License required. 
    No person shall permit any dog to be or remain in the township without being licensed as provided in this division. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-041; Ord. No. 51, § 3.1, 1-2-1978)
Sec. 8-68. - Registration; wearing license tag. 
    All persons keeping dogs in the township shall register the same as to sex, breed, name and address of the owner and name of dog, in accordance with county requirements. At the time of such registration such owner shall obtain a license for such dog in accordance with county standards and it shall be the duty of said owner to cause such license tag to be securely attached around the dog's neck and kept there at all times during the license period. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-042; Ord. No. 51, § 3.2, 1-2-1978)
Sec. 8-69. - Removing license tag. 
    Only a dog's owner or the owner's authorized agent shall be empowered to remove the license tag from his dog. Any other person removing the license tag from a dog shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-043; Ord. No. 51, § 3.3, 1-2-1978)
Sec. 8-70. - Proof of licensure. 
    Any person who owns or harbors a dog shall produce proof of the dog's licensure upon request of any dog warden. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-044; Ord. No. 51, § 3.4, 1-2-1978)
Secs. 8-71-8-98. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 8-99. - Length of time. 
    All animals picked up or otherwise coming within the control of the dog warden shall be impounded and held for such length of time as required by state law or as determined by the impounding authorities, or for such period as set forth in this chapter, whichever is the greater. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-061; Ord. No. 51, § 5.1, 1-2-1978)
Sec. 8-100. - Fees. 
    Fees for impounding shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the township board from time to time. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-062; Ord. No. 51, § 5.2, 1-2-1978)
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STATE CONSTRUCTION CODE 

Sec. 10-19. - Agency designated. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with section 8b(6) of Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1508b(6)), the director of building and planning of the township is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the township under such Act. The township assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act through out its corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 1, 9-5-2006)
Sec. 10-20. - Code appendix enforced. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with section 8b(6) of Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1508b(6)), Appendix G of the state building code shall be enforced by the enforcing agency within the township. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 2, 9-5-2006)
Sec. 10-21. - Designation of regulated floodprone hazard areas. 
    The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS) Entitled "Flood Insurance Study, county, Michigan, and Incorporated Areas" and dated September 29, 2006 and the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMS) panel numbers of 26125C0050F, 26125C0075F, 26125C0180F, 26125C0185F, 26125C0190F, 26125C0195F, 26125C0205F, 26125C0211F, and 26125C0212F and dated September 29, 2006, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of section 1612.3 of the state building code. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 3, 9-5-2006)
Sec. 10-22. - Fees. 
    Permit fees under the state construction code shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the township board from time to time. 
Sec. 10-23. - Violations as municipal civil infractions. 
    Violation of this article, including the state construction code, is a municipal civil infraction. 
Secs. 10-24-10-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DANGEROUS OR UNSAFE BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES 

Sec. 10-50. - Public Act 61 adopted by reference. 
    Public Act No. 61 of 1969 (MCL 125.538 et seq.) is hereby adopted by reference. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 22.411; Ord. No. 19, § 1, 7-12-1971)
Sec. 10-51. - Violations as municipal civil infractions. 
    Violation of this article is a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 124, § 2, 7-7-2008)
Secs. 10-52-10-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - COMPLAINT AND HEARING PROCEDURE FOR ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 10-76. - Intent and purpose. 
    This article is adopted in recognition of the fact that there are structures in the township which, due to lack of care in construction, maintenance and/or use, or due to other causes, amount to hazards to the health, safety and welfare of the township and its citizens. The township board deems it appropriate to provide a procedure under and pursuant to which reports of such houses, buildings and structures may be received and acted upon by the township. It is the intent and purpose of this article to establish and provide for the receipt of such reports by the township building department, for the investigation of such reports by that department, and, where appropriate, for the referral of such reports to the township board, or other appropriate persons or agencies, and for further consideration and action by the township board. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 22.512; Ord. No. 75, § 1.02, 10-15-1984)
Sec. 10-77. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Director means the director of the township building department, and the designates of such director. 
    Hearing officer means any person appointed to hear violations hereunder, any panel appointed or constituted to hear violations hereunder or designated to hear such violations, and may include the township board in the board's discretion. 
    Owner means owner, occupant and/or person in apparent control or possession of property. 
    Violation means the condition of a house, building or structure which does or is likely to endanger the public health, safety and/or welfare for any one or more of the reasons set forth in section 10-78(a)(1) through (9). 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 22.521; Ord. No. 75, § 2.01, 10-15-1984)
Sec. 10-78. - Reports. 
(a)	The building department shall receive the report of any person, including the report of the director, alleging that any house, building or structure is in a condition which does or is likely to endanger the public health, safety and/or welfare for any one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)	Structural damage, deterioration and/or other weakness.
(2)	Unsanitary conditions.
(3)	Inadequate or improper light, air, heating, electrical and/or plumbing facilities.
(4)	Inadequate egress for cases of emergency.
(5)	Abandonment and/or attractive nuisance.
(6)	Fire hazard.
(7)	Fire damage.
(8)	Incomplete structure.
(9)	Other specific danger, or safety or health hazard, existing on the property.
(b)	The director shall keep a record and file of such reports, and include with the file of each report the use-type of the building or structure, e.g., residential, and the nature and extent of the danger or hazard. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 22.531; Ord. No. 75, § 3.01, 10-15-1984)
Sec. 10-79. - Investigation and notice. 
(a)	The director shall investigate each report. The extent of investigation shall be determined in the discretion of the director. In appropriate cases, reports shall be referred to the county health department, state health department, township fire department, and/or other township, county and state agencies for further investigation and action, or for further cooperative investigation and action. 
(b)	If, after initial investigation, the director determines that a violation exists, the director shall notify the owner of the property, by regular mail, mailed to the address available on the records of the township assessor. Further, the notice shall also be served upon the occupant of the premises by regular first class mail, or in the alternative posted on the premises. Such notice shall advise the owner and/or occupant of the existence of the report, and of the findings of the director upon initial investigation, and, shall further apprise the owner that a complaint shall be sent to the township board for further proceedings unless appropriate corrective action is commenced to remove or abate the violation within a fixed, reasonable period of time as determined by the director, taking into consideration the circumstances involved, with such period of time being specified in the notice. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 22.532; Ord. No. 75, § 3.02, 10-15-1984)
Sec. 10-80. - Referral to board; complaint; board action. 
(a)	If the appropriate corrective action has not been commenced within the period fixed in the notice given under section 10-79, and/or if the corrective action is not continuously and diligently pursued and/or completed within a reasonable time, the director shall prepare a complaint detailing the violation, the needed corrective action, and the response of the owner to the notice given under section 10-78(b), including whether, and the extent to which, corrective action was commenced. 
(b)	The complaint, together with a copy of the initial report received under section 10-78(a), and a copy of the notice sent under section 10-79(b), shall be transmitted to the township board, through the clerk, for consideration at a regular or special township board meeting. 
(c)	After due deliberation, the township board shall determine whether to:
(1)	Return the matter to the director for further pursuit through the director's office, with or without a fixed date and/or directive for return to the township board for reconsideration. 
(2)	Issue a show cause resolution, providing the owner with an opportunity to appear before a hearing officer and show cause why further action should not be taken as directed by the hearing officer, without limitation, institution of circuit court action to abate the violation. 
(3)	Direct immediate circuit court proceedings.
(4)	Make any other disposition, including, without limitation, a decision to take no further action. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 22.533; Ord. No. 75, § 3.03, 10-15-1984)
Sec. 10-81. - Show cause proceedings. 
(a)	Should the township board decide to proceed by way of a show cause resolution, the form of the resolution shall include the following: 
(1)	The date, time and place scheduled for the owner to appear at a hearing before a hearing officer. 
(2)	A statement describing the alleged violation.
(3)	The requirement upon such appearance by the owner to demonstrate at the hearing that a violation does not exist; or, if the existence of a violation is admitted by the owner, what justification exists which would establish a reasonable basis for the township board to defer in, or forbear from, pursuit of action to abate the violation through circuit court proceedings or other lawful means. 
(b)	The show cause resolution shall be delivered to the owner by regular mail, or other method reasonably calculated to provide notice to the owner, as determined by the township board, and may, in addition, be delivered to any other person who either requests notice of further proceedings in the matter, or, as determined in the discretion of the director, has an interest in such property or can contribute relevant information for the deliberations of the hearing officer. 
(c)	The show cause hearing before the hearing officer may be adjourned from time to time, and shall include the opportunity of the owner or his representative to be heard relative to the allegation of violation. 
(d)	The show cause hearing may further include, as determined by the hearing officer, the opportunity for other interested persons, or other persons having relevant information, to be heard, and it also may include a presentation by the director. 
(e)	At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a disposition, which may include the following: 
(1)	A determination that no violation exists, and that proceedings should be terminated.
(2)	A determination that one or more violations exist, and to do one or a combination of the following: 
a.	Provide the owner with a specified period of time within which to take corrective action, to be monitored by the director. 
b.	Resolve that court or other lawful action shall be taken seeking abatement of the violation forthwith. 
c.	Take other lawful action found to be appropriate under the circumstances.
(3)	As a part of any determination which involves further administration or monitoring by the director, the township board or a person or panel conducting the hearing may impose a reasonable administration fee payable by the owner, in an amount determined to be required to reimburse the township for its reasonable expenses in connection with the show cause proceeding and/or monitoring the directive. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 22.534; Ord. No. 75, § 3.04[1], 10-15-1984)
Sec. 10-82. - Alternative proceedings for compliance. 
(a)	The township may attempt to gain compliance by any lawful means. If the director, township supervisor or township board determine that no public interest shall be served and/or that proceedings under all or a portion of this article would not be likely to bring about abatement of an alleged violation, compliance with the procedures set forth in this article shall not be required. 
(b)	In such event, the township board may proceed immediately to conduct the show cause hearing, or the township may immediately seek abatement of the violation by court action or other lawful manner. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 22.535; Ord. No. 75, § 3.04[2], 10-15-1984)
Sec. 10-83. - Permit requirement. 
    Any notice or order to an owner by the director or township board requiring corrective action shall not constitute a waiver of any permit otherwise required to be obtained as a condition to performing the corrective work. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 22.536; Ord. No. 75, § 3.05, 10-15-1984)
Sec. 10-84. - Nonexclusivity. 
    It is not the intent of this article to repeal and/or pre-empt any other ordinance, regulation or law, and enforcement of this article shall not prohibit the separate or concurrent pursuit of relief under any other ordinance, regulation, law or code provision, nor shall this article prohibit the township from seeking relief in any court, either at law or in equity. Further, action under this article may be taken concurrently with action under the state construction code. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 22.541; Ord. No. 75, § 4.01, 10-15-1984)
Secs. 10-85-10-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VACANT PROPERTY REGISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 10-100. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to help protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens by preventing blight, protecting the property values and neighborhood integrity, avoiding the creation and maintenance of nuisances and ensuring safe and sanitary maintenance of dwellings, commercial and industrial buildings. Due to economic conditions, mortgage fraud, foreclosures and increased bankruptcies, many homes and buildings have become vacant and unsupervised. This can and has caused properties to become attractive nuisances for minors and criminal activity. Vacant properties have a negative impact on surrounding properties and neighborhoods. There can be and has been increased instances of unsecured or open doors and windows, broken water pipes, theft of metals and other materials, overgrowth of grass weeds, shrubs and bushes, illegal dumping and rat and vermin activity at vacant structures. Such neglect devalues properties and causes deterioration in neighborhoods and commercial areas. Further, it is important for the township to be able to contact owners of vacant properties for fire safety and police purposes. 
(Ord. No. 151-13, 1-7-2013)
Sec. 10-101. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to all residential, commercial and industrial structures and vacant land. 
(Ord. No. 151-13, 1-7-2013)
Sec. 10-102. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, certain words and phrases are defined as follows: 
    Abandoned vacant and/or vacated property means a vacant or vacated property as defined in this section that has been vacant for 30 days or more and meets any of the following criteria: 
(1)	Provides a location for loitering, vagrancy, unauthorized entry or other criminal activity; 
(2)	Have one or more broken or boarded windows;
(3)	Has taxes in arrears for a period of time exceeding 365 days;
(4)	Has utilities disconnected or not in use;
(5)	Is not maintained in compliance with this Code, including without limitation, other building and building regulations in this chapter, the anti-blight regulations in chapter 18, the fire prevention code in chapter 20, and the solid waste regulations in chapter 38, and the current edition of the International Property Maintenance Code; 
(6)	Is only partially completed and is not fit for human occupancy.
    Building means a structure with a roof supported by columns or walls to serve as a shelter or enclosure. 
    Evidence of vacancy means any condition that on its own or combined with other conditions present would lead a reasonable person to believe the property is vacant. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, overgrown and/or dead vegetation, accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers and/or mail, past due utility notices and/or disconnected utilities, accumulated trash, junk and/or debris, broken or boarded up windows, abandoned vehicles, auto parts or materials, the absence of window coverings, such as curtains, blinds and/or shutters, the absence of furnishings and/or personal items consistent with habitation or occupation, statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, or government employees that the property is vacant. 
    Foreclosure means the process by which a mortgage is enforced against a parcel of real property through sale or offering for sale to satisfy the debt of the trustor (borrower). 
    Mortgage means a recorded lien or interest of retail property to secure payment of a loan. 
    Owner means an individual, co-partnership, association, corporation, company, fiduciary, or other person or legal entity having a legal or equitable title or any interest in any real property. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected the use of which requires location or attachment to the ground and includes buildings. 
    Trustee means a person, firm or corporation holding a mortgage on a property. 
    Trustor means a borrower under a mortgage, who grants a lien or interest in property to a trustee as security for the payment of a debt. 
    Vacant and/or vacated property means an improved lot or parcel of real property with at least one building or structure that is not currently used or occupied. 
(Ord. No. 151-13, 1-7-2013)
Sec. 10-103. - Registration of vacant or abandoned vacated property. 
(a)	An owner of a vacant property in the township shall be responsible for registering that property with the planning and building department by complying with the affidavit and restoration and inspection fee requirements in this article within the times in this section. 
(b)	An abandoned vacant property shall be registered within 30 days of the vacancy or ten days of the inspection described in section 10-107. 
(c)	Residential and commercial structures that are vacant at the time this article takes effect shall be registered within 30 days of that date. 
(Ord. No. 151-13, 1-7-2013)
Sec. 10-104. - Registration affidavit. 
    Owners who are required to register their properties pursuant to this article shall do so by submitting a copy of a driver's license and an affidavit containing the information specified in this section. The affidavit may be provided by an agent for an owner provided the agent's written authorization from the owner is provided with the affidavit. 
(1)	The name of the owner of the property.
(2)	A mailing address where mail may be sent that will be acknowledged as received by the owner and/or the owner's agent. If certified mail/return receipt requested is sent to the address and the mail is returned marked "refused" or "unclaimed" or if ordinary mail sent to the address is returned for whatever reason, then such occurrence shall be prima facie proof that the owner has failed to comply with this requirement. 
(3)	The name of an individual entity responsible for the care and control of the property. Such individual may be the owner, if the owner is an individual, or may be someone other than the owner with whom he/she has contracted. 
(Ord. No. 151-13, 1-7-2013)
Sec. 10-105. - Registration, inspection and other fees. 
    All fees applicable to this article shall be set by resolution of the township board. Registration and inspection fees shall be paid at the time of submitting the registration affidavit. There shall also be a fee for the filing of any additional or new owner's affidavit, with such fee being set by resolution of the township board. For properties that are not registered within the require time, an additional fee for the added cost of the township's expenses in having to determine ownership, which may include but it not limited to, title searches, shall be assessed and immediately payable. The payment of all fees required under this article is secured by a lien against the property which may be place on the tax roll for collection in the same manner and subject to the same interest and penalties applicable to delinquent special assessments. 
(Ord. No. 151-13, 1-7-2013)
Sec. 10-106. - Requirement to keep information current. 
    If at any time the information contained in the affidavit is no longer valid, the property owner has ten days to file a new affidavit containing current information. There shall be no fee to update a registered owner's current information. 
(Ord. No. 151-13, 1-7-2013)
Sec. 10-107. - Annual inspections. 
(a)	If the vacant property includes vacant or unoccupied buildings, the owners of that property area also responsible for immediately obtaining and paying for the township's safety and maintenance inspection of the building and property, obtaining necessary permits, making required repairs and obtaining inspections from the township annually thereafter until a certificate of occupancy has been issued and the building is lawfully occupied, to ensure that buildings are safe, secured and well-maintained. The owner or the owner's agent shall demonstrate that all water, sewer (septic), electrical, gas, HVAC and plumbing systems, exterior finishes and walls, concrete surfaces, accessory buildings and structures, roofing, structural systems, foundation, drainage systems, gutters, doors, windows, parking areas, signage, driveway aprons, service walks, sidewalks and other public areas are sound, operational or properly disconnected. No certificate of occupancy will be issued until all Code requirements are met. 
(b)	Any trustee who holds a mortgage on a property located within the township, shall perform an inspection, to the extent permitted by law or under the mortgage of the property that is the security of the mortgage, upon default by the trustor, within five days after either the filing of a complaint for foreclosure (if the foreclosure is by judicial action) or publishing a notice of foreclosure (if the foreclosure is by advertisement). If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it is by this article, deemed abandoned and the trustee shall, within ten days of the inspection, register the property in accordance with this article and be subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 151-13, 1-7-2013)
Sec. 10-108. - Maintenance and security requirements. 
    All owners are responsible for compliance with the requirements of this section, which apply to vacant property from the time of vacancy, including the time between vacancies and when registration is required. 
(1)	Property shall be kept free from weeds, grass more than 12 inches high (Brandon Township ordinance), dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by federal, state or local law, discarded items, including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed materials, signage, containers, equipment, construction materials of any other items that give the appearance that he property is abandoned. 
(2)	Property shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior of the structure. 
(3)	All visible front and side yards shall be maintained in the R1-A and R1-B zoned districts and yards directly adjacent to the structures in the RE district. Maintenance includes, but is not limited to, cutting, pruning, and mowing of vegetation in the above areas and removal of all trimmings. 
(4)	Pools, spas and other water features shall be kept in working order so that the water remains clear and free of pollutants and debris or drained and kept dry and free of debris. In either case, properties with pools and/or spas must comply with the minimum security fencing and barrier requirements of applicable construction, building and property maintenance codes and ordinances. 
(5)	Property shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. Secure manner includes, but is not limited to, the closure and locking of windows, doors, gates, and any other opening of such size that may allow a child to access the interior of the property and/or structures. Broken windows must be repaired or replaced within 14 days. Boarding up of open or broken windows is prohibited except as a temporary measure. 
(6)	Owners shall inspect or cause the inspection of vacant property on a weekly basis to verify compliance with this section and other applicable laws. If the property is owned by a person other than an individual and/or the trustee owner is located more than 30 miles away, a local property management company shall be contracted to perform weekly inspections to verify that the requirements of this section and other applicable laws are being met. The property shall be posted with name and a 24-hour contact telephone number of property management company located within 30 miles of the subject property. The posting shall be no less than 18 inches by 24 inches and shall be of a 72-point Arial font and shall contain, along with the name and 24-hour contact number, the words: "THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY AND TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL." The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible form the street or secured to the exterior of the building structure facing the street to the front of the property so that it is visible from the street, or, if no such area exists, on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting in a location that is visible from the street to the front of the property, but not readily accessible to vandals. The local property management company shall inspect the property at least on a weekly basis to determine if the property is in compliance with the requirements of this section, shall create and maintain a written record of the inspections and provide written notice to the owner, any person registered as responsible for the care and control of the property and township of any areas of noncompliance. 
(Ord. No. 151-13, 1-7-2013)
Sec. 10-109. - Fire damaged property. 
    If a building is fire damaged, the owner has 90 days from the date of the fire to apply for a permit to start construction or demolition. Additional 90-day extensions may be granted by the township provided the owner can demonstrate substantial progress towards completing repairs. Failure to do so will result in the property being deemed vacant and subject to the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 151-13, 1-7-2013)
Sec. 10-110. - Right of entry. 
    If the owner has failed to secure a property and it has been secured by the township, the township and/or it s contracted agent, may enter or re-enter the structure to assure compliance with the requirements of this Code and to determine if there are emergency or hazardous health and safety conditions in existence. 
(Ord. No. 151-13, 1-7-2013)
Sec. 10-111. - Re-occupancy. 
    A vacant or unoccupied building or structure on vacated or vacant property shall not be occupied until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the township, and all violations have been corrected in accordance with the applicable requirements of the state construction code and act and the residential code, electrical, mechanical, plumbing and other codes that are apart of the state construction code administered and enforced by the township, the townships property maintenance ordinance and code and other applicable. All mechanical, electrical, plumbing structural systems shall be certified by a licensed contractor as being in good repair, assessments and/or liens owned to the township have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 151-13, 1-7-2013)
Sec. 10-112. - Violation and penalty. 
(a)	Violations of this article are municipal civil infractions, subjecting persons found responsible for violations to the fines in subsection (b), plus costs and to the sanctions, remedies and procedures as set forth in sections 1-11 and 1-12, with the provision that each day is a separate offense specifically applicable to all violations of this article. 
(b)	The fine for a first offense of failure to obtain an annual inspection, failure to file the required affidavit or failure to maintain the affidavit containing current information shall be $75.00. The fine for all other violations shall be in an amount not to exceed $500.00 as well as cost as prescribed in section 24-76. 
(Ord. No. 151-13, 1-7-2013)
Chapter 12 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to acquire and maintain cemeteries, MCL 128.1 et seq.; permit for disposition of body, MCL 333.2850; cemetery regulations act, MCL 456.521 et seq.

Sec. 12-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Burial lot means any lot or space, individually or in combination with other lots or spaces, used or to be used for the burial, interment, or preservation of human corpses or the remains thereof, including any tomb, monument, gravestone, or other structure or thing placed or designed for a memorial of the dead, or any fence, railing, curb, or other thing intended for the protection or ornamentation of any tomb, monument, gravestone, or other structure mentioned in this section. 
    Cemetery means any cemetery, public or private, located within the township. 
    Unauthorized person means any natural person or combination of persons or legal entity other than the burial lot owner or his representative, or a person having care, custody, or control of a burial lot or cemetery by virtue of law, contract or familial relationship. 
(Ord. No. 107, art. I, 11-7-2007)
Sec. 12-2. - Application of township ordinances. 
    All provisions of the township ordinances now in force or hereafter enacted, relating to and defining public offenses in the township, shall, insofar as the same shall be applicable, be in full force and effect in the township cemeteries. 
(Ord. No. 107, § 2.1, 11-7-2007)
Sec. 12-3. - Unlawful entry. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person other than duly authorized officers, officials or employees of the township, to enter into or be upon the cemetery grounds of the township during the time after sunset and before sunrise of any day without first obtaining the permission of the township clerk in charge of said cemetery. It shall further be lawful at all times for any person to enter or leave the grounds other than by the established and open entrances or gateways. 
(Ord. No. 107, § 2.2, 11-7-2007)
Sec. 12-4. - Trespass, loitering; exceptions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or trespass upon lots and graves of a township cemetery or for the parent or guardian of any child under the age of 16 to permit such child to be within said cemetery grounds unless accompanied by an adult person; provided, nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit any person having lawful business in the cemetery in connection with the improvement thereof or persons visiting the graves of relatives or friends from being in said cemetery in accordance with the rules as established by the board. 
(Ord. No. 107, § 2.3, 11-7-2007)
Sec. 12-5. - Speed of vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle in said cemetery faster than ten miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 107, § 2.4, 11-7-2007)
Sec. 12-6. - Operation of vehicles and parking. 
(a)	No person shall drive or move any vehicle within the cemetery except over a roadway open for vehicular traffic, or obstruct any path or driveway within the cemetery open to vehicular traffic. No person shall use the cemetery grounds or any driveway therein as a public thoroughfare or drive any vehicle through said grounds except for purposes of making deliveries in the cemetery, attending a graveside service or burial service, or visiting any grave site. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of the township clerk and his assistants to direct all vehicular traffic, and the clerk is authorized to direct the parking or standing of all vehicles in said cemetery. No person shall disobey or disregard the directions of the clerk relating to the movement or standing of all vehicles within said cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 107, § 2.5, 11-7-2007)
Sec. 12-7. - Grave decorations; flowers. 
    The placing of cut flowers or plastic flowers over individual graves shall be permitted; however, the township shall not be responsible for the care of such flowers or the containers that they are placed in. Further, the township shall remove, without notice, all flowers, real or artificial, that remain over 15 days. 
(Ord. No. 107, § 2.6, 11-7-2007)
Sec. 12-8. - Rubbish; debris. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any rubbish, trash, waste materials, litter, or debris of any kind in the township cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 107, § 2.7, 11-7-2007)
Sec. 12-9. - Property damage. 
    No person shall remove, molest, injure, mar, deface, throw down or destroy any headstone, monument, survey marker, corner marker, tomb, vault or mausoleum, or decoration on any cemetery lot in the township cemetery, or open, disturb or molest any grave or place of burial therein. This shall not prohibit acts by cemetery officers and employees, or public officials, in carrying out their duties nor shall this provision prohibit lot owners from engaging in the repair or replacement of monuments. 
(Ord. No. 107, § 2.8, 11-7-2007)
Sec. 12-10. - Trees, shrubs, and flowers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to plant any tree, shrub or other plant in the cemetery except those permitted by the general landscape plan approved by the board. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to cut down, injure, break or destroy any tree, shrub or other plant growing in the cemetery or to pick, pluck or cut any flower or decorative plant except as authorized by the cemetery rules. 
(Ord. No. 107, § 2.9, 11-7-2007)
Sec. 12-11. - Monuments. 
(a)	In addition to those standards provided herein the township board may from time to time adopt regulations establishing standards and requirements regulating the type, location, size, material, number, the manner of placement and installation, and removal of monument markers, and plantings permitted within the township cemetery to the extent not established by this article, and may prohibit the placement of new monuments. 
(b)	No monument or marker shall exceed 60 inches in height, 38 inches in width. 
(c)	Every monument and marker shall be placed in the space as shown on the cemetery plat or as directed by the township clerk. No monument or marker shall be placed unless its location has been approved by the township clerk and the full purchase price of the grave has been paid. 
(d)	No monument or marker may be constructed of limestone, sandstone, wood, or other materials which will not ensure relative permanency. 
(e)	All markers or monuments shall be placed upon a suitable foundation and must be structurally sound and properly secured to avoid endangering public safety, health and other property. An apron of at least four inches in width shall be placed around said marker or monument, which shall be made of concrete, which apron shall also be level with the surface of the ground, and which shall be affixed to the marker so as to prevent grass, weeds, or other vegetation from growing between the marker and apron. 
(f)	This section and regulations that may be established by the board shall not affect monuments or markers of plantings in existence as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, except in those instances where such monuments, markers or plantings have become unsafe. 
(Ord. No. 107, § 3.0, 11-7-2007)
Sec. 12-12. - Violations as municipal civil infractions. 
    Violation of this chapter is a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 107, § 3.1, 11-7-2007; Ord. No. 124, § 2, 7-7-2008)
Chapter 14 - DEVELOPMENT DESIGN STANDARDS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the standards is to establish general requirements for the design and construction of subdivisions, site condominiums, commercial sites, and all other site improvements under the jurisdiction of the township which require site plan submittal in conformance with the township's zoning ordinance or as required by the township planning and building department director. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 1-2, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-2. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of these standards to: 
(1)	Provide a flexible yet reasonable and proper basis for the design and construction of land improvements, including, but not limited to, drainage facilities, stormwater management facilities, road and parking lot improvements, pedestrian activities, landscaping, grading, community sewage systems, sewage collection and disposal systems, potable water supply, potable water distribution, and fire suppression facilities. 
(2)	Establish uniformity in township design and construction requirements and supplement township ordinances. 
(3)	Outline information required for plans submitted for review so that the plans are complete and in a proper form. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 1-3, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    AASHTO means the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
    ADA means the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
    Administrative policy means the administrative guidelines to this chapter. 
    Aggregate means: 
(1)	A rock, stone, or other granular material;
(2)	Inert material that is mixed with Portland cement and water to produce concrete.
    ANSI means the American National Standards Institute. 
    Applicant means the party who is submitting development or improvement plans for review and approval by the township. 
    Aquatic vegetation means plants and plant life forms which naturally occur in, at, near, or predominantly near water. 
    As-builts means revised plans showing the as constructed conditions of the site, including utilities, grading, detention, etc. 
    ASTM means the American Society of Testing and Materials. 
    AWWA means the American Water Works Association. 
    Association. 
(1)	For a condominium development, the term "association" shall have the same meaning as "Association of Co-Owners" found in Act 59, Michigan Public Acts of 1978, as amended. 
(2)	For a subdivision or other development, the term "association" means an association of homeowners or property owners organized pursuant to deed restrictions and/or restrictive covenants in a particular development. 
    Base means a layer of selected, processed or treated aggregate material of planned thickness and quality placed immediately below the pavement and above the subbase or subgrade soil. 
    Base course means the bottom portion of a pavement where the top and bottom portions are not of the same composition. 
    Base flood or 100-year flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, or of a magnitude that may be equaled or exceeded once in any 100-year period. 
    Berm means a landscaped earthen undulation which gently blends into surrounding terrain. 
    Best management practices (BMPs) means structural, vegetative, or managerial measures, activities, which help to achieve soil erosion and sedimentation control objectives or enhance water quality. 
    Bottom land means the land area of a lake, stream, or watercourse which lies below the ordinary high-water mark and which may or may not be covered by water. 
    Buffer strips means: 
(1)	Landscaped areas composed of living plant material, a wall or berm, or a combination thereof for the purpose of visual screening and/or noise reduction between conflicting land uses and/or between a thoroughfare and an existing land use. 
(2)	Vegetative areas left in a native state or planted adjacent to water courses or stormwater facilities which provide a transition between developed areas and these environmentally sensitive areas typically to provide soil erosion and sedimentation control (SESC) protection and enhance water quality. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest piping of the wastewater drainage system of a building which receives the sanitary sewage from waste pipes, and other drainage pipes inside the perimeter walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or sanitary service leads, which begins approximately five feet outside the building wall. 
    Building sewer or sanitary sewer lead means that part of the exterior sewer piping of a drainage system which continues from a building drain (approximately five feet outside the building wall) and carries the flow emanating from the building drain to the sewer. 
    Channel means the geographical area within the natural or artificial banks of a watercourse required to convey continuously or intermittently flowing water under normal or average flow conditions. 
    Check dam means an earthen, stone, or manufactured structure placed perpendicular in a swale or channel or ditch which reduces water velocities. The design must follow very specific criteria. 
    Cisterns means underground tanks used for the storage of water for fire suppression. 
    Clean-out means a pipe through which cleaning equipment can be pushed to unplug a sewer. 
    Clear cut means the removal of all existing vegetation and natural features on a site. 
    Commercial developments means businesses or other such developments that are not intended for residential use. 
    Community sewer system or system means a facility for the transportation, collection, processing, treatment, or disposal of sanitary sewage which is owned by a non-governmental entity and which services or which is proposed to service more than one user. 
    Community water system means a facility to obtain, treat, transport, and distribute potable water which is owned by a non-governmental entity and which services or is proposed to service more than one user. 
    Compaction means the densification of soil by mechanical means involving the expulsion of excess air. 
    Concrete means a mixture of Portland cement, fine aggregate, coarse aggregate, and water, with or without admixtures. 
    Contractor means any person under written contract with the landowner, owner, developer, or applicant to perform the described work. 
    County agency means an officer, board, commission, department, or other entity of county government. 
    County drain refers to drains established and/or constructed pursuant to the Michigan Drain Code, Act 40 of the Public Acts of 1956, as amended. 
    County enforcing agency refers to the county drain commissioners office, as designated by the county board of commissioners. 
    Deposit means to fill, place, or dump. 
    Designated agent means a person who has written authorization from the landowner, owner, development, or applicant to sign the application and secure a permit in the landowner's name. 
    Detention ponds means a facility designed for holding (or detaining) stormwater runoff for a relatively short period of time and then releasing it at a controlled rate to the natural water course where it returns to the hydrologic cycle. The objective of a detention facility is to regulate the runoff from a given rainfall event and to reduce the impact on downstream drainage systems, natural or manmade. 
    Developer means a person, partnership, corporation, or other entity constructing one or more buildings, for occupancy by other than the owner, or creating or developing any parcel of land for any use other than agricultural or farming purposes. 
    Developer/owner's consulting engineer means the licensed engineer who has prepared the site plan for review and approval. 
    Development. 
(1)	The term "development" includes a subdivision as defined by Act 288, Public Acts of 1967, as amended, a condominium pursuant to the provisions of Act 59, Public Acts of 1978, as amended, or any group of dwellings or structures which are proposed. 
(2)	The term "development" means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations. 
    Development documents means: 
(1)	For a condominium project, the master deed, Exhibit B Drawings, and bylaws provided by Act 59, Public Acts of 1978, as amended; and 
(2)	With regard to subdivisions or other developments, deed restrictions and/or restrictive covenants, or a development agreement where required by the township. 
    Disturbed area means an area of land subject to erosion due to the removal of vegetative cover and/or earth moving activities, including filling. 
    Diversion means a ridge graded to divert water to a specific location. It is normally used to reduce the length of slope water runs over, thus reducing the erosive speed of the runoff. 
    Drain means either a county drain or a private storm drain. 
    Drain commissioners office means the Oakland County Drain Commissioners Office. 
    Drainage course means the location of existing surface water (i.e., lake, pond, river, stream, creek, wetland, etc.). 
    Drainage way means surface or subsurface drains that remove excess surface water or groundwater from land. 
    Driveway shall mean any area or portion of a premises, lot, parcel, or yard used or proposed to be used to provide a means of ingress, egress, access and circulation of vehicles and traffic to, from, and between any public or private street or road, principle, or accessory building, use or structure, loading spaces, or parking spaces. 
    Driveway approach means that portion of a driveway located between the road right-of-way line and the traveled portion of roadway or between the driveway radii returns and the travel portion of the roadway, whichever is greater in size. 
    Dry hydrants means hydrants that are not connected to a municipal water system but rather use an underground tank or surface water source. 
    Dwelling means a structure primarily designated or used for residential purposes. 
    Earth change means a human-made change in the natural cover or topography of land, including cut and fill activities, which may result in or contribute to soil erosion or sedimentation of the waters of the state. 
    Easement means the legal document executed to provide the right to use or control the property of another for designated purposes. 
    Effluent means the flow existing a process. 
    Encroachment means: 
(1)	Any impact to a wetland or other natural feature; or
(2)	Any unauthorized use, trespass, or alteration of areas designated on the plans for preservation, protection or not intended for such activities. 
    Erosion control permit means a permit issued at the county drain commissioners office. 
    Excavation means any breaking of ground. 
    Existing grade means the vertical location of the existing ground surface or structure prior to excavating or filling. 
    Expansion means any activity where by additional structures or users shall be added to an existing system. 
    Filling means the depositing or dumping of any matter onto or into the ground. 
    Final site plan means a plan showing all features of a proposed development, as required under the provisions of the township's zoning ordinance, including all engineering such as paving, grading, utilities, detention, etc. 
    Finished grade means the final grade or elevation of the ground surface conforming to the proposed design. 
    Fire suppression facilities means any facilities that are used to assist the fire department in firefighting. 
    First flush means the initial washing action that stormwater has on impervious surfaces. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)	The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source;
(3)	The collapse or subsidence of land along the shores of a lake or other body of water as a result of undetermining cause by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels, or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseen event which results in flooding. 
    Flood hazard area means land which, on the basis of available floodplain information, is subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
    Floodplain or flood hazard area means land which, on the basis of available information, would be subject to inundation during a base flood event. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas which must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood. 
    Floodway fringe means the land area between the floodway and the boundary of the floodplain. 
    Franchised utilities means utilities, such as electric, cable, gas, and telephone, which are not maintained by the township or the county. 
    Freeboard means: 
(1)	The vertical distance between the high water surface elevation and the crest of a dam, top of a channel side or the lowest elevation of a detention/retention pond embankment. 
(2)	The distance the water surface can rise before it overflows.
    GLUMRB means the Great Lakes-Upper Mississippi River Board. 
    GLUMRB is the Recommended Standards for Sewage Works (Ten States Standards). The standards are for use as a guide in the design and preparation of plans and specifications for sewage works, and are prepared by the standards committee of the Great Lakes-Upper Mississippi River Board of State Sanitary Engineers. 
    Gully means a deep cut formation in the soil that is the result of erosive water velocity. 
    Headwall means the entrance to a culvert or sluiceway. 
    Infiltration means the movement of water downward from the ground surface through the upper soil. 
    Influent means the flow entering a process. 
    Lake refers to the Great Lakes, and all natural and artificial inland lakes or impoundments that have definite banks, a bed, visible evidence of a continued occurrence of water, and a surface area of water that is equal to, or greater than, one acre, including any navigable tributaries. The term "lake" does not include sediment basins and basins constructed for the sole purpose of stormwater retention, cooling water, or treating polluted water. 
    Landowner means the person who owns or holds a recorded easement on the property or who is engaged in construction in a public right-of-way in accordance with Sections 13, 14, 15, and 16 of Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of 1925, as amended. 
    Looped connection means a system that has more than one connection to an existing system of streets, sewers, water mains, etc. 
    Main or trunk sewer means a sewer to which one or more branch sewers are tributary. 
    Material means soil, sand, gravel, clay, peat, debris and refuse, or any other substance, organic or inorganic. 
    MDEQ or DEQ means the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
    MDNR or DNR means the Michigan Department of Natural Resources, or its successors. 
    MDOT means the Michigan Department of Transportation. 
    MIOSHA means the Michigan Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 
    Mitigation refers to the replacement of an existing feature such as vegetation, wetlands, etc., lost or destroyed during development. 
    MMUTCD means the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
    Mobile or manufactured home, as defined by the Michigan Mobile Home Act, shall mean a structure that is transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis, and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the utilities. The term "mobile or manufactured home" does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers. 
    Municipality's engineer or township engineer means the staff engineer or professional engineer employed by the township. 
    New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
    NFPA means the National Fire Protection Association. 
    Non-point source pollution means pollution that is washed off the surface of land and impervious surfaces. 
    NPDES means National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
    OCDC means Oakland County Drain Commission. 
    OCDPW means Oakland County Department of Public Works. 
    OCHD means Oakland County Health Department. 
    Off-street loading space means a facility or space which permits the standing, loading or unloading of trucks, and other vehicles other than on or directly from a public right-of-way. 
    Off-street parking lot means a facility other than for single- or two-family dwellings providing vehicular parking spaces along with adequate drives and aisles for maneuvering, so as to provide access for entrance and exit for the parking of more than three vehicles. 
    Open drainage facilities are a means of stormwater conveyance, such as ditches and swales, that are above ground. 
    Operation means the making of additions or deposits, performing any construction or excavation activity, removing, improving and/or developing land in any manner, or any combination thereof. 
    Ordinary high-water mark means the line between upland and bottom land which persists through successive changes in water levels, below which the presence and action of the water is so common or recurrent that the character of the land is markedly distinct from the upland and is apparent in the soil itself, the configuration of the surface of the soil and the vegetation. On an inland lake which has a level established by law, it means the high established level. Where water returns to its natural level as a result of a permanent removal or abandonment of a dam, it means the natural ordinary high-water mark. 
    Parking space means a permanently surfaced area of land adequate to carry out the off-street parking regulations of chapter 46, and an area for each motor vehicle complying with the zoning ordinance, exclusive of drives, aisles, and entrances given access thereto, and fully accessible for the storage and parking of permitted vehicles. 
    Pedestrian facilities means sidewalks, safety paths, and nature trails designed and constructed for non-motorized uses. 
    Percolation means the movement of water through subsurface soil layers, usually continuing downward to the groundwater table. 
    Permitee means any person to whom a permit is issued pursuant to these rules. 
    Planning commission means the planning commission of the township. 
    Potable drinking water means water that is suitable for human consumption. 
    Private roads means those which are to be maintained and operated by the property owner, condominium/subdivision association, or adjacent property owners. 
    Property or land owner means any person who has dominion over, control of, title to and/or any other proprietary interest in designated wetland and/or watercourse areas, or title to an obstruction, natural or otherwise, to wetland and watercourse properties. 
    Public roads means those which are to be dedicated to the Road Commission for Oakland County (RCOC). 
    RCOC or OCRC means Road Commission for Oakland County. 
    Registered professional or licensed professional means a registered professional engineer (P.E.), surveyor (P.S.), architect (R.A), or landscape architect (R.L.A.) who is registered in the state and whose license is in good standing. 
    Reinforcement means steel bars or tie bars placed in concrete structures for additional support and strength. 
    Remove includes to dig, dredge, suck, pump, bulldoze, dragline, or blast. 
    Retention ponds means a facility without the ability for gravity drainage whereby water is held for a considerable length of time for aesthetic, agricultural, consumptive, holding of storm runoff, or other uses. The water may never be discharged to a natural water course, but it is intended to be dissipated by plants, evaporation, or percolation into the ground. 
    Right-of-way (R.O.W.) means the strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer, or other special use. 
    Runoff means the surface discharge of precipitation to a watercourse or low area. 
    Sanitary sewage or wastewater means wastewater discharged from homes, commercial establishments, and other structures, designated as sanitary flow because it is composed of used or spent water resulting from human use in so-called sanitary conveniences. 
    Sanitary sewer means a pipe or conduit, with appurtenances, that carries liquid and/or water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with minor quantities of stormwaters, surface waters, and groundwaters that are not admitted intentionally. 
    Sanitary sewer system means a facility for the transportation, collection, processing, or treatment of sanitary sewage. 
    Seasonal means any intermittent or temporary operation which occurs annually and is subject to interruption from changes in weather, water level, or time of year, and may involve annual removal and replacement of an operation, obstruction, or structure. 
    Sediment means the solid particulate matter, mineral or organic, that has been deposited in water, is in suspension in water, is being transported, or has been removed from its site of origin by the process of soil erosion. 
    Sediment basin means a naturally occurring or constructed depression used for the sole purpose of capturing sediment during or after an earth change activity. 
    Sediment forebays means basins which pretreat water prior to outletting into a retention or detention basin which function to reduce incoming water velocities, and to trap and localize incoming sediments, therefore reducing pond maintenance. 
    Site condominiums means condominium projects wherein individual parcels of land constituting individual development sites are proposed for separate ownership and use, in a fashion similar to a subdivision. 
    Site improvements means grading, street surfacing, curb and gutter, sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains and lines, sanitary sewers, culverts, bridges, utilities, and other additions to the natural state of the land which increases its value, utility, or habitability. 
    Soil boring means a geotechnical investigation and analysis of soil conditions taken from digging, augering, or other means of extracting soil from its place of origin. 
    Soil erosion means the wearing away of land by the action of wind, water, gravity, or any combination thereof. 
    Stabilization means the establishment of vegetation or the proper placement, grading, or covering of soil to ensure its resistance to soil erosion, sliding, or other earth movement. 
    Steep slope means a slope over 15 percent grade, which is characterized by increase runoff, erosion, and sediment hazards. 
    Storm drain means a conduit, pipe, natural channel, or human-made structure which serves to transport stormwater runoff. 
    Stream means a river, creek, or other surface watercourse which may or may not be serving as a drain as defined in Act No. 40 of the Public Acts of 1956, as amended, and which has defined banks, a bed, and visible evidence of the continued flow or continued occurrence of water. 
    Stripping means any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover including tree removal, sod, clearing, grubbing, and storage or removal of topsoil. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having such location. 
    Subbase means the layer of aggregate placed on the existing soil as a foundation for the base. 
    Subcontractors means workers hired by the general contractor for the purpose of completing a specific task. 
    Subdivision means the partitioning or dividing of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns for the purpose of sale or lease for more than one year, or building development, where the act of division creates five or more parcels of land, each of which is ten acres or less in area; or five or more parcels of land, each of which are ten acres or less, are created by successive divisions within a period of ten years. The term "subdivision" shall also include any plats which may be designated by the proprietor to be separated if in fact the plats are contiguous and are being developed simultaneously. In all such instances, the township shall treat the plats as a single plat and require development in accordance therewith. Contiguous shall be deemed to mean and include those plats of adjoining parcels as well as those plats of parcels which are separated by roadway, easement, existing or proposed private drive or the like. Simultaneous shall be deemed to include any plats which are proposed within the time during which a contiguous plat is pending any stage of development up to and including final plat approval of preliminary plat. 
    Subdivision association means an association of owners organized pursuant to deed restrictions and/or restrictive covenants in a particular development. 
    Subgrade means the portion of a roadbed surface that has been prepared as specified, upon which a subbase, base, base course, or pavement is to be constructed. 
    Surface drainage refers to all water flow across the surface of land. 
    Surface water means any water including ponds, lakes, streams, rivers, drains, and wetlands. 
    Swale means: 
(1)	A low lying portion of land, below the general elevation of the surroundings;
(2)	A natural ditch or long, shallow depression through which accumulated water from adjacent watersheds drains to lower areas. 
    Temporary soil erosion and sedimentation control measures means interim control measures which are installed or constructed to control soil erosion or sedimentation until permanent soil erosion control measures are established. 
    Time of concentration means the time required for water to flow from the most distant point on a runoff area to the measurement or collection point. 
    Township planner means the staff planner or community planner employed by the township. 
    Treatment systems means methods and facilities used to cleanse wastewater before disposal. 
    Upland means the land area adjoining a lake, stream, or watercourse, above the ordinary highwater mark, uses for which are essentially non-aquatic. 
    USGS means United States Geological Survey 
    Variance means a modification of the literal provisions of an ordinance granted by the township board or zoning board of appeals in situations or under circumstances where permitted by law. 
    Vegetative cover means grasses, shrubs, trees, and other vegetation which hold and stabilize soils. 
    Water main means a facility for the transportation, and distribution of potable water. 
    Watercourse or waterway means any waterway or other of water having well defined banks, including rivers, streams, creeks, and brooks, whether continually or intermittently flowing, and lakes and ponds, or as otherwise shown on an official watercourse and/or wetland map. 
    Wetlands means land characterized by the presence of water of a frequency and duration sufficient to support and that under normal circumstances does support wetland vegetation or aquatic life and is commonly referred to as a bog, swamp, or marsh. A wetland will be regulated by the state if: 
(1)	It is greater than five acres in size and located in a county with a population greater than 100,000; 
(2)	Is of any size and is contiguous (within 500 feet) of an inland lake, stream, or pond, or within 1,000 feet of the Great Lakes; or 
(3)	Is of any size if MDEQ determines that protection of the area is essential to the preservation of the natural resources of the state from pollution, impairment, or destruction. 
(Ord. No. 119, ch. 16, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-4. - Conflicts. 
    If there should exist conflicts or discrepancies between these standards and adopted ordinances or resolutions of the township board, said ordinances or resolutions shall govern over these standards. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 1-4, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-5. - Variance from standards. 
    The township board may authorize a variance from these standards when practical difficulty may result from strict compliance. In granting any variance, the township board may prescribe conditions that it deems necessary or desirable for the public safety, health, welfare, and best interest of the community. No variance shall be granted unless the township board finds all of the following: 
(1)	That strict compliance with these standards would either unreasonably prevent the owner from utilizing the property for a permitted purpose or that conformity with the standards would be unnecessarily burdensome. 
(2)	That the variance is the minimum necessary to give appropriate relief to the applicant, giving consideration to the effect of the variance on surrounding property owners. 
(3)	Feasible and prudent alternatives have been duly evaluated and are readily available.
(4)	That the granting of a variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or injurious to other properties in the area. 
(5)	That the variance will be in accordance with the objectives and policies of the township.
(Ord. No. 119, § 1-5, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-6. - Interpretation. 
(a)	Provisions of these standards shall be held to be the minimum requirements necessary for the promotion and preservation of the public health, safety, and general welfare of the township. The standards are not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any manner interfere with existing regulations or ordinances of the township, standards or regulations of the county where they have jurisdiction, nor to conflict with any statutes of the state. 
(b)	Proprietors and their engineers are encouraged to design facilities to provide for actual conditions encountered in their project work area. As site conditions dictate, the township in the review process may allow more flexible designs, which are more or less stringent than the minimum requirements specified herein, provided that the design alternative is in accordance with township objectives and goals; for example, the preservation of natural features. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 1-6, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-7. - Right to revise standards. 
    The township reserves the right to revise these standards at any time and to require that such revised standards be incorporated into the work at any time prior to construction plan approval. The township also reserves the right to require revisions or corrections to any plans, that have been approved for construction, due to errors, omissions, or changes or unforeseen field conditions and to require that such revisions and corrections be incorporated into the work at any time prior to the final acceptance of the work. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 1-7, 3-17-2008)
Secs. 14-8-14-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES 

Sec. 14-33. - Detailed engineering plans. 
    Detailed engineering construction plans shall be submitted by the applicant for site improvements, including, but not limited to, storm sewers, stormwater management facilities, paving, soil erosion control measures, site grading, community sewage systems, sanitary sewage collection facilities, and potable water supply and distribution systems. Timing of plan submittal shall follow the requirements of the ordinances and the procedures set forth by the township. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 2-1, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-34. - Plans and specifications. 
    All plans submitted for review and approval are to comply with the requirements specified herein and may be rejected for failure to comply. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 2-2, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-35. - Development agreement. 
    Where otherwise provided for by ordinance or as required by the township for phased projects, projects that may require building permits or certificates of occupancy prior to completion of site development, projects with water and sanitary sewer systems, projects with off-site improvements or as otherwise determined by the township, the township may require the execution of a development agreement between the property owner and the township including the posting of a financial security for the unfinished portions of the work. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 2-3, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-36. - Plan review fees. 
    Plan review fees or escrow accounts for projects located in the township shall be payable to the township in the amount as set forth in a fee schedule adopted by resolution of the township board from time to time or as otherwise required. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 2-4, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-37. - Specifications by reference. 
(a)	Where reference is made in these standards to the specifications of any technical society, association, governmental agency, etc., such as those promulgated by AASHTO, ANSI, MDOT, etc., said specifications shall apply and be binding as if fully set forth herein. It is understood and agreed that such specifications or standards are incorporated by reference. 
(b)	Reference to standard specifications of any technical society, organization, association or to codes of local or state authorities, shall mean the latest standard, code, specifications, or tentative specification adopted and published unless specifically stated otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 2-5, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-38. - Existing utilities and site conditions. 
    It shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant to locate, survey, field verify, etc., all existing utilities within the construction area. The township or its engineers may have completed projects in the same area or have utility information available for review. This information, while intended to assist the applicant, is not warranted as complete or accurate and is not intended to be the only source of such information or to be utilized solely in lieu of the applicant's own investigation. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 2-6, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-39. - Easements. 
(a)	An applicant must provide the township with the necessary easements for current or future facilities that are to be located on the developed property and which may be maintained by the township. Easements shall be a minimum width to provide proper access as determined by the township, or as stated in these standards. Furthermore, it shall be required that the applicant provide all utility and drainage easements (i.e., storm sewers, surface drainage, private water and sanitary systems, etc.) to the township for review and approval prior to final project approval. The easements shall be subject to a recommendation of approval by the township engineer and the township attorney. 
(b)	Proof of ownership shall be provided along with the easement in the form of title insurance, acceptable to the township attorney, to show that the grantor of the easement is the owner of the property. All parties having a legal interest in the property shall execute and grant the easement. 
(c)	Easements must be submitted to the township in recordable form prior to the start of work. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 2-7, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-40. - Use or access to private property. 
    A contractor shall not enter upon private property for any purpose without first obtaining written permission from the property owner, and shall be responsible for the preservation of all public property, trees, survey monuments, etc., along, within, and adjacent to the private property, and shall use every precaution necessary to prevent damage or injury thereto. He shall use suitable precautions to prevent damage to pipes, conduits, and other underground structures. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 2-8, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-41. - Township mapping. 
    When the submitted plans are prepared in digital format, the developer may be requested to provide the township with electronic files of the approved construction plans and as-built plans in order to facilitate any township electronic map updates. Township maps may be modified to incorporate the utilities to service the subject development. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 2-9, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-42. - Phased construction. 
    On all projects in which construction is to proceed in phases, a separate plan sheet shall be included in the construction drawings which breaks down all improvement quantities by item, i.e.: walkways paths, grading, landscaping, community sewage and sanitary sewage collection systems, potable water supply and distribution systems, storm sewers, soil erosion control measures, landscaping, pavement base and wearing courses, and utilities for each phase. Said phasing limits shall match those approved or to be approved by the township. Approval of phased construction shall not supersede the requirement to obtain site plan approval for each phase of the construction. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 2-10, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-43. - Codes, ordinances, laws and regulations. 
    The contractor and subcontractors shall observe and comply with all federal, state and local codes, ordinances, laws and regulations in force at the construction site. The contractor shall pay for and obtain all building permits, licenses for the work, pay for inspection and testing, and file plans and specifications to the inspection department having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 2-11, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-44. - Submittals for review and approval. 
(a)	All plan documents shall be submitted to the township planning and building department. The applicant is to contact the township regarding the number of plans to submit and the review process. No documents shall be submitted directly to the township engineer, planner, or attorney unless prior authorization is given by the township. 
(b)	All plans, computations, and estimates shall be signed and sealed by a registered professional, licensed to practice in the state. The township engineer and planner shall review and make recommendations to the township. Comments for approval or nonapproval shall be in writing. They may also be marked on a set of plans at the discretion of the township. Copies of the letter recommending approval or nonapproval and any marked up plans will be forwarded to the township, the applicant, and the applicant's consultant. The applicant shall forward revised copies of the plans or documents in question to the township for further processing and review should additional information or plan revisions be required. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 2-12, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-45. - Agency approval. 
    Engineering drawings for proposed subdivision or condominium improvements, site plan improvements, and utility construction shall be approved by all jurisdictional agencies and the township prior to the beginning of any construction. Construction shall not begin until all required approvals and permits are secured. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 2-13, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-46. - Submittal for construction. 
    Four complete sets of the approved construction plans, signed and sealed (three copies to the engineer, one copy to the township) must be submitted for the township's use after construction plan approval and prior to the preconstruction meeting. Additional plan sets, individual plan sheets, or digital files may be requested at the township's discretion. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 2-14, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-47. - Meetings. 
(a)	A preconstruction meeting shall be held prior to the start of any site improvements. The preconstruction meeting should include a representative of the township, the township engineer, the applicant or authorized representatives, the contractor, and where necessary any utility company officials whose underground, overhead, or at grade utilities may conflict in any manner with the proposed project, and state, county, and local government persons who may be involved, directly or indirectly, with the proposed project, and any other persons who may be able to contribute information in regard to the construction of the subject project. 
(b)	It shall be the applicant and/or contractor's responsibility to contact the township at least 14 days prior to planned construction commencement to arrange for a preconstruction meeting. The project shall not be permitted to commence until such time that the applicant and/or contractor has secured all required permits, submitted observation (inspection) escrow funds, and submitted all insurance and bonds in accordance with the township's requirements. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 2-15, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-48. - Performance guarantee. 
    The applicant may be required to deposit with the township, cash, certified check, bond backed by a surety firm listed in Circular 570, or self-renewing irrevocable letter of credit from a solvent financial institution, whichever the applicant selects, in an amount sufficient to guarantee the completion of the construction of all required improvements, as shown on the approved construction plan. Copies of contractor contracts with the applicant or estimates of cost provided by the project engineer shall be required to be submitted to the township engineer for review prior to establishment of the required security and a 25 percent administrative markup will be added to the amount. Should contractor contracts not be submitted, the township engineer, at his sole discretion, will determine the value of the improvements for guarantee purposes. The final release of security will only be made after the improvements have been final inspected and accepted by the township and only upon written request by the applicant. Partial releases will be considered at the township's discretion. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 2-16, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-49. - Construction observation. 
(a)	Fulltime or parttime observation shall be required for all site improvements associated with subdivisions, site condominiums, commercial sites, and elsewhere as determined by the township. Parttime observation may also be required for improvements covered by other governmental agencies. Observation personnel shall be provided by the township or its agents. The developer shall pay all applicable observation fees as established by the township. The contractor shall notify the township and the township engineer's supervising field observer at least 48 hours prior to commencing construction. Any work installed without field observation as required by the township may not be accepted by the township. 
(b)	In such an event, the township's decision regarding removing or exposing covered work, testing, or any other appropriate course of action, shall be final and binding on the applicant. 
(c)	The applicant shall deposit with the township at least 48 hours prior to the start of construction, an observation escrow based on the estimated observation time required as determined by the township. The observation escrow amount shall be determined prior to or at the preconstruction meeting. The township may assess actual administration fees to cover the construction portion of the project. 
(d)	The observation fees will be billed to the township on a time and material basis by the township engineer and deducted from the observation escrow deposit. 
(e)	A minimum of four hours will be charged against the observation escrow if the observer keeps a scheduled observation appointment and the contractor does not work or cancels work with less than 24 hours' notice and the observer cannot be reassigned to another job. In the event of a rain out, the contractor shall notify the appropriate personnel prior to the regular starting time or be charged the four-hour increment. All costs incurred for consulting services and testing conducted by the township will be billed against the escrow account. 
(f)	The applicant will be notified in the event the escrow deposit has been depleted and/or additional funds are required. Prompt attention to reestablishing this deposit will prevent the project construction from being stopped and/or building or occupancy permits withheld. The account balance upon completion of the project and acceptance of the record plans will be returned to the applicant and only upon written request by the applicant. 
(g)	Review of as-constructed, as-built plans or record drawings shall be invoiced by the township against the observation account. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 2-17, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-50. - Insurance requirements. 
    It is agreed that the contractor for all developments shall comply with the following general stipulations and provide the township with proof of the insurance requirement herein prior to the start of construction. Additional requirements and monetary amounts as are currently established or as may hereafter be required at the discretion of the township by resolution of the township board. 
(1)	Contractor's comprehensive general liability insurance. The contractor shall procure and shall maintain during the life of his contract, contractor's personal injury insurance; contractor's property damage insurance; and completed operations and contractual liability coverages. This comprehensive general liability insurance shall include coverage for explosion, collapse, underground hazards, and flooding and coverage assumed in the indemnification clause of this section of the work. 
(2)	Contractor's automobile bodily injury and property damage insurance. The contractor shall procure and shall maintain during the life of his contract automobile bodily injury insurance. The contractor shall procure and shall maintain during the life of his contract hired and nonownership automobile bodily injury and protection damage insurance. 
(3)	Umbrella or excess liability. The contractor is granted the option of arranging under a single policy for the full limit required for general liability and/or automobile liability or by a combination of underlying policies with the balance provided by an excess or umbrella liability policy equal to the total limit requested. 
(4)	Worker's compensation insurance. The contractor shall procure and shall maintain during the life of his contract, worker's compensation insurance, including employer's liability. 
(5)	Indemnification clause. The contractor agrees to indemnify, defend, and save harmless the township and the engineer, its elected officials, officers, owners, consultants, agents, and employees, from and against all loss or expense (including costs and attorney's fees) by reason of liability imposed by law upon the township and the engineer, its elected officials, officers, owners, consultants, agents, and employees for damages because of bodily injury; including death at any time resulting therefrom, sustained by any person or on account of damage to property, including loss of use thereof, arising out of or in consequence of the performance of this work, whether such injuries to persons or damage to property is due, or claimed to be due, to the negligence of the contractor, his subcontractors, the township, the engineer, and the township's elected officials, officers, owners, consultants, agents, and employees. 
(6)	Proof of coverage of insurance. The contractor shall provide the township certificates of insurance for the required coverage. A guarantee that 30 days' notice to the township prior to cancellation or nonrenewal of or change in any such insurance shall be endorsed on each policy and certificate of insurance. 
(7)	Additional insured. All insurance policies with the exception of worker's compensation are to include the following additional insured: 
a.	The township. All elected officials, officers, consultants, agents and employees. 
b.	The township engineer. The owners, officers, consultants, agents, and employees. 
(8)	Removal of engineering exclusions. All policies shall ensure that all references to the exclusion of engineering or engineering services shall be removed, by amendment, from the policies. 
(9)	Sample forms. The sample forms be obtained from the township or township engineer. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 2-18, 3-17-2008)
Secs. 14-51-14-73. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS AND PLAN REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 14-74. - Intent. 
    The intent of this article is to provide the applicant with general plan requirements. Failure to comply with these requirements may lead to the plans being rejected. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 3-1, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-75. - Plan requirements. 
    In general, plans submitted for review must include the following: 
(1)	Complete improvement plans bearing the seal of a registered professional, licensed to practice in the state shall be submitted prior to review and approval of any portion thereof. 
(2)	Plans submitted shall be on 24 inches by 36 inches (no larger) prints having blue or black lines, and shall be neatly and accurately prepared. Judgment should be exercised in the design, layout, and the presentation of proposed improvements. 
(3)	For plan sets with four or more sheets, including details, a cover sheet is to be included and contain the following information: 
a.	Title of project.
b.	Property legal description including sidewell number.
c.	Name, address and telephone number of owner/applicant and contact person.
d.	Name, address and telephone number of project engineer and/or surveyor.
e.	Contacts for existing on-site utilities that may be in conflict with site improvements (in the event of an emergency). 
f.	Plan set index.
g.	MISS DIG information and telephone number.
h.	Location map to site, including north arrow.
i.	Zoning classification of subject and all adjacent properties.
For plan sets with less than four sheets, this information must be included elsewhere in the plan set. 
(4)	For projects having more than one plan sheet, a general plan having a scale of one inch equals 100 feet shall be provided showing the overall project, surrounding area, match lines between plan sheets and indicating the size and general location of all improvements shown in the detailed plans. Street names, street and easement widths, lot lines, lot dimensions, lot numbers, and ownership shall be shown on all plans. 
(5)	Engineering plans having a maximum scale of one inch equals 50 feet horizontal and one inch equals five feet vertical for profile views shall be provided. Standard engineering scales (i.e., one inch equals ten feet, one inch equals 20 feet, one inch equals 30 feet, one inch equals 40 feet, one inch equals 50 feet) shall be used. Sanitary sewer and water main shall be shown on the same sheet. Plan and profile views are required on all sanitary and storm sewers (regardless of size) and water mains 16 inches in diameter and larger. Profiles, where possible, shall be shown below the plan view. 
(6)	A boundary survey of the site, or a copy of the completed plat shall be submitted with the engineering drawings, as well as a legal description of the property and tax parcel number. 
(7)	Elevations shall be on U.S.G.S. datum. Two permanent benchmarks for the work shall be indicated on the plans. 
(8)	Existing elevations must be provided across the entire site and for a minimum distance of 100 feet abutting the entire perimeter of the site on a 50-foot minimum interval grid system or two-foot elevation contours. One foot contours are preferred and shall be provided where a greater amount of detail is needed. Grades shall be indicated at all property corners and along all property lines. The elevation information requirement may be modified by the township engineer for developments with significant open space. On-site, intermittent elevations and defined contours are required to establish the existing site drainage. All existing conditions shall be indicated. Locations and elevations must be given on the following: 
a.	Existing drainage courses, ditches, swales, ponds, lakes, rivers, wetlands, etc.
b.	Upstream and downstream culverts.
c.	All utilities, including storm and sanitary sewer, water main, gas, telephone, electrical, etc. Inverts and finished grades are required where applicable. 
d.	All existing sidewalks, roads, and driveways within 100 feet of the property.
e.	Finished grades of all adjacent buildings within 100 feet of the property.
f.	All easements.
(9)	Existing and proposed road topography shall extend across the entire site with grades shown on both sides of the street for: 
a.	Property lines.
b.	Ditch centerline and top of bank.
c.	Edge of shoulder.
d.	Edge of pavement or top of curb.
e.	Crown or centerline.
(10)	Property lines must be indicated by distances and bearings where applicable.
(11)	Existing and proposed rights-of-way of adjacent roads must be indicated.
(12)	All information as required in accordance with the zoning ordinance must be provided.
(13)	Tentative finished grades shall be indicated for all proposed structures or new building sites to be constructed within the development. These grades are intended to be used as a guide with flexibility encouraged to customize each building site to fit the natural topography and still maintain some consistency within the development. Building site grades shall be shown at lot/unit corners and every 50 feet along the lot/unit lines. 
(14)	Street names shall be approved by the township and/or the road commission for county (RCOC) and labeled on the plans. 
(15)	Grading plans are required for all developments. Refer to article V, pertaining to clearing, grading, surface drainage, wetlands protection and soil erosion control, of this chapter for specific requirements. 
(16)	Utilities shall typically be parallel to lot lines or roadways. Generally, utilities shall be constructed in the road right-of-way or in easements adjacent to the road right-of-way and shall not be located under existing or proposed pavement where possible. Irregular or meandering utilities will be considered and encouraged where natural features or vegetation may be saved. 
(17)	All design calculations for storm sewers, sanitary sewers, and water mains shall be included. 
(18)	Storm sewers, open ditch, or swale conveyance systems and pavement shall be shown on the same sheets. Plan and profile views are necessary for all stormwater conveyance systems, except for residential side yard swales. A plan view with centerline stationing shown is necessary on all paving. The top-of-curbline must be shown on all profiles. 
(19)	All crossings of utilities must be shown in the profile view. Minimum vertical clearance between utilities shall be 18 inches. Sand or stone backfill, compacted to at least 95 percent of maximum unit weight, is required between utilities. 
(20)	Profiles of sanitary and storm sewers shall indicate the size, class of pipe, class of bedding, rim elevations of all manholes, length between manholes, slope of pipe, and shall indicate the existing and proposed ground elevations above the route of the sewer. The inverts of all sewers shall be given at manholes. The limits of compacted engineered backfill required shall be indicated on the plan and profile. 
(21)	All existing and proposed easements, their widths, and intended use are to be shown on the plans. 
(22)	Any wetland areas shall be indicated on the plans and shall be subject to township ordinance and the requirements of this chapter. No improvements shall be allowed in regulated wetlands unless the MDEQ issues a permit or a letter of nonjurisdiction for such improvements. 
(23)	Any areas that are determined to be located within the 100-year floodplains of a watercourse shall be shown on the plans. The project engineer is responsible to determine the limits of the 100-year floodplain and obtain all required permits. Refer to the township's floodplain ordinance for specific requirements. 
(24)	Plans for landscaping, tree preservation, or tree planting required by the township or proposed by the applicant shall be submitted to the township for review and approval prior to construction plan approval. 
(25)	The developer/owner's consulting engineer shall forward plans, for approval, to any public utility (gas, electric, telephone, cable, etc.) and any federal, state, or county (drain commission, road commission, etc.) agency whose facilities or rights-of-way may be affected by the proposed construction, and show the contact name, address, and telephone and fax numbers for all utilities on the plan set. Copies of all transmittals and responses shall be furnished to the township. 
(26)	Material specifications for improvements as required by the township shall be submitted for approval prior to the start of construction. 
(27)	All lots, parcels, or units must have the proposed location of the individual on-site septic systems, if known, and any alternate locations as required by the OCHD, as well as soil borings, test pits, etc., used to determine the location of such. 
(28)	All lots, parcels, or units must have the proposed location of the individual on-site wells, if known, and any alternate locations as required by the OCHD, as well as soil borings, test pits, etc., used to determine the location of such. 
(29)	The following township standard notes must be included on the plans:
a.	The township and township engineer must be notified a minimum of 48 hours prior to the start of construction and after stoppages and prior to a restart of construction. 
b.	All construction must be in conformance with the current development design standards adopted by the township. 
c.	MISS DIG (1-800-482-7171) must be called a minimum of 72 hours prior to the start of construction. 
d.	All soil erosion must be controlled and contained on site, with strict compliance with state law for soil erosion and sedimentation control and county drain commissioner permit requirements. 
e.	All excavation under the 45-degree zone of influence line from the edge of pavements, bike paths, sidewalks, and/or drive approaches (existing or proposed), shall be backfilled and compacted with aggregate materials to at least 95 percent of minimum unit weight as specified in the plans. 
f.	Prior to final acceptance, final engineering inspection is required.
g.	All signs and traffic control during construction shall be per the most current Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MMUTCD) or as required by RCOC. 
h.	As-built Mylar drawings in accordance with township standards must be submitted prior to final project acceptance. As-builts must be submitted in electronic format once approved. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 3-2, 3-17-2008)
Secs. 14-76-14-93. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AS-BUILT DRAWINGS PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 14-94. - Intent. 
    Prior to the township's final approval of any site improvements or the final acceptance of any public utilities, which the township may accept currently or in the future for maintenance and operation, as-built, as-constructed, or record drawings must be submitted to the township for review and acceptance. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 4-1, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-95. - Procedure. 
(a)	As-built drawings shall be initially submitted in the form of two sets of prints with blue or black lines. Upon the approval of the as-built drawings by the township engineer, complete sets of reproducible Mylar drawings, a minimum of three mils thick, together with two complete sets of blue-line or black-line prints, shall be submitted to the township engineer for distribution and archives. The township may, at its discretion, also require the plans to be submitted in digital format. The number of as-built Mylar plan sets shall be determined by the township. 
(b)	The applicant shall receive copies of any inspection/observation reports from the township engineers. This information is only intended to supplement their own as-built survey, contractor reports, and own field observation reports and are not intended to be a complete record for all construction activities for the subject project or the only source of documentation to provide the as-built information required herein. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 4-2, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-96. - Security deposits. 
    In lieu of submitting final as-built plans in accordance with this article, prior to the time of final project approval, the township may, at its discretion, require a cash security deposit, or letter of credit, in an amount to be determined by the township. This deposit will be returned upon the submittal of approved as-built plans. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 4-3, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-97. - Criteria. 
    As-built drawings shall contain, but are not limited to, the following information: 
(1)	General plan requirements. The plans shall contain all information as shown on the approved plans: 
a.	The as-built plans shall include all information as included in article III of this chapter, pertaining to general plan provisions, such as location map, legend, project contacts, etc.; 
b.	The plans shall be clearly labeled "as-built" on each sheet;
c.	All as-built survey data shall tie into the same site benchmarks as those used for the construction plans. 
(2)	Clearing, grading, surface drainage, wetlands, and soil erosion control. As-built grading plans shall include, but are not limited to, the submittals of a master grading plan with any deviations from the approved grading plan noted on the drawing. The plan must also include all drainage courses and open ditch or swale drainage conveyance facilities. In general, the as-built grading plan is to provide the township with an accurate plan to verify that individual plot plans conform to the overall grading and drainage pattern. 
(3)	Storm sewer system. As-built storm sewer system plans shall include, but are not limited to, length, diameter, invert and rim elevations and percentage of grade in plan and profile view. As-built plans shall also include structure locations, shown with a minimum of two offsets from property lines or an as-built coordinate table, material and joint type used, and quantities. 
(4)	Stormwater management facilities. As-built detention or retention plans shall include, but are not limited to, as-built contours, adequate spot grades to substantiate these contours, all overflow and outlet invert elevations, and labels identifying the permanent water, high water, and freeboard elevations. Also, as-built volumetric calculations must be included in the plans which include the required volume calculations from the approved plans and as-built calculations. It must be certified on the as-built drawings that any maximum basin side slopes, as stipulated on the approved plans, have not been exceeded. If the approved plans required perimeter fencing, it must also be shown and properly "as-built." Furthermore, any restrictor location and size must also be "as-built." 
(5)	Paving. As-built paving plans for roads, parking lots, sidewalk paths, etc., shall include, but are not limited to, centerline elevations, curb and gutter elevations, where installed, edge of parking lot grades, pavement widths, and sidewalk lengths. Also, any entrance improvements such as turn lanes, acceleration/deceleration lanes, etc., must also be properly as-built. 
(6)	Sanitary sewer collection system. As-built sanitary sewer system plans shall include, but not be limited to, length, diameter, invert and rim elevations and percentage of grade in plan and profile view. As-built plans shall also include structure location (shown with a minimum of two offsets from property lines and an as-built coordinate table), material and joint type, and quantities. Also, sanitary sewer house lead information is required. This shall include lead length, distance of wye from downstream manhole, a triangulation dimension and invert depth below grade. This information can be shown in an as-built table. 
(7)	Community sewage system. As-built community sewage system plans shall include, but are not limited to, all sizing dimensions, materials and equipment installed, capacity of system, size, lengths, slopes and inverts of all piping, finished grades of all structures, etc. 
(8)	Water mains. As-built water system plans shall include, but not be limited to, lengths, diameter gate well and hydrant finished elevations, locations of all hydrants, structures, gate wells, meter pits, PRV's, etc. (shown with offsets from property lines or an as-built coordinate table), materials used including the make and model of the hydrants and quantities. 
(9)	Community potable water system. As-built plans for community potable water systems shall include, but are not limited to, all dimensions as shown on the approved plans, equipment and materials listings, all pipe sizes, lengths, inverts, slopes, rims, etc., tank capacities, design calculations, offset dimensions to nearest property lines, and any other information as required for final site plan approval. 
(10)	Fire suppression facilities. As-built plans shall include, but are not limited to, all dry hydrant dimensions, all dry hydrant assembly parts/fittings information, supply size (i.e., tank dimensions, pond contours and calculations). 
(Ord. No. 119, § 4-4, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-98. - Certification. 
    All as-built plans shall contain a statement by a licensed professional engineer, architect, or landscape architect, who is currently registered in the state, certifying the drawings to be as-built. All plans must also contain the seal and signature of said registered professional. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 4-5, 3-17-2008)
Secs. 14-99-14-124. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CLEARING, GRADING, SURFACE DRAINAGE, WETLANDS PROTECTION, AND SOIL EROSION CONTROL 

Sec. 14-125. - Intent. 
    This standard establishes the minimum requirements for clearing, grading, surface drainage, wetlands protection, and soil erosion control plans and the construction requirements to implement such plans for all sites within the township. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 5-1, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-126. - General. 
    All new subdivisions, site condominiums, commercial development, or any improvement which requires site plan approval by the township, will require a clearing, grading, drainage, wetlands protection (if applicable), and soil erosion plan. Plans which minimize, to the extent possible, clearing and grading as well as utilize open drainage facilities are strongly encouraged. The township may require such provisions in order to preserve natural features that the township deems necessary to protect. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 5-2, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-127. - Design considerations. 
(a)	Clearing. 
(1)	Plans will generally not be approved for sites which are to be clear-cut and relandscaped. It is the intent of the township to maintain as much of the natural landscaping and features as possible. 
(2)	The township reserves the right to have trees preserved and/or protected, which it feels enhance the natural characteristics of the property to be developed. These trees may be of unique size, shape, species, location, etc. 
(3)	All stumps and other tree parts, litter, brush, weeds, scrap construction materials or other debris shall be removed from the site and disposed of in accordance with state and federal law. If trees or limbs are reduced to chips, they may be used in landscaping applications. No burning on site is permitted unless specifically approved by the fire department. 
(b)	Grading. 
(1)	Filling and grading shall not create a barrier causing entrapment or restriction of water onto or from adjacent properties. 
(2)	The grading plan shall be designed to ensure that stormwater will drain away from all building structures and not be detrimental to adjacent properties. 
(3)	Grading plans shall take into account the desirable natural features, i.e., trees, wetlands, steep slopes, etc., and the character of the land which must be preserved where possible. 
(4)	No filling, dredging, grading, or other alteration will be allowed in any areas of land which lie either wholly or in part within the floodplain of a river, stream, creek, lake or regulated wetlands unless under the terms of a permit granted by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) or other governmental agency having jurisdiction and in accordance with the township's floodplain ordinance. 
(5)	Topsoil stripped during construction shall be stockpiled on site. Stockpiled topsoil shall be contained by appropriate soil erosion control measures to prevent the migration of soils (i.e., erosion). Stockpile locations are to be shown on the plans. 
(c)	Drainage. 
(1)	The township encourages open drainage facilities (i.e., ditches, swales, etc.) in lieu of enclosed storm sewers wherever feasible. 
(2)	All stormwater runoff will be intercepted within the boundaries of the site, collected, and conducted through a stormwater system to an approved point of discharge. At no time shall stormwater discharge from a developed site exceed the restricted rate or volume as set forth in these standards (article IV of this chapter, pertaining to stormwater management). 
(3)	For storm events with a reasonable intensity and frequency, all developments shall freely drain stormwater without ponding, except where specifically designed for storage such as detention, retention, or a landscape pond. 
(4)	All development shall provide for overland flow of stormwater from adjacent properties where the existing offsite land slopes to the site. The amount of runoff to be accommodated from offsite lands shall be at least equal to the volume and rate of runoff from the land in the undeveloped state. 
(5)	Easements for drainage facilities shall be of a width adequate to provide proper access for maintenance and shall be centered upon the facilities. Such easements shall be deeded or dedicated to the subdivision association, condominium association, property owner, or entity responsible for the maintenance of the drainage facilities, with restrictions against use or occupation of easements by the property owners and/or by other utilities in any manner which would restrict maintenance or repair operations. Easements will be in a form as approved by the township. Whenever a constructed drainage facility is required to cross an adjacent property, an easement for this purpose must be provided on the adjacent property. 
(6)	All surface drainage facilities must be designed to ensure that, should a failure occur in the system, stormwater will drain away in a manner which will not impact existing or proposed structures on site or off site, or cause erosion. 
(7)	For open ditch stormwater conveyance systems, channel slopes shall be set at grades which will not cause erosion. The project engineer shall be responsible to provide calculations based on Manning's formula, which demonstrate the velocity and capacity of all open drainage courses based on a ten-year design flow in accordance with the methods as outlined in article VII of this chapter, pertaining to storm sewers. The minimum ditch grade shall be such that water will flow properly and not become stagnant. This requirement does not include side yard swales between lots or units in a residential development. 
(8)	Hydraulic design calculations and a copy of the drainage area layout used for the hydraulic design shall accompany construction plans submitted for review. The drainage area layout shall, in the case of a design for a new development, be superimposed on the proposed grading plan for the development. 
(9)	Side slopes of all drainage courses shall be designed in accordance with the proposed slope maintenance. For example, grass slopes to be mowed should be no steeper than one on four, or armored banks (i.e., riprap or gabion lining) could be up to one on two side slopes. 
(10)	Stormwater runoff in excess of the rate and volume generated by the pre-developed property shall be managed in accordance with article VI of this chapter, pertaining to stormwater management standards. 
(d)	Wetlands. 
(1)	Township review of wetland impacts. While wetland permitting may be required through MDEQ, every person shall comply with the township's wetland ordinance, section 46-389. 
(2)	Mitigation. Any mitigation required shall be designed to remove an impairment to the wetland benefits, to mitigate the impact of a discharge or fill material, or otherwise improve water quality and/or habitat. Mitigation may be designed for the improvement of the existing wetland resources or the creation of new wetland resources to offset wetland resources lost as a result of the proposed project. 
(3)	Buffer strip requirements. 
a.	To protect the natural resources of wetlands, streams, lakes, ponds, etc., a 25-foot-wide natural vegetation buffer strip should be left undisturbed and protected as required by the zoning ordinance. 
b.	Any proposed buffer strip must be shown on the plans and properly labeled. The buffer strip shall be protected during development by construction fencing. No development or encroachment shall be permitted within any required or approved buffer area without township approval. The entire wetland and buffer strip must be left in open space, protected by use restrictions, contained within a dedicated conservation easement, or protected in another manner. 
(e)	Lot (site) layout. 
(1)	Generally, a building shall not be set below the crown of the road on which it fronts, unless it is positioned far enough back from the road to ensure positive drainage away from the building. 
(2)	Each site shall be graded to drain away from structures or units into swales. Swales shall discharge to a storm sewer, roadway gutter, ditch, stormwater management facility, or other approved drainage course. 
(f)	Soil erosion control. Soil erosion and sedimentation control as a program shall: 
(1)	Provide proper maintenance of permanent soil erosion and sedimentation practices and adequate restoration of adverse impacts from sediments and erosion. 
(2)	Protect water resources such as lakes, streams, rivers, wetlands and watercourses from degradation due to sedimentation and erosion. 
(3)	Protect adjacent property from degradation due to sedimentation and erosion.
(4)	Protect meadows, woodlands, and other natural features from sedimentation and damage caused by erosion. 
(g)	Plan submittal. Plans conforming to the soil erosion control requirements contained herein shall be submitted to the township for review. The township is not considered a local enforcement agency and does not issue permits for soil erosion control. Permit applications for soil erosion control must be submitted to and approved by the county drain commissioner. The township, however, will review soil erosion control plans for conformance to the standards herein and reserves the right to require control measures above and beyond those required by the county drain commissioner. Furthermore, while the county drain commissioner acts as the enforcement agent in the township, as a condition of plan approval by the township, the township retains the right to stop work for failure to comply with the approved soil erosion control plan or failure to maintain such measures. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 5-3, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-128. - Plan requirements. 
    Clearing, grading, surface drainage, wetlands protection, and soil erosion plans shall show at least, but are not limited to, the following information: 
(1)	Existing and proposed topography and ground elevation contours, with a two-foot contour interval as indicated in article III of this chapter, tied together to clearly show proposed cuts and fills. 
(2)	The limits of clearing shall be shown on the same plan sheet as the grading. Construction fencing shall be placed to delineate the limits of the clearing where appropriate to preserve natural features. Individual trees to be protected shall have protective fencing installed at the drip edge of the tree or otherwise protected. 
(3)	All proposed and existing storm drainage facilities, such as swales, ditches, stormwater management facilities, storm sewers, manholes, catchbasins, and inlets including rim and end section finish grades, as well as inverts. 
(4)	Stationing of centerline of street pavements, and pavement elevations at 50-foot intervals. High and low points are also to be shown. 
(5)	Top of curb or shoulder elevation opposite each front lot (unit) corner (and side lot corner for corner lots) to tenths of a foot. 
(6)	Proposed ground elevation at each lot corner (front and rear), and side lot elevations to tenths of a foot, where individual lots are being developed concurrently with site improvements for which plan approval is being sought. 
(7)	Swale elevations must be provided at the high point adjacent to any buildings, and at points adjacent to building corners. 
(8)	Drainage flow arrows shall be shown to indicate the direction of surface water flows.
(9)	Proposed elevations shall be provided for pavement, sidewalks, top of curbs, parking islands, and additional locations as required by the township engineer. 
(10)	Any proposed grade separation that necessitates the provision of a retaining wall, or the like must be clearly indicated on the grading plan. Retaining wall design and supporting calculations, with the exception of natural (i.e., boulder) wall construction, must be submitted to the township at the time of construction plan submittal. The retaining wall design and supporting calculations must bear the seal of a licensed professional engineer, registered to practice in the state. Walls must be no higher than three feet or terraced with a minimum two-foot horizontal separation. 
(11)	Finished building grades shall be compatible with the grades of surrounding existing structures, yards, and with the existing ground at the proposed structure. The building elevation should fit into the natural topography of the individual property (lot) to the extent practical given any site constraints such as drainage or access. 
(12)	Drainage district delineation and area.
(13)	Cross sections for all proposed open conveyance facilities, including width from top of bank to top of bank, side slope grades, easement width, restoration, slope protection measures, etc. 
(14)	Design calculations for all storm sewers based on Manning's equations with all assumptions or values used for the variables shown. Calculations are to include design velocity and capacity. Any temporary or permanent facility designed for the conveyance of water around, through, or from the earth change area shall be designed to limit the water flow to a nonerosive velocity. 
(15)	All wetlands, lakes, ponds and watercourses must be shown on the plans.
(16)	Wetland delineation must be performed by a certified wetland scientist and tied into the site plans by survey. The party responsible for determining the wetland limits must be included on the plans. 
(17)	Any proposed or township regulated buffer strip is to be shown and labeled.
(18)	All mitigation areas with landscaping plans and compensatory volume calculations must be shown on the plans. 
(19)	All proposed activities within the buffer and wetland limits must be described and shown on the plans. 
(20)	Restoration provisions for all township approved disturbed areas within the buffer or wetland limits must be shown on the plans. 
(21)	All proposed soil erosion and sedimentation control measures must be shown on the plans. 
(22)	Information as to how excavated material will be handled and stored to prevent erosion.
(23)	Proposed location of material storage and stockpiles properly protected.
(24)	Detail sheet showing all proposed soil erosion and sedimentation control measures.
(25)	Sequence of construction, operations, and restoration.
(26)	Schedule for installation, maintenance, and removal of all proposed soil erosion and sedimentation control measures. 
(27)	Limits of dewatering, if necessary, and proposed discharge location and control methods.
(28)	Permanent stabilization provisions.
(29)	The following notes must also be included on the plans:
a.	All erosion and sediment control work shall conform to the current standards and specifications of the county drain commissioner and the township. 
b.	Daily inspections shall be made by the contractor for effectiveness of erosion and sedimentation control measures, and any necessary repairs shall be performed without delay. 
c.	Erosion and any sedimentation work on the site shall be contained on the site and not allowed to collect on any offsite areas or in waterways, including both natural and manmade open ditches, streams, storm drains, lakes and ponds. 
d.	The contractor shall apply temporary erosion and sedimentation control measures when required and as directed on these plans or by the township. He shall remove temporary measures as soon as permanent stabilization of slopes, ditches, and other earth changes has been accomplished. 
e.	Staging the work will be done by the contractor as directed in these plans and as required to ensure progressive stabilization of disturbed areas. 
f.	Soil erosion control practices will be established in the early stages of construction by the contractor. Sediment control practices will be applied as a perimeter defense against any transporting of silt off the site. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 5-4, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-129. - Approvals. 
    The applicant is responsible for obtaining all required permits and approvals prior to the start of any site grading and clearing. These include, but may not be limited to, the following: 
(1)	Approval from the township;
(2)	Off-site drainage and/or grading easements;
(3)	County drain commissioner soil erosion and sedimentation control permit;
(4)	MDEQ-National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES); wetland; or discharge; and 
(5)	RCOC and MDOT permits. A permit will be required from MDEQ to fill, dredge, drain, construct within, discharge to or otherwise disturb a regulated wetland as defined by Part 303 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.30301 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 119, § 5-5, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-130. - Construction requirements. 
    Construction requirements are as follows: 
(1)	At all times grading shall be conducted in a timely and orderly fashion, acceptable to the township. All clearing, grading, surface drainage, wetlands protection, and soil erosion control measures shall be constructed per the approved plans or per the manufacturer's recommendations and shall not alter or in any way effect offsite and adjacent natural drainage. Natural drainage flow passing through any construction site shall be accommodated at all times. 
(2)	Any construction fencing to be a minimum four feet high, orange or red in color, and with steel posts spaced every ten feet. 
(3)	All disturbed areas should be stabilized or finished and vegetation established as soon as possible after grading operations. 
(4)	The project engineer is to properly stake the centerline and top of bank of all drainage improvements. 
(5)	Prior to final approval by the township, any accumulated sediment must be removed and the channel restored. 
(6)	All wetland impacts are to be constructed in accordance with the approved plans or MDEQ permit, whichever is more restrictive. 
(7)	Any wetland encroachments shall be immediately restored in accordance with the plan provisions and/or MDEQ permit. 
(8)	All wetland mitigation areas must be fully restored prior to final project approval from the township. 
(9)	All soil erosion and sedimentation control measures must be installed prior to the start of any work on site including mobilization of earth moving equipment onto the site. It is the responsibility of the contractor to maintain the soil erosion and sedimentation control measures throughout the duration of the project, supplement ineffective measures, and remove all such measures at the time of established restoration and project completion. 
(10)	Pumping or draining from trench excavation shall not be permitted into the waters of the state. It shall be the contractor's responsibility to secure the necessary approval of private landowners and the township before discharging water from the trench excavation onto the private lands. Water shall be discharged in such a manner as to not cause any pollution or erosion problems. Under no circumstances may the contractor discharge sanitary sewage onto the ground surface. The contractor shall dewater to existing storm system sewers wherever possible. The method of disposal shall be approved by the township. All discharge from dewatering wells discharged onto the ground before being piped to a natural watercourse or lake via an existing storm sewer system or by a temporary piping system shall have built at the point of entry an approved silt retention structure. The silt structure may consist of several straw bales adequately anchored and placed as directed by the engineer. Any eventual silt or solids retained in the area of these structures shall be removed prior to the removal of the structure. At no time will silt or similar materials be permitted to filter into a lake or natural watercourse. There shall be no sidecasting of any excavated material into any waterway. Excess excavated material from stream crossings and excavation near streams shall be removed and disposed of elsewhere. The contractor shall be responsible for all repairs necessary due to damage caused by dewatering activities. 
(11)	Surface restoration. Where construction calls for, or the drawings involve placing underground utilities in the roadways or under other impervious materials, special care shall be provided by the contractor to: 
a.	Provide control measures at all storm sewer catchbasins by providing straw or other types of filters or construct sediment traps adjacent to inlets. 
b.	If a roadway has a grass ditch area, minimize disturbance and provide filter berms (straw or gravel) or sediment traps as appropriate. 
c.	Provide proper downdrain structures to control increased runoff to streams and drains.
d.	Stabilize the roadway as soon as possible after placement of the underground utilities. Temporary erosion control measures shall be instituted until final paving is complete. Such measures may include a subbase surfacing application or gravel surfacing. Compaction of soil may suffice if other control measures are affected. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 5-6, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-131. - Inspection. 
(a)	Inspections by the township or its appointed agent (as well as the county drain commissioner) will be made periodically throughout the construction on the maintenance and effectiveness of the soil erosion and sedimentation control measures. Follow-up inspections may be warranted should failures be noted or additional measures may be needed. 
(b)	The costs of these township inspections will be charged against the inspection/observation escrow account. If inspection reveals that the controls are not being implemented or maintained, a stop work order on all site construction may be issued until the concern is addressed. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 5-7, 3-17-2008)
Secs. 14-132-14-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 14-161. - Intent. 
    This section sets forth specific design and construction standards for the review of proposed stormwater management facilities. The purpose of this article is to minimize water quality degradation, flooding, and drainage problems resulting from stormwater runoff and conveyance; identify requirements for stormwater management systems, existing or proposed; provide for long-term maintenance of stormwater systems; and to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the township's residents. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 6-1, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-162. - General standards for stormwater management. 
    All new developments require a stormwater management plan and shall be designed, constructed, and maintained to prevent flooding and protect water quality. The particular facilities and measures required on-site shall take into consideration the natural features, wetlands, and watercourses on the site; the potential for on-site and off-site adverse stormwater impacts, water pollution, and erosion; and the size of the site. The following general standards shall be applied: 
(1)	Site design considerations. A well devised stormwater management plan starts with the development's planning and layout. As such the following considerations shall be made: 
a.	Developments shall be planned and designed to minimize impervious surfaces.
b.	Open space and natural feature preservation shall be paramount.
c.	Infiltration versus off-site conveyance means are preferred.
d.	Open drainage systems such as vegetative swales are preferred to enclosed storm sewers.
e.	Structural BMPs are encouraged where feasible and easily maintained.
f.	Facilities are to be provided for separated sanitary sewage collection and conveyance to a waste water treatment plant. 
(2)	General standards for stormwater management systems. 
a.	Stormwater management conveyance, storage and infiltration measures, and facilities shall be designed to prevent flood hazards and water pollution related to stormwater runoff, to prevent accelerated soil erosion from the proposed development, and shall conform with the requirements as specified herein. 
b.	Natural topography and site drainage shall be preserved and site grading shall be minimized to the maximum extent that can be reasonably achieved. 
c.	Proposed drainage for the development shall conform to any established county drainage districts, the natural drainage course, and the subwatershed in which it is located. 
d.	Stormwater management systems shall meet the goals and objectives of all watershed plans, subwatershed plans, the township's stormwater pollution prevention initiative, and the township's general stormwater permit if applicable. 
e.	Unless otherwise approved, stormwater runoff shall be conveyed through ditches, swales and vegetated buffer strips so as to decrease runoff, allow for natural infiltration, allow suspended sediment particles to settle, and to remove pollutants. Enclosed drainage systems shall be permitted only where it is not feasible to build ditches, swales and vegetated buffers. 
f.	Storage volumes and runoff rates from detention/retention basins shall conform to the requirements specified in this chapter. 
g.	Watercourses shall not be deepened, widened, dredged, cleared of vegetation, straightened, stabilized, or otherwise altered without applicable permits or approvals from the township, relevant county agencies, and the state department of environmental quality. 
h.	Drainage systems shall be designed to protect the public health and safety and to facilitate efficient and effective maintenance. 
i.	The stormwater management plan shall demonstrate a zero percent increase or reduction over the discharge of runoff permitted by applicable law and ordinances in relation to the pre-development and post-development stormwater runoff. 
j.	Upstream and downstream riparian owner's rights and privileges shall not be impacted.
k.	At no time shall stormwater management facilities including swales, ditches, storm sewers, downspouts, sump pumps, detention basin outlets or any other similar stormwater system be connected to the separated sanitary sewer. The township may require the disconnection of any such facility found to be connected to the separated sanitary sewer. Costs to do so shall be the responsibility of the property owner found to be noncompliant. 
(3)	Protecting existing stormwater management systems. 
a.	Natural drainage courses such as ditches, swales, streams, creeks, lakes, etc., shall be protected from: 
1.	Increased discharge of pollutants or sedimentation.
2.	Adverse impacts from increased water quantity.
3.	Encroachments that could be otherwise avoided.
4.	Improvements, such as enclosures, for purely aesthetic reasons.
b.	Existing stormwater management systems shall not be obstructed, blocked or their route otherwise altered without the submittal of a stormwater management plan in accordance with this article and the approval granted by the township. 
c.	Depositing soil, leaf, lawn, plant or other yard waste materials within an existing drainage facility shall be strictly prohibited. 
d.	All stormwater management plans shall first take into account existing drainage and stormwater facilities and preserve and protect these features. 
(4)	Improving existing stormwater management systems 
a.	It is identified that most existing stormwater management facilities are located on private property, except in the case of existing county drainage districts or within the county's public road rights-of-way. Therefore, the responsibility for routine maintenance (i.e., mowing, removing obstructions and debris, etc.) or for improving the facilities lies with the adjacent property owner. 
b.	Under the provisions herein, property owners adjacent to the stormwater facility may individually or in concert with other such property owners petition the township to establish a special assessment district (SAD) to evaluate, design, construct, administer, and finance an improvement to a stormwater management facility. The SAD will be facilitated in accordance with the provisions herein and the township requirements. The benefiting property owners will be assessed their portion of the project costs based on benefit. Typically, drainage area, percent impervious, capacity, or other means as determined by the township are used to determine benefit. 
c.	Improvements to existing stormwater management systems can also be petitioned through the county drain commissioner's office in accordance with Public Act No. 40 of 1956, the Drain Code of 1956 (MCL 280.1 et seq.). 
d.	Design and construction provisions for improving existing stormwater management systems shall be as indicated herein. 
(5)	Ditches and driveway culverts. 
a.	It is recognized that existing roadside ditches and driveway culverts are an integral part of the overall stormwater management system and are important to local drainage patterns. Typically, maintenance of roadside ditches and driveway culverts are the responsibility of the adjacent property owner. As such the property owner is responsible for maintaining the drainage pattern through these facilities, removing obstructions, mowing in the case of a grassed ditch, and replacing or repairing these facilities if deteriorated or damaged. 
b.	Should a property owner wish to install, modify, replace a driveway culvert, a plan meeting the requirements of this article shall be prepared, the culvert must be designed to handle flow from upstream, proper materials must be used, and an RCOC permit will be required if the work is within the public road right-of-way. 
c.	All design, construction and maintenance costs for driveway culverts and ditch enclosures will be the responsibility of the property owner proposing to install the driveway culvert or ditch enclosure. The township may request a surety bond or escrow deposit be placed with the township to guarantee the completion of the project. 
d.	If a township initiated roadway or drainage project requires the cleaning or repairing of a driveway culvert or ditch enclosure the township shall cause said cleaning, repair or enclosure to be done at the project's cost. All other cleaning or repairing to maintain flow shall be done by the property owner or at the township's request in accordance with the provisions herein. Failure to comply with the township's request may result in the township's addressing the situation and billing the adjacent property owner. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 6-2, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-163. - Stormwater management plan requirements. 
(a)	Plan presentation. 
(1)	Through plans, illustrations, reports, and calculations, the stormwater management plan shall display the required information specified in the article III of this chapter, pertaining to general provisions and plan requirements or as otherwise specified herein. 
(2)	The stormwater management plan must be sufficiently detailed to specify the type, location, and size of stormwater management facilities. 
(3)	If it is proposed to develop a project in two or more phases, the stormwater management plan shall be prepared and submitted for the total project unless a waiver has been approved. Moreover, it shall be demonstrated that a sufficient stand alone plan shall exist upon the completion of each phase, i.e., assuming that future phases will never be developed. 
(b)	Required information. The following information is required for all stormwater management plans: 
(1)	All information as required within article III of this chapter, pertaining to general provisions and plan requirements. 
(2)	Existing conditions for all existing or proposed site features including stormwater management facilities consistent with the requirements of these procedures and standards. 
(3)	Soil borings may be required at various locations including the sites of proposed retention/detention/infiltration facilities, and as needed in areas where high groundwater tables exist. 
(4)	All calculations used in designing all components of stormwater management systems must be submitted along with plans and shall include a drainage district map if the drainage area extends past the boundaries of the subject project. Calculations for any off-site drainage that passes through the site must be included. 
(5)	Easement information must be shown, consistent with the requirements of these procedures and standards. 
(6)	A description of the mechanism to be established to provide for long-term maintenance of the development's stormwater management system, and the government agency responsible for maintenance oversight if maintenance is to be performed by a private entity. A drainage district may be required to be established for future maintenance. 
(7)	Development layout of lots, roads and utility and drainage easements.
(8)	Plans, profiles and details of all roads and storm sewers. The storm sewer details will include type and class of pipe, length of run, percent of slope, invert elevations, rim elevations, and profile of the hydraulic gradient, as specified herein. 
(9)	A storm sewer computation sheet indicating the number of acres, calculated to the nearest tenth of an acre, contributing to each specific inlet/outlet, the calculated hydraulic gradient elevation, maximum flow in cubic feet per second and the flow velocities in feet per second for enclosed systems. 
(10)	Plans, profiles and details of all open ditch drains, drainage swales and drainage structures. 
(11)	Plans and details of detention/retention facilities.
(12)	Required volume, freeboard calculations, based on the detention or retention criteria.
(13)	A drainage area map, overlaid onto a copy of the site grading plan, which clearly shows the areas tributary to each inlet and/or storage basin. 
(14)	The number of acres proposed to be developed and, for phased developments, the number of acres in each phase. 
(15)	Design data and criteria used for sizing all drainage structures, channels, and stormwater basins including weighted runoff coefficient calculations. 
(16)	A stormwater facility maintenance plan.
(17)	In addition to the foregoing, a single sheet including the entire site plan along with all proposed storm drainage facilities and drainage easements shall be submitted. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 6-3, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-164. - Final development approval. 
(a)	Complete construction plans showing all pertinent information for the design, layout, and construction shall be submitted to the township for review and final approval. 
(b)	Final plan review will be completed by the township within a reasonable time following submission by the applicant. If the plan is not acceptable, written notice of rejection and the reasons therefor will be given to the applicant. If the township approves the plan, it will issue a letter to that effect and the plan will be executed. 
(c)	As a condition of final plan approval, the township will require the following:
(1)	Before approval of the final plan, it must be demonstrated that all necessary wetland, floodplain, inland lakes and streams, erosion control or other needed state, federal or local permits are in place. 
(2)	If the stormwater management system is constructed before the applicant seeks final project approval, written verification of the stormwater system will be submitted by a registered professional engineer. This verification will state that the stormwater facilities were installed in an acceptable manner and according to construction plans approved by the township. Inspection fees will be deposited in advance with the township. 
(3)	A satisfactory recorded agreement that assures long-term maintenance of all drainage improvements will be in place per section 14-170. Documentation of the maintenance agreement will be supplied to the township. 
(4)	Complete development agreements (including deed restrictions) must be submitted for the township's review and approval prior to recording. Review of the documents shall be invoiced by the township against the escrow account. 
(5)	For site condominiums, complete master deed documents (including "Exhibits" drawings) must be submitted for the township and township attorney's review and approval prior to recording. Review of the documents shall be invoiced by the township against the escrow account. 
(6)	The applicant will make arrangements acceptable to the township for inspection during construction and for final verification of the construction by a registered professional engineer or surveyor prior to the approval of the final construction plans. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 6-4, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-165. - Existing drainage facilities. 
(a)	Drains under the jurisdiction of the drain commissioner.
(1)	Drainage districts will not be altered when designing development drainage, except as provided under section 433 of Public Act No. 40 of 1956 (MCL 280.433). 
(2)	Existing county drain easements, as recorded at the county register of deeds or in the county drainage commissioner records, will be indicated on the plans as well as the final plan and will be designated as "Oakland County Drain," as applicable. 
(3)	A permit is required to be obtained from the drain commissioner's office prior to tapping or crossing any county drain, and must be obtained prior to final plan approval. 
(4)	Proposed relocations of county drains will be processed through the office of the drain commissioner. 
(5)	If a development is proposed in an area where drainage conditions are not reasonably adequately controlled onsite, on surrounding properties or downstream by the minimum standards provided herein, additional reasonable installations necessary to control said drainage problems may be required to achieve the objectives set forth in this article. 
(b)	Orphan drains are defined as drainage courses that are not under the jurisdiction of any governmental agency (i.e., county, state, township, etc.). Typically, these are located in rear yards and are small streams. The maintenance of these drains is the responsibility of the adjacent property owner. However, the provisions herein regulate improvements to these drains. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 6-5, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-166. - Discharge and outlet constraints. 
(a)	In no event shall the maximum design rate of discharge exceed 0.2 cubic feet per second per acre or the rate of existing discharge at the outlet point, whichever is lower. 
(b)	The discharge volume and flow shall be similar to conditions prior to development, i.e., weighted acreage based on runoff coefficients are equal between existing and developed conditions. Additional volume controls and acquisition of rights-of-way from downstream property owners receiving the stormwater flow will be required where a volume increase could cause downstream problems. 
(c)	It is the applicant's obligation to meet these standards. Should a stormwater system, as constructed, fail to comply with the standards herein, it is the applicant's responsibility to design and construct, or to have constructed at their expense, any necessary additional and/or alternative stormwater management facilities. Such additional facilities will be subject to the township's review and approval. 
(d)	The applicant shall be solely responsible to determine the feasibility of the discharge point and downstream conditions from the outlet. The proposed outlet to the stormwater management facility shall, in every way feasible, respect and conform to the natural drainage patterns within the site and the watershed in which it is located. 
(e)	A description of the off-site outlet, evidence of its adequacy and a detailed description of the effects of said outlet on downstream properties must be included in the plans. 
(f)	The volume and manner of water discharged due to development of the site shall not create adverse impacts to downstream property owners and watercourses (e.g., flooding, excessive soil saturation, crop damage, erosion, degradation in water quality, or habitat destruction). Offsite drainage easements may be required as determined by the township, to be warranted based on the location and condition of the drainage outlet and subject to all applicable local ordinances and state law in this regard. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 6-6, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-167. - Design considerations. 
(a)	Determination of surface runoff. 
(1)	The rational method of calculating stormwater runoff is generally acceptable. For drainage areas over 100 acres, due caution should be exercised. Other methodologies for predicting runoff, such as runoff hydrographs, may be required by the township for sizing the stormwater management systems on sites that are deemed potentially problematic. Acceptable alternative methods include The Army Corps of engineers HEC programs and the Soil Conservation Service (SCS) Technical Releases and Programs. 
(2)	All design rainfall events will be based on the Soil Conservation Service (SCS) Type II distribution. 
(3)	Computations of runoff hydrographs that do not rely on a continuous accounting of antecedent moisture conditions will assume a conservative wet antecedent moisture condition. 
(4)	For watersheds equal to or greater than two square miles, where approval of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality is required, MDEQ will compute the runoff rates at no cost. MDEQ requires applicants to use the UD-21 method by SCS in lieu of the rational method. This method was developed for small watersheds by SCS and can be used for watersheds up to ten square miles. The current version of UD-21 contains updated rainfall curves. Computer programs such as HEC-1 and HEC-RAS, DEQ permit applications, etc., can be downloaded from the MDEQ's web site located at http://www.michigan.gov/deq. 
(b)	Stormwater retention or detention. Stormwater retention or detention required pursuant to these standards shall comply with the requirements specified herein. 
(1)	In general, wet ponds and stormwater marsh systems will be preferred to dry ponds. Dry ponds providing extended storage will be accepted when the development site's physical characteristics or other local circumstances make the use of a wet pond infeasible. 
(2)	Retention basins without an outlet will be designed for two 100-year frequency storm events. Emergency overland flow route shall be shown. Soil borings in the location of the proposed retention basin may be required. Infiltration rates shall be determined for the retention basin. 
(3)	At a minimum, the volume of storage provided for flood control will be equal to or in excess of that required by the county drain commissioner's "A Simple Method of Detention Basin Design" for a ten-year frequency storm event. If this methodology results in the maximum design rate of discharge exceeding that stated in section 14-166(a), additional storage will be required. If the discharge does not outlet to a clearly defined downstream channel, the release of water shall not exceed the pre-development volume and/or rate and shall not be concentrated. Easement acquisition from downstream property owners is required for any change in the concentration of flow or increase in volume. "C" factor assignments shall be as indicated in article VII of this chapter. 
(4)	The county drain commissioner adopted new standards in January 2006 calling for the volume of storage to be equal to or in excess of that required by the county drain commissioner's "A Simple Method of Detention Basin Design" for a 100-year frequency storm event. Any platted sites, sites that will ultimately discharge into a county drain, or sites that will otherwise be reviewed by the county will be required to meet this requirement. 
(5)	The detention volume for a gravity outlet is defined as the volume of detention provided above the invert of the lowest outflow pipe. 
(6)	The detention volume must be provided for all onsite acreage unless otherwise determined by the township. Offsite acreage originally draining across the proposed development must either be intercepted and routed through the project's storm drainage system or otherwise be handled in a manner satisfactory to the township. 
(7)	To the extent feasible, the distance between inlets and outlets should be maximized. The length and depth of the flow path across basins and marsh systems can be maximized by: 
a.	Increasing the length to width ratio of the entire design.
b.	Increasing the dry weather flow path within the system to attain maximum flow-thru time. 
c.	Offsetting inlets and outlets at opposite longitudinal ends of the basin.
(8)	Public safety will be a paramount consideration in stormwater system and pond design. Pond designs will incorporate gradual side slopes, vegetative and barrier plantings, and safety shelves. Where further safety measures are required, the applicant is expected to include them within the proposed development plans. For safety purposes and to minimize erosion, basin side slopes will generally not be flatter than 20:1 nor steeper than 5:1. Steeper slopes may be allowed if fencing at least five feet in height is provided and approved by the township board. The fencing must meet all other applicable township ordinances or codes. 
(9)	All detention ponds must be capable of dewatering by gravity. Wet ponds shall be capable of being dewatered by a control structure. Stormwater management systems incorporating pumps are not permitted, absent a township waiver, which shall require a showing that there is no feasible and prudent alternative, and that it is in the public interest. 
(10)	A sediment forebay will be provided at the inlet of all stormwater management facilities, to provide energy dissipation and to trap and localize incoming sediments. 
a.	The forebay will be a separate cell, which can be formed by rip rap, gabions, or an earthen berm. 
b.	Capacity of the forebay should be sized to take 15 to 20 percent of the ten-year frequency storm runoff volume for residential developments, and will be included in calculating overall basin stormwater storage capacity. 
c.	Capacity of the forebay should be sized to take the first flush volume, which is to be detained for a minimum of 24 hours and is defined as the first half inch of runoff from the site for commercial and industrial developments. The forebay volume will be included in calculating overall basin stormwater storage capacity. 
d.	Direct maintenance access to the forebay for heavy equipment shall be provided.
e.	An adequate disposal area shall be provided for accumulated sediment.
(11)	Basin inlet/outlet design.
a.	Velocity dissipation measures will be incorporated into basin designs to minimize erosion at inlets and outlets, and to minimize the resuspension of pollutants. 
b.	To the extent feasible, the distance between inlets and outlets will be maximized.
c.	The use of V-notched weirs, dual outlets, or other designs to ensure an appropriate detention time for all storm events is required. 
d.	The outlet will be well protected from clogging.
e.	Where a pipe outlet or orifice plate is to be used to control discharge, it will have a minimum diameter of four inches. If this minimum orifice size permits release rates greater than those specified in these procedures and standards, alternative outlet designs will be utilized that incorporate self-cleaning flow restrictors, such as perforated risers and "V" notch orifice plates that provide the required release rate. Calculations verifying this rate are to be submitted to the township for approval. 
f.	Backwater on the outlet structure from the downstream drainage system will be evaluated when designing the outlet. 
g.	Culverts and storm sewer outlets 18 inches and greater in diameter shall have a bar grate or screen installed on a flared end section to prevent animals, children, etc., from entering the system. 
(12)	Vegetative plantings associated with retention/detention facilities.
a.	Stormwater management facility designs will be accompanied by a landscaping plan that uses native plant species. 
b.	Vegetative cover and landscaping should be done immediately upon completion of the grading operations specifically on the side slopes, inlet and outlet. 
c.	A permanent buffer strip of natural vegetation at least 25 feet in width will be maintained or restored around the perimeter of all detention/retention basins. No lawn care chemical applications shall be applied to the buffer area. 
d.	Viability of plantings will be monitored for two years after establishment by the applicant, and reinforcement and replacement plantings shall be provided as needed. 
(13)	Anti-seep collars should be installed on any piping passing through the sides or bottom of the basin to prevent leakage through the embankment. 
(14)	A minimum of one foot of freeboard will be required above the proposed high water elevation on all detention/retention facilities. 
(15)	All basins will have provisions for a defined emergency spillway, routed such that it can be picked up by the main outflow channel. 
(16)	Adequate maintenance access from public or private rights-of-way to the basin will be reserved. The access will be on a slope of 5:1 or less, stabilized to withstand the passage of heavy equipment, and will provide direct access to both the forebay and the riser/outlet. 
(17)	For sites where chemicals may be stored and used (e.g., certain commercial and industrial developments) a spill response plan will be developed that clearly defines the emergency steps to be taken in the event of an accidental release of harmful substances that may migrate to the stormwater system. As a result of this plan, design elements such as shut-off valves or gates may be needed. 
(18)	The placement of retention/detention basins within a floodplain is discouraged. Where retention/detention basins are proposed within a floodplain, information will be provided to verify that the facility will operate as designed during flood events. 
(19)	The use of underground retention/detention facilities will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. 
(c)	Stormwater conveyance. All stormwater conveyance structures will be constructed in accordance with the appropriate governing specifications (state department of transportation, county road commission, county drain commissioner or township). In the event of no other governing specifications, the latest edition of the county drain commissioner standards will be observed. Stormwater conveyance systems incorporating pumps are typically not permitted without township board approval. It shall be required to show that there is no feasible and prudent alternative, and that it is in the public interest. 
(1)	Natural streams and channels. 
a.	Natural streams are to be preserved. Natural swales and channels should be preserved, whenever possible. 
b.	If channel modification must occur, the physical characteristics of the modified channel will meet the existing channel in length, cross-section, slope, and carrying capacity. 
c.	Streams and channels will be expected to withstand all events up to the 100-year storm without increased erosion. Armoring banks with riprap and other manufactured materials will be accepted only where erosion cannot be prevented in any other way, such as by the use of vegetation. 
(2)	Vegetated swales/open ditches. 
a.	Open swale/ditch drainage systems will be preferred to enclosed storm sewers where site conditions permit, provided, that appropriate safety measures shall be observed. 
b.	Swales should follow natural, pre-development drainage paths where possible, and be well vegetated, wide and shallow. 
c.	Open ditch flow velocities will be neither siltative nor erosive. In general, the minimum acceptable velocity will be 2.0 feet per second, and the maximum acceptable velocity will be 6.0 feet per second. 
d.	Open ditch running slopes will depend on existing soils and vegetation and, whenever possible, will be greater than 1.5 percent. For slopes less than 1.5 percent, additional inspection will be necessary to ensure proper, positive drainage. In no case shall slopes be less than 1.0 percent, unless other techniques such as infiltration devices are implemented. Maintenance for such devices must be detailed in the overall maintenance plan. 
e.	Side slopes of ditches should be no steeper than 3:1. Soil conditions, vegetative cover and maintenance ability will be the governing factors for determining slope requirements. 
f.	Slopes and bottoms of open ditches and swales will be stabilized to prevent erosion.
g.	In general, a minimum of five-foot vertical clearance will be provided between open swale/ditch inverts and underground utilities unless special provisions are employed. Special provisions, for example, could be the encasement of utility lines in concrete when crossing under the channel. In no case will less than two feet of clearance be allowed. 
h.	Permanent metal or plastic markers will be placed on each side of the drain to show the location of underground utilities. 
i.	All bridges will be designed to provide a two-foot minimum flood stage freeboard to the lowest portion of the bridge. Footings will be at least one foot below the invert grade of the channel. Depending on soils, additional footing depth may be required. 
j.	A series of check dams or drop structures across swales should be provided to enhance water quality performance and reduce velocities. 
k.	Additional redundant pollutant removal enhancement features such as stilling basins and stone infiltration trenches shall be integrated into the stormwater management plan. 
(3)	Determination of channel size. 
a.	The Mannings formula will be used to size the open channel or pipe unless otherwise approved by the township. 
b.	A minimum "n" of 0.035 will be used for the roughness coefficient unless special treatment is given to the bottom and side slopes, such as sodding, riprap or native vegetation. 
(4)	Determination of road culvert size. 
a.	Under state law, part 301 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.30101 et seq.) and part 31 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.3101 et seq.), crossroad culverts draining two square miles or more must be reviewed and approved by the state department of environmental quality. 
b.	Crossroad culverts draining less than two square miles of upstream watershed will be sized by the applicants engineer and approved by the state department of transportation, county road commission, county drain commissioner's office or the township as appropriate. 
c.	In general, culverts will pass the 100-year storm flow with the velocity not exceeding eight feet per second, and with no increase in adverse water conditions occurring from the development property or flooding of structures within the development. A minimum of one foot of freeboard is required. 
d.	Acceptable methods of determining the quantity of water needed to pass through the culvert are listed below. The applicants engineer may use any of the methods listed or another if approved by the township: 
1.	Rational method.
2.	U.S.D.A. Soil Conservation Service Method.
3.	The Michigan Department of Environmental Quality Method.
4.	Continuous flow modeling.
e.	The discharge velocity from culverts should consider the effect of high velocities, eddies, or other turbulence on the natural channel, downstream property and roadway embankment. The culvert exit velocity should not cause downstream channel erosion or scour. 
f.	Sizing of culvert crossings will consider entrance and exit losses as well as tailwater conditions on the culvert. Once the design flow is determined, the required size of the culvert will be determined by one of the following methods: 
1.	The "Mannings" formula.
2.	The inlet headwater control/outlet tailwater control nomograph.
3.	Other methods approved by the township.
g.	Wing walls, headwalls and all other culvert extremities will be designed to assure the stability of the surrounding soil. It is recommended that state department of transportation standard designs be observed unless special exemption is given. 
(d)	Off-site stormwater management requirements. 
(1)	In lieu of on-site stormwater detention or retention, the use of off-site stormwater conveyance, infiltration, and/or detention areas may be proposed. Off-site stormwater management facilities shall be designed to comply with the requirements specified in this article and all other standards provided by these standards that are applicable to onsite facilities. 
(2)	Offsite stormwater management areas may be shared with other landowners, provided that the terms of the proposal are approved by the township board and township attorney. 
(3)	Adequate provision and agreements providing for maintenance and inspection of stormwater management facilities shall be made by recorded instrument, including an access easement, approved by the township and the township attorney. 
(4)	Accelerated soil erosion shall be managed off-site as well as on-site.
(Ord. No. 119, § 6-7, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-168. - Sequence of construction. 
    Detention/retention basins shall be constructed as part of the initial site grading activities and prior to underground utility construction for all projects in the township. Immediately following construction of a basin, suitable ground cover shall be established, weather conditions and species planting requirements prevailing. Should weather conditions not permit the installation of permanent ground cover, temporary erosion control measures must be immediately implemented. Such ground cover shall be established on the basin bottoms, side slopes, vegetative buffer, etc. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 6-8, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-169. - Stormwater management easements. 
(a)	Necessity of easements. Stormwater management easements shall be provided in a form required by the township and recorded as directed by the township to assure: 
(1)	Access for inspections;
(2)	Access to stormwater management facilities for maintenance purposes; and
(3)	Preservation of primary and secondary drainageways which are needed to serve the stormwater management needs of other properties. 
(b)	Easements for off-site stormwater management. The applicant shall obtain easements ensuring access to all areas used for off-site stormwater management, including wetlands. 
(c)	Recording of easements. All easements shall be recorded with the county register of deeds according to county requirements. 
(d)	Recording prior to building permit issuance. The proprietor must provide the township clerk with evidence of the recording of the easement prior to final subdivision plat approval or final construction approval. 
(e)	Wording relative to easement information shown on the final development plan will be as specifically required by the township. If a county drain is to be established under the state drain code, related easement language will be depicted on final Mylar plans and exhibit B condominium drawings as follows: 
    "____________ private easement to county Drain Commissioner for drainage" - as applicable. 
In addition, language will be included in the deed restrictions for the development and/or condominium master deed. The location and purpose of drainage easements should be clearly described in development deed restrictions or condominium master deeds. 
(f)	The language shall be included within the development deed restriction or condominium master deed that clearly notifies property owners of the presence of stormwater management facilities and accompanying easements, as well as restrictions on the use or modification of these areas. 
(g)	If a utility is to be located within the right-of-way of any county drain or drainage easement, it will be located such that it will not significantly increase the expense of maintaining the drainage facility. 
(h)	Retention/detention basins or other stormwater management facilities will have sufficient easements for maintenance purposes. Easements will be sized and located to accommodate access and operation of equipment, spoils deposition, and other activities identified in the development's stormwater system maintenance plan. 
(i)	Easement widths will be sized by the township and situated in such a way as to allow maximum maintenance access (for example, by offsetting them from the centerline). In general, easement widths will conform to the following: 
(1)	Open channels and watercourses. A minimum of 30 feet total width. Additional width may be required in some cases, including, but not limited to: watercourses with floodplains delineated by FEMA; sandy soils, steep slopes, at access points from road crossings. 
(2)	Back lot drainage (open swales). minimum of 15 feet total width or as required by the township. 
(3)	Enclosed storm drains. A minimum of 20 feet will be required, situated in such a way as to allow maximum maintenance access. Additional width will be required in some cases, including, but not limited to, pipe depth exceeding four feet from the top of pipe, sandy soils and steep slopes. 
(j)	All wells and existing drain fields (septic areas) shall not be located within drainage easements. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 6-9, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-170. - Maintenance agreement. 
(a)	Purpose of maintenance agreement. The purpose of the maintenance agreement is to provide the means and assurance that maintenance of stormwater management and facilities shall be undertaken. 
(b)	Maintenance agreement required. 
(1)	A maintenance agreement shall be submitted to the township for all developments subject to stormwater management plan requirements. 
(2)	The maintenance agreement shall require all contributing properties within the development, or party to the construction of the detention basin, to maintain in perpetuity the detention basin and all stormwater management appurtenances. 
(3)	Maintenance agreements shall be approved by the township prior to final subdivision plat approval in the case of subdivisions, and prior to construction approval in other cases. 
(c)	Maintenance agreement provisions. 
(1)	The maintenance agreement shall include a plan for routine, emergency, and long-term maintenance of all stormwater facilities with a detailed annual estimated budget for the initial three years. 
(2)	The maintenance agreement shall be recorded in the office of the county register of deeds prior to the effectiveness of the approval of the township planning commission and shall be binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the stormwater management facilities. 
(3)	Subdivisions and condominiums. The developer must provide for continued maintenance of all stormwater management facilities. If the maintenance is to be assumed by a homeowners' or condominium association, the covenants of the plat or master deed of the condominium must incorporate a procedure to provide for this continued maintenance. The developer must reference the township's ordinances for procedures on providing the necessary documents for continued maintenance of all stormwater management facilities. 
(4)	Commercial, industrial, multiple, and office sites. The proprietor shall maintain the stormwater facilities in proper working order at all times. The township may require the developer to submit a plan to continue maintenance. 
(5)	All developments. Through provisions in the plat, condominium documents, or by separate easement agreement, the township shall be provided with the right to enter the subject property to repair any failing stormwater systems, correct any deficiencies, and/or finish any items of work deemed incomplete or not constructed, all at the owner's expense. Provisions shall be made in the maintenance agreement for new developments where the township may cause necessary repairs to the stormwater system to be made and to assess the responsible parties, i.e., homeowners or condominium associations, proprietor, etc., for any expenses incurred, plus up to a 25 percent administration fee. The recorded documents shall include consent to the establishment of a special assessment district for enforcement of this provision. 
(6)	All stormwater maintenance plans or provisions shall include specific time frames for such tasks as routine inspection, sediment removal, basin restoration, etc. 
(7)	It is anticipated that any sediment removal operation will disrupt the vegetation around and within the stormwater facility. As the plantings are an integral part in the development's stormwater quality enhancement, specifications for the reestablishment of the vegetation after maintenance must be included in the maintenance plan. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 6-10, 3-17-2008)
Secs. 14-171-14-193. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - STORM SEWERS 

Sec. 14-194. - Intent. 
    This standard establishes the minimum requirements for the design and construction of enclosed storm sewer systems within the township. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 7-1, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-195. - General. 
(a)	All storm sewers outside of public road rights-of-way are to remain private within subdivisions, condominiums, and commercial sites. Any storm sewers located in the public road right-of-way shall be under the jurisdiction of either the road commission for the county or state department of transportation. 
(b)	Hydraulic design calculations and a copy of the drainage area layout used for the hydraulic design shall accompany construction plans submitted for review. The drainage area layout shall, in the case of a design for a new development, be superimposed on the proposed grading plan for the development. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 7-2, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-196. - Design considerations. 
(a)	Location. 
(1)	Easements for storm sewers shall be in accordance with article VI of this chapter. Such easements shall be deeded or dedicated to the subdivision association, condominium association, property owner, or entity responsible for the maintenance of the storm sewer, with restrictions against use or occupation of such easements by the property owners and/or by other utilities in any manner which would restrict sewer maintenance or repair operations. 
(2)	Storm sewers shall preferably be constructed outside of paved parking areas, streets and drives, and not closer than ten feet to any building. 
(3)	The horizontal alignment of sewers which are not proposed to generally follow street, drive, or parking area pavements shall generally parallel property lines or building lines, with clearance distances sufficient to accommodate the full width of the proposed easement. 
(4)	Drainage structures will be located as follows:
a.	To assure complete positive drainage of all areas of the development.
b.	At all low points of the streets and rear yards.
c.	Such that there is no flow across a street intersection.
d.	For smaller enclosed pipes (12-24 inches), manholes will not be spaced more than 350 feet apart. Longer runs may be allowed for larger sized pipe, but in all cases maintenance access must be deemed adequate by the township. 
(b)	Capacity. 
(1)	Tributary area. Storm sewers shall be designed to serve all natural tributary areas with due consideration given to topography, established zoning, and the capacity of the stormwater outlet proposed to be used. Discharge must not be diverted onto abutting properties without necessary easements. The outlet must be in accordance with the existing natural drainage courses in the area. Provisions for stormwater management must be included in the storm drainage system as described in article VI of this chapter. 
(2)	Hydrologic considerations. 
a.	The rational formula shall be utilized to determine flows to accommodate using a ten-year curve for rainfall or I = 175/(t+25) where I = rainfall intensity rate and t = time of concentration. 
b.	Runoff coefficients shall be determined for each individual drainage area and calculations for each drainage area must be submitted as part of the design computations. Coefficient design determinations shall be based upon the following table: 
Rational method runoff coefficientsForested0.15Asphalt, Concrete, Roof Areas0.90Brick0.80Gravel0.65Lawns and Meadows Up to 2% slope0.15-0.18 2% to 7% slope0.18-0.22 Over 7% slope0.25-0.35 
c.	The township may require additional soil borings or other data to verify soil type and applicable coefficients. The final determination of "C" factor used shall be made by the township. 
(c)	Hydraulics. 
(1)	Pipe sizes. 
a.	Minimum pipe sizes for storm sewers accepting surface drainage shall be 12-inch nominal internal diameter. 
b.	Trunk sewers shall be sized as design dictates with allowance for extensions.
c.	Enclosed storm drain systems will be sized to accommodate the ten-year storm, with the hydraulic gradient generally kept below the top of the pipe. 
d.	The catchbasin or inlet covers should be designed to accept the ten-year design storm. No ponding of water should occur during this storm event. 
e.	Restricted conveyance systems designed to create backflow into stormwater storage facilities are not permitted. 
(2)	Allowable pipe slopes. The following table reflects allowable pipes slopes in the township: 
Pipe Diameter
(Inches)Minimum Slope
(Feet Per 100 Feet)Maximum Slopes 
(Feet Per 100 Feet) Pipe SlopeH.G. Slope*120.193.94.88150.142.83.6018 0.112.12.8421 0.0921.72.3224 0.0771.41.9227 0.0661.21.6430 0.0571.051.4436 0.0450.801.1242 0.0360.650.92480.0300.540.76540.0260.460.64600.0230.400.56*H.G. - Hydraulic Gradient also referred to as H.G.L. - Hydraulic Grade Line**Generally, all catchbasin and inlet leads shall be laid on a slope no flatter than one percent. 
(3)	Minimum and maximum velocities. 
a.	Minimum design velocity shall be two feet per second with pipe flowing full.
b.	Maximum design velocity shall not exceed ten feet per second.
c.	All outlets will be designed so that velocities will be appropriate to, and will not damage, receiving waterways. 
(d)	Calculations. 
(1)	Kutter's or Manning's formulas shall be used for hydraulic calculations. Allowances for head losses through manholes shall be provided. 
(2)	The hydraulic gradient shall be maintained by matching the 0.80 diameter depth above invert for pipe size increases. 
(3)	Provide a drop of 0.10 feet in the downstream sewer invert for direction changes in excess of 30 degrees to compensate for the hydraulic head losses. 
(4)	Surcharging under design conditions is permitted provided the surcharged hydraulic grade line (HGL) is maintained lower than one foot below the rim elevations of all upstream structures. The HGL must be shown on the profile view if outside the pipe. 
(e)	Minimum sewer cover. Unless otherwise approved, no sewer shall have less than three feet of cover. 
(f)	Sewer pipe specifications. Sewer pipe (including catchbasin and inlet leads) shall conform to the following specifications: 
(1)	Reinforced concrete sewer pipe. ASTM C-76 class of concrete pipe shall be:
Cover Over Pipe
(feet)Class of Pipe0 to 3V3.1 to 10III10.1 to 18IV18.1 to 32 V 
Storm sewer pipe shall conform to the current ASTM tentative specifications for reinforced concrete culvert, storm drain and sewer pipe, ASTM C-76 for circular pipe, or C-507 for horizontal elliptical pipe, latest revision. If other materials are proposed for use, the proprietor shall furnish the load-carrying design analysis for the pipe for the proposed depth conditions. 
Note- All catchbasin and inlet leads shall be a minimum of ASTM C-76 class IV pipe. 
(2)	Corrugated high density polyethylene (HDPE) may be approved for use in areas outside the public rights-of-way based upon the township's evaluation of the application. Corrugated exterior smooth interior high density polyethylene (HDPE) shall be at minimum AASHTO M294 types and in accordance with current state department of transportation standard specifications. Installation methods including compacted granular bedding materials per AASHTO standards, shall be strictly adhered to. 
(3)	Corrugated steel pipe meeting ASTM standards for driveway culverts shall be used.
(4)	Schedule 40 PVC or SDR 26, four-inch diameter minimum, meeting the requirements of ASTM 2665 shall be used for all sump leads. 
(5)	All pipe shall have class, lot number, and date of manufacture conspicuously marked on each length by the manufacturer. 
(6)	Where approved by the township, perforated pipe may be used outside of the road rights-of-way.
(7)	Certification forms, together with a report of the manufacturer test results, shall be provided to the observer with pipe deliveries upon request. Certification forms shall include project name, location, and contractor. All pipe fittings shall be suitably marked to provide manufacturer's name, lot or production number, ASTM designation, ABS or PVC, nominal diameter, and SDR number, where applicable. Fittings, however, need not contain lot or production number. Pipe shall have a "home" mark. 
(8)	All materials will be of such quality as to guarantee a maintenance-free expectancy of at least 50 years and will meet all appropriate ASTM standards. 
(9)	A sewer pipe shall be of approved type and class designated for the specific locations or intended uses shown or noted on the approved plans. Any deviation from the type or class of pipe shown on the drawings will not be permitted, except upon receipt of written approval of the township engineer. 
(g)	Sewer joints (including catchbasins and inlet leads). 
(1)	Joints shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C443, with the following stipulations and exceptions: 
a.	Gaskets shall be synthetic rubber only. Natural rubber gaskets are not acceptable.
b.	Gaskets shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C361.
(2)	Modified grooved tongue (MGT) pipe shall have a rubber gasket snapped into a groove cast into the tongue. The modified groove or bell end of the pipe shall be made smooth and shall have not over a 31/2-degree slope for sizes ten inches to 24 inches, or a two-degree slope for sizes 27 inches-108 inches, tapered to fit the rubber gasket to tolerances as determined by the gasket manufacturer. MGT joints shall be lubricated and coupled in accordance with the pipe manufacturer's printed instructions. 
(3)	Rubber gasket joints shall be in accordance with the tentative specification for joints for circular concrete sewer and culvert pipe, using flexible, watertight, rubber type gaskets, ASTM designation C443, latest revision. Rubber gasket joints shall be lubricated and coupled in accordance with the pipe manufacturer's printed instructions. 
(4)	Pipe joints will be such as to prevent excessive infiltration or inflow.
(h)	Sumps. 
(1)	All structures, including catchbasins, manholes, etc., excluding roadway inlets, accepting surface drainage shall have three-foot deep sumps. Furthermore, the last two structures upstream from a stormwater management facility or outlet shall also have sumps. 
(2)	Differences in invert elevations at structures exceeding two feet shall be provided with a three-foot deep sump for energy dissipation. 
(3)	At the discretion of the township engineer, a Vortech Chamber, AquaSwirl Concentrator, or approved equal may be required in some structures prior to discharge into environmentally sensitive areas or on sites with a large amount of paved surfaces. 
(i)	Footing drains/sump pump discharge. Generally, sump pump or footing drain discharges shall be surface outletted onto splash blocks. These discharges shall not be directed toward adjacent units. With township approval, footing drains may be discharged by means of sump pumps connected by underground piping to a storm sewer where site conditions dictate the need to intercept sump pump discharges to prevent drainage problems. If sump pump leads are to be connected into the enclosed storm sewer system, these taps should be made directly into storm sewer structures. Exceptions to this rule may be permitted where factors such as lot size, soils and hydrology demonstrate that sump pumps discharging to the ground surface will result in a drainage nuisance for the prospective home owner or the adjacent lot owners. All storm sewer which is only accepting drainage from sump leads and not surface drainage can be eight inch diameter minimum. 
(j)	Manholes, inlets, and catchbasins. 
(1)	Manholes shall be constructed at every change in sewer grade, alignment, pipe size, pipe type, and at the junction of sewer lines. The maximum distance between manholes shall be 350 feet for sewers less than 24 inches in diameter, 400 feet for sewers 24 to 30 inches in diameter, 450 feet for sewers 36 inches to 42 inches in diameter, and 500 feet maximum for 48 inch diameter sewers and larger. Generally, manholes should be placed at street intersections. Manholes shall be provided where catchbasins and inlet leads are to be connected to the sewer. 
(2)	Manholes shall be constructed of concrete block or precast reinforced concrete sections. Precast reinforced concrete manhole sections shall conform to the requirements of ASTM, "Tentative Specifications for Precast Reinforced Concrete Manhole Risers and Tops," ASTM Designation C-478, latest revision. Eccentric cones to be provided on all structures, regardless of material used (precast reinforced concrete, manhole block, or brick), to provide a true vertical face for placement of the manhole steps. Manhole steps shall be steel, encased with polypropylene plastic, equivalent to M.A. Industries, Inc., PSI or PS1-B as appropriate. A maximum of five courses (or 15 inches) of brick shall be placed on the cone section of all precast concrete block structures. 
(3)	The top section of any structure is to be wrapped with geotextile fabric to five feet minimum depth below the frame. Enough geotextile fabric shall be left on top to roll over the cone section. Cover shall be EJIW 1040 or Neenah No. 12-1916 for manholes and Type M for catchbasins. 
(k)	Catchbasins and inlets location. Catchbasins and inlets shall be located: 
(1)	So that the flows to be accommodated do not exceed the intake capacity of the cover. The intake capacity of the cover is assumed to be 0.011 cubic feet per second (cfs) per square inch of opening. 
(2)	At all low points in gutters and in swales and ditches, where applicable.
(3)	At the upstream curb return, if more than 200 feet downstreet of high point in gutter or of intercepting structure. 
(4)	At maximum intervals of 600 feet along a continuous slope.
(5)	Inlets will only be allowed in pavement areas as a high end structure and when followed by a catchbasin within 100 feet of the inlet. 
(6)	End sections may be used as a ditch inflow device when followed within 50 feet by a catchbasin. 
(7)	Where a low point exists in the gutter line, no more than two relief basins shall be used in either direction in advance of the low point, i.e., four relief basins would be possible. When a total of two or more relief basins are used in such a system, a double catchbasin will be placed at the low point. 
(l)	Stubs. Where future connections to a manhole are anticipated, stubs with watertight bulkheads shall be provided. 
(m)	Leaching basins. 
(1)	Leaching basins are encouraged where native soils are permeable and conducive to such installation, provided the maintenance routine for such basins is approved by the township. 
(2)	Concrete leaching basins shall be in accordance with state department of transportation standard plans or as approved by the township. 
(3)	Materials for the plastic leaching basin drainage structures, in rear yards only, shall be in accordance with all applicable ASTM standards. 
(4)	The cover for the leaching basin drainage structures shall be in accordance with section 403, subsection 04 of the 1996 Michigan Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Construction. 
(n)	Underdrains. Pavement catchbasins and inlets, where shown on the approved plans or where determined by the township or the road commission for the county to be necessary, shall have perforated underdrain installed. The depth, alignment, diameter, pipe material and backfill shall be as shown on the plans or as directed by the township or RCOC. 
(o)	Pipe end treatment. 
(1)	The inlet end of culverts and storm drains shall have a properly designed inlet structure (i.e., head wall or flared end section). 
(2)	Culverts and storm drain outlets shall also have headwalls or flared end sections with necessary erosion control; i.e., grouted concrete riprap. 
(3)	A prefabricated bar screen shall be used on all storm sewer openings 18 inches in diameter and larger. The bar screens will be constructed according to an approved separate enlarged detail in the drawings and shall be designed to be sturdy, permanent, easily maintained, nonclogging, and shall have clear openings of no more than four inches. 
(4)	Grouted concrete riprap, or other approved energy dissipating measure, is required at all pipe outlet points other than structures. The minimum width of the riprap shall be twice the outside diameter of the pipe. The riprap shall extend from the bottom of slope to the pipe invert. Two types of riprap may be used; field stone or broken concrete. 
(p)	Special structures and appurtenances. Preliminary plans for special structures and appurtenances required for sewer systems shall be submitted to the township for review and comment prior to their inclusion in the construction drawings. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 7-3, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-197. - Plan requirements. 
    All plans shall be submitted to the township for storm sewer approval and shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information: 
(1)	Overall layout of the sewer system with manhole numbers and direction-of-flow arrows.
(2)	A drainage plan delineating the area tributary to the sewer system.
(3)	Plan and profile view in accordance with article III of this chapter.
(4)	Locations of all manholes and other sewer appurtenances and special structures.
(5)	Building sump leads to be constructed or installed concurrently with sewer construction with locations at easement and/or property lines. Length, size, end of lead invert elevations, and amount of riser shall be shown on the plan for each sump lead. 
(6)	Dimensions to manholes and storm sewers to property lines, right-of-way lines or buildings.
(7)	Size, slope, length, pipe type and class, and controlling invert elevations for each section of proposed storm sewer between manholes in both plan and profile view. 
(8)	Limits of special backfill requirements.
(9)	Profile, over centerline of proposed sewer, of existing and finished ground and pavement surfaces. Existing profile shall be obtained from actual field survey data. 
(10)	Location of existing or proposed utilities crossing the line of the storm sewer and otherwise affecting sewer construction in the profile view. 
(11)	Location, by station, of every proposed manhole, with manhole number, invert elevation of all inlet or outlet pipes, top of cover elevation, cover type, and manhole type in the profile view. 
(12)	Location, by station, of all building sump leads to be constructed or installed concurrently with proposed sewer construction in profile view. 
(13)	Invert elevation at property line for building sump leads to be included with storm sewer construction. 
(14)	Each plan and profile sheet shall include a tabulated list of quantities.
(15)	Detail sheets:
a.	Details shall include the standard sheet and notes as provided by the county drain commissioner or the county road commission. Where these standards require different or more restrictive standards (i.e., three-foot deep sump) the project engineer shall add appropriate notes and/or plan details to this effect. A standard Mylar reproducible drawing of these details may be obtained from the respective agency. 
b.	Detail sheets shall include specific and complete details for all sewer appurtenances and structures to be included with the sewer construction and special or unusual sewer or associated construction requirements. Details not being used which are included on a standard detail sheet shall be crossed out or otherwise clearly marked. 
c.	Scales utilized for special details shall be selected to clearly portray intended construction and component or equipment arrangement. Scales used shall be clearly identified. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 7-4, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-198. - Construction standards. 
(a)	Concrete grade rings. Concrete grade rings shall have a minimum compressive strength of 4,000 psi at 28 days. Concrete grade rings shall be reinforced and shall be in conformance with ASTM C-478. 
(b)	Final inspection. All storm sewer systems shall be subjected to a final inspection prior to approval of the system by the township. 
(c)	HDPE pipe testing requirements. All HDPE pipe shall be videotaped after installation and backfill to finish grade. Upon review by the township engineer of the videotape, any noted pipe deflections shall necessitate the contractor providing a mandrel test for the affected sections of pipe. All plastic pipe shall, at no point, have out of round deflections greater than five percent as determined by a nine-point mandrel. Should any sections of pipe not pass the mandrel test, the contractor shall remedy the situation by excavating and recompacting the bedding material, replacing the failed pipe sections, or any other methods as approved by the township engineer. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 7-5, 3-17-2008)
Secs. 14-199-14-219. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - STREETS, DRIVEWAYS, PEDESTRIAN FACILITIES AND PAVING 

Sec. 14-220. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this article to provide the applicant with standards for the design and construction of streets, driveways, pedestrian facilities (i.e., bike paths, safety paths, sidewalks, and other nonmotorized trails) and all other private paved surfaces such as parking lots. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 8-1, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-221. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)	Any work proposed within the existing rights-of-way of the county road commission or the state department of transportation is to be reviewed and approved by the respective agency that has jurisdiction over the subject right-of-way. 
(b)	Any roads intended to be publicly dedicated are to be reviewed and approved by the RCOC. Correspondence regarding the acceptance of the roadway into the public system upon completion must be on file at the township prior to final site plan approval. Upon project completion and RCOC acceptance of the roadway, a copy of the board of commissioners resolution declaring the road to be public must be on file at the township. 
(c)	While RCOC and the state department of transportation will issue construction permits for work within their respective rights-of-way and their standards will dictate the design of roads or other improvements to be dedicated to the public, the township reserves the right to require additional plan provisions or paving requirements above those required by the governmental agency having jurisdiction. 
(d)	Any roads which are to remain private must be constructed in accordance with the township's private road ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 8-2, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-222. - General. 
    It is the intent of the township to encourage paving layouts and street designs that preserve natural features by minimizing the clearing and mass grading required to construct streets, parking lots, pedestrian facilities, etc. Street or road designs should meet current RCOC standards or township private road ordinance requirements. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 8-3, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-223. - Reference to standards. 
(a)	Public roads shall be designed and constructed to current RCOC standards.
(b)	Private roads shall be designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering principles, taking into consideration public health, safety, and welfare, as well as preservation of natural resources. At minimum, current AASHTO design standards applicable to appropriate traffic volumes shall be adhered to. The township private road ordinance must be followed. 
(c)	Off-street parking shall be designed in accordance with the current township zoning ordinance and the specifications herein. 
(d)	Sidewalks shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) barrier free specifications except where modified herein. The more strict interpretation between these standards and ADA shall apply. 
(e)	Nonmotorized pedestrian paths such as safety paths, bike paths, paved nature trails, etc., shall be designed and constructed to current AASHTO Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities and ADA Outdoor Recreational Trails standards except where modified herein. The more strict interpretation between these standards and AASHTO and ADA shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 8-4, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-224. - Design considerations. 
(a)	Streets. 
(1)	Layout. 
a.	Street layout shall provide for the continuation of existing major or collector streets in surrounding areas or conform to the development plan approved by the township. 
b.	Certain streets, public or private, as designated by the planning commission, shall be extended to the limits of the property to be developed to provide future connection with adjoining undeveloped land. 
c.	Proposed streets shall be to match existing topography where feasible.
d.	Service entrances and drives shall be permitted to provide a secondary means of access for service and safety vehicles, provided that appropriate signage limiting usage shall be established as required by the township. 
e.	Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be approved by the township only upon an adequate demonstration that there are no reasonably feasible alternatives. 
f.	Alleys and half-streets are prohibited except where absolutely essential to the reasonable development of the property in conformance to these standards and the zoning ordinance and as reviewed and approved by the township on a case-by-case basis. 
(2)	Geometrics. 
a.	Pavement widths for each side of a boulevard shall, at a minimum, accommodate one-way traffic. Island widths shall typically be ten to 16 feet. The nose of the island shall be 12 feet from the edge of pavement of the intersecting street. 
b.	For public roads, road centerlines that deflect more than ten degrees but less than 90 degrees shall be connected with a horizontal curve radius with a minimum radius of 230 feet. Actual radii shall be designed for the posted speed of the road and in accordance with RCOC standards. For private roads, current AASHTO standards shall apply. 
c.	Between reverse curves, there shall be a minimum tangent distance of 100 feet.
d.	Acceleration, deceleration and passing lanes for approaches to existing roads shall be required as determined by the township with recommendations provided by the township engineer based upon such criteria as traffic volumes, accident data, horizontal and vertical alignment, site distance, land use, topography and other natural conditions. Where required, acceleration, deceleration and passing lanes shall be constructed to RCOC or state department of transportation standards. 
e.	Streets shall be crowned with two percent transverse slopes provided from the centerline to the edge of the road. 
(b)	Driveways. 
(1)	Property shall be developed to minimize the number of ingress/egress points from an existing or proposed road, unless otherwise determined by the township. 
(2)	Use of shared or common driveways for all developments, including between two businesses or residences, is encouraged. Shared access easements for such driveways will be required. 
(3)	Maximum driveway grades shall be ten percent unless the applicant receives township board approval. 
(4)	All driveway approaches to a roadway shall not exceed 1.5 percent for a distance of 25 feet from the edge of the roadway, unless existing site topography dictates a steeper grade. In such cases, the safety of access must be considered in the final driveway grade. 
(5)	Driveways to individual residential lots shall be surfaced as required by the zoning ordinance. 
(6)	Driveways within the public road right-of-way are to be built to the same standards as a road with the same surface. 
(7)	Driveways to commercial, industrial, multifamily, institutional, etc., developments shall be surfaced in accordance with the requirements herein specified for streets. 
(c)	Pedestrian facilities. 
(1)	General. 
a.	Pedestrian facilities are to be installed in accordance with township ordinances.
b.	Where topography, vegetation, natural features, utilities, poles, signs, etc., dictate, the pedestrian facilities shall be meandered around these features. 
c.	Barrier free ramps shall be installed in accordance with applicable and current ADA barrier free requirements and state department of transportation specifications at all intersections with driveways, roads, parking lots, etc. Covered and textured raised dome pads shall be used as required. 
d.	Pedestrian facilities installed outside of the right-of-way will require a dedicated easement. 
e.	Proper signage for the pedestrian facilities shall be the applicant's responsibility.
f.	Pedestrian facilities shall be sloped to provide for positive drainage of stormwater off of and away from the path. 
(2)	Sidewalks. 
a.	Sidewalks shall be concrete with a mix design suitable to achieve a strength requirement of 3,500 psi at 28 days. 
b.	Concrete sidewalks shall be four inches thick nonreinforced except at driveways and approaches where it shall be six inches thick nonreinforced extending ten feet past the edge of drive pavement or back of curb. The mix design shall meet current state department of transportation standards. The concrete shall be placed on a prepared granular compacted subgrade void of all unstable soils. If native soils are not granular, then a six-inch thick granular type II subbase shall be provided. 
c.	Sidewalks shall be no less than four feet wide.
d.	Gaps or joints must not be wider than one-half of an inch and run perpendicular to the traveled path. 
e.	Transverse slope of sidewalks shall not exceed two percent.
f.	Longitudinal grade (running grade) shall be as follows: up to five percent for any length, eight percent for up to 200 feet, ten percent for up to 30 feet and 12 percent for up to ten feet. 
g.	Resting intervals shall be required where the running grade exceeds the maximum length as specified in subsection (c)(2)f of this section. Resting intervals shall be at minimum five feet in length and match the width of the sidewalk. The slope shall not exceed five percent. 
(3)	Pedestrian, bicycle, safety or nonmotorized paths (referred herein as paths). 
a.	Paths shall be:
1.	Three-inch thick bituminous on a six-inch thick aggregate base. Mix designs shall meet current state department of transportation standards. 
2.	Concrete four-inches thick nonreinforced except at driveways and approaches where it shall be six inches thick nonreinforced extending ten feet past the edge of drive pavement or back of curb. The mix design shall meet current state department of transportation standards. The concrete shall be placed on a prepared granular compacted subgrade void of all unstable soils. If native soils are not granular, then a six-inch thick granular type II subbase shall be provided. 
3.	Six inches of 21AA aggregate compacted to 98 percent density to provide a firm and stable surface. Provisions for long-term maintenance of gravel paths shall be incorporated in the development deeds, bylaws, etc., suitable to the township. 
4.	Alternative materials as approved by the township.
b.	Gaps or joints must not be wider than one-half of an inch and run perpendicular to the traveled path. 
c.	Transverse slope of paths shall not exceed two percent.
d.	Longitudinal grade (running grade) shall be as follows: up to five percent for any length, six percent for up to 800 feet, seven percent for up to 400 feet, eight percent for up to 200 feet, ten percent for up to 30 feet and 12 percent for up to ten feet. Gravel paths can not exceed three percent for any distance without approval from the township. 
e.	Resting intervals shall be required where the running grade exceeds the maximum length as specified in subsection (c)(3)d of this section. Resting intervals shall be at minimum five feet in length and match the width of the sidewalk. The slope shall not exceed five percent. 
(d)	Paving. 
(1)	All areas required to be hard surfaced under the township zoning ordinance shall be surfaced with bituminous asphalt or concrete pavement in accordance with the following minimum cross sections: 
a.	For residential driveways, private parking lots and storage areas not subject to heavy equipment loads, the required pavement section shall consist of three inches of bituminous asphalt pavement over eight inches of compacted state department of transportation 22A (or alternate six inches of compacted state department of transportation 21AA) aggregate on existing sand subgrade. For commercial or industrial driveways, private roads, and storage areas subject to heavy equipment loads, the required pavement section shall consist of four inches of bituminous asphalt pavement over ten inches of compacted state department of transportation 22A (or alternate eight inches of compacted state department of transportation 21AA) aggregate on existing sand subgrade. If the applicant proposes to utilize concrete pavement, the minimum cross section shall be six inches of nonreinforced concrete on a four-inch bed. For all pavement on an existing clay subgrade, a minimum of four inches of compacted state department of transportation class II subbase or four inches of additional aggregate base material shall be provided. For private developments, all access drives and internal routes to loading areas, dumpsters, equipment storage areas, or any other areas subject to traffic loading by heavy nonpassenger type vehicles, shall be required to install the thicker pavement cross-section as outlined. The township body responsible for site plan approval shall make the final determination regarding the required pavement cross-section for any given development requiring site plan approval. 
b.	Alternate deep strength bituminous asphalt or concrete pavement designs will be considered on a case-by-case basis provided adequate engineering data is made available demonstrating equal structural stability and longevity to the section as outlined under subsection (d)(1)a of this section. However, at no time, will the thickness of deep strength bituminous pavement be less than seven inches or concrete pavement be less than six inches. 
c.	All proposed pavement sections are subject to review and approval by the township.
(2)	Maximum parking lot grades shall be six percent.
(3)	Parking lots shall be of the size and configuration as required in chapter 46, pertaining to zoning. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 8-5, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-225. - Plan requirements. 
(a)	Plan view. 
(1)	Road and right-of-way width must be shown on the plans.
(2)	Cross sections of all pavement sections shall be provided, including surface, subbase, and a shoulder and ditch profile. 
(3)	All parking lots, loading spaces, and driveway layouts, along with typical dimensions and layouts of parking spaces shall be shown. 
(4)	Entrance, intersection, and cul-de-sac details must be shown.
(5)	Existing grade elevations at the center of the proposed roadway in 50-foot intervals or as needed to accurately demonstrate proposed plan. 
(6)	Complete mix design for asphalt or concrete shall be given.
(7)	The location of any proposed or existing utilities and structures within the proposed right-of-way. 
(8)	Provisions for the removal of any unsuitable soils including peat, muck, and marl, as well as brush, trees, tree stumps, and similar material from the full width of the roadway. 
(9)	Any proposed culverts (driveway or cross) including size, type and invert elevations.
(10)	Proposed and existing parking lot and driveway grades.
(11)	Legal descriptions for the road right-of-way for public roads and ingress and egress easements for private roads must be provided. 
(12)	Sight distances must be provided.
(b)	Profile view. 
(1)	Elevations at top of curb (or centerline if not curbed) in 50-foot intervals or as needed to accurately demonstrate the proposed plan. 
(2)	Existing grade elevations at the center of the proposed roadway in 50-foot intervals or as need to accurately demonstrate the proposed plan. 
(3)	Station and elevations of all high and low points, grade breaks, curb returns, intersecting property lines and vertical curve information. 
(4)	The station and elevation of the rim grade of all drainage structures.
(Ord. No. 119, § 8-6, 3-17-2008)
Secs. 14-226-14-243. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - COMMUNITY ON-SITE SEWAGE SYSTEMS 

Sec. 14-244. - Intent. 
    This article establishes the minimum requirements for the design and construction of non-municipally owned community on-site sewage systems for the treatment and disposal of wastewater located within the township. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 9-1, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-245. - General. 
(a)	This article applies to the treatment and disposal of sanitary wastewater in a community wastewater system. 
(b)	Community sewage systems, including the collection, treatment, and disposal facilities are subject to the township's community sewer system ordinance, which is intended to be a supplement to nontownship regulatory programs to provide without limitation increased protection of human health, the environment, and provide cost effective operations and maintenance. 
(c)	A community wastewater treatment and disposal system refers to any facility which accepts sanitary sewage for treatment and disposal from more than one lot, unit, building, etc. This includes without limitation systems that serve subdivisions and condominiums (community sewer systems), mobile home treatment plants, public and private wastewater treatment plants, multiple developments, etc. 
(d)	Reference is to be made to article X of this chapter, pertaining to sanitary sewer collection systems, for the design of a gravity collection system serving the community wastewater treatment and disposal system. Other types of collection systems including pump stations and force mains, low pressure sewers and grinder pumps, etc., will be considered on a case-by-case basis. 
(e)	The township may require more stringent treatment and disposal technology based on published and accepted environmental protection methodology to protect environmentally sensitive areas. 
(f)	Treatment systems may be regulated by chapter 46, pertaining to zoning, and require the adherence to zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 9-2, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-246. - Agency approvals and references. 
(a)	Collection systems shall be reviewed and approved by the state department of environmental quality and the township. 
(b)	Treatment system design and operational plans shall be reviewed and approved by the state department of environmental quality, the county health department and the township. 
(c)	Overall design, operation, and escrow agreements shall be reviewed and approved by the township. 
(d)	Inspections shall be performed as required by the state department of environmental quality, the county health department, and the township. 
(e)	The township shall be copied on all submittals to the state department of environmental equality and the county health department. The property owner shall send copies of all state department of environmental equality and county health department correspondence to the township. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 9-3, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-247. - Design considerations. 
(a)	Wastewater flows shall conform to the requirements of the state department of environmental equality and the county health department with additional flow capacity to account for acceptable infiltration and inflow into the sewer from the specific type of collection system. 
(b)	The system siting standards, including setback distances and distances to groundwater or restrictive layers, for community treatment and disposal systems of the state department of environmental equality and the county health department, shall be met as a minimum. In areas determined to be environmentally sensitive by the township, zoning setbacks will be applied in addition to more restrictive provisions. 
(c)	Treatment systems.
(1)	Primary treatment, i.e., septic tanks for settling, are encouraged on the individual lots. 
(2)	Treatment may be provided by septic tanks, effluent filters, intermittent media filters, and recirculating media filters. Filter media are typically properly graded sand or gravel. Other materials or treatment components may be approved on a case-by-case basis. 
(3)	Discharge from a primary treatment facility and discharge to a sand filter shall be through a filtration unit. 
(4)	Tanks shall be bedded on a minimum of six-inches of compacted sand or crushed stone.
(5)	Tank penetrations must be provided with watertight joints. This includes inlet and outlet lines, riser pipes or hatches, and electrical penetrations. 
(d)	Disposal field requirements.
(1)	The requirements of the state department of environmental equality and the county health department for soil texture, disposal system sizing, and allowable system type shall be adopted as the minimum standard. 
(2)	The use of soil observation pits instead of borings shall be strongly encouraged to allow observations of soil structure, soil texture, soil color and root development by an experienced soil evaluator. These observations can be used to determine the type of community wastewater treatment and disposal system that is appropriate for the site. 
(3)	Community disposal systems shall be pressure dosed. Alternative disposal systems will be considered on a case-by-case basis. 
(e)	Electrical and control requirements.
(1)	Electrical provisions must meet the requirements of the state electrical code as enforced by the township. 
(2)	Controls must be mounted on a sturdy panel that is accessible for maintenance.
(3)	Pumps must either be completely submerged during normal operating conditions, or must be explosion proof. 
(4)	Explosion proof electrical components are required.
(5)	Redundant off floats shall be required for all pumps.
(6)	Audio and visual alarms with battery backup shall be provided. These alarm functions shall be activated by power outage, pump or equipment failure, and designated high water. Common alarms may be used. Offsite notification of operators via telephone system or other means shall be required for remote treatment and disposal systems. 
(7)	An audio and visual alarm shall be provided for individual pumping units to the residence. Provision of alarms to the system operator should be considered. 
(f)	Emergency power provisions. The community treatment system shall be designed such that there is not a hazard of pollution from overflow or discharge onto public or private property with sewage from the community collection or treatment system. The impact of common failures of power to wastewater generators shall be considered. If the wastewater producers and the community treatment system are on separate electrical lines, emergency requirements must be addressed. Options for reliable operation include: 
(1)	Provision of storage in an off-line containment structure for the expected length of power outage. 
(2)	Alternate electrical power supply from either the power company or with an emergency generator. 
(3)	Pipe connections for utilizing a portable pump to bypass existing pumping systems. If portable pumps or generators are used, a telemetry device shall be provided for 24-hour notification and deployment of the equipment. 
(g)	General requirements.
(1)	Community treatment systems shall meet all applicable requirements of chapter 46, pertaining to zoning. 
(2)	Community treatment systems shall be provided with all weather access roads.
(3)	Offstreet access shall be provided for maintenance vehicles.
(4)	Access for septage tank pump trucks shall be provided.
(5)	Access for sampling the treatment system shall be provided.
(6)	The community treatment system shall be delineated with landscaping and decorative fencing. Security fencing shall be provided around the community treatment system, where deemed necessary to protect critical system components. Fencing shall require review and approval by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 9-4, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-248. - Plan requirements. 
(a)	Reference is to be made to article III of this chapter, pertaining to general requirements and procedures, for general plan submittal requirements. 
(b)	Additional requirements specific to this article:
(1)	Engineering calculations and background information shall be provided as follows: consistent capacity of the collection, treatment and disposal systems; tank buoyancy; hydraulic calculations for pumps, force mains, filtration units, wastewater distribution pipe networks; and calculations demonstrating the capacity of the proposed system to meet any necessary advanced treatment requirements. 
(2)	Electrical and control requirements shall be clearly described on the plans or in specifications. 
(3)	Equipment, materials or processes that are specifically described in either these regulations or those addressed in MDEQ or OCHD regulations may be considered on a case-by-case basis. Adequate documentation including at a minimum test results from similar applications, design calculations, and references for successful previous installations shall be provided to support this consideration. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 9-5, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-249. - Construction provisions. 
(a)	Reference is to be made to article XV of this chapter, pertaining to general construction provisions and requirements, for general construction provisions. 
(b)	Areas to be used as disposal fields (including future reserve areas) shall be protected from construction activities and vehicular access during construction and operation in a manner appropriate for the disposal system. Shallow disposal systems and those that utilize existing soils shall receive the highest degree of protection. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 9-6, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-250. - Inspections, testing and approvals. 
(a)	The inspections and testing requirements of the MDEQ and the OCHD shall be adopted as a minimum. Additional project specific inspection and testing requirements may be required during township review due to site and/or system specific concerns. 
(b)	A hydrostatic test of system tanks will be required prior to site delivery and after installation. The test shall include sealing the empty tank, inlets, and outlets, filling tanks with water to a height of one foot above the normal top construction joint for 24-hours, topping the tank off after the completion of the initial 24-hour period, and then measuring the loss of water over a one-hour period. If no loss of water occurs, the tank shall be considered acceptable. Vacuum testing shall be considered on a case-by-case basis and shall be conducted in accordance with current ASTM standards. 
(c)	Acceptance tests for gravity collection systems and force mains shall be as described in article X of this chapter. 
(d)	The operation of pumping systems and controls shall be demonstrated to show that they meet the specified operational requirements prior to system acceptance. 
(e)	The township may impose reasonable additional effluent testing requirements upon systems. These requirements will be detailed in the approval of the operation and maintenance plan described in section 14-251. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 9-7, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-251. - Operation and maintenance. 
(a)	An operation and maintenance plan must be submitted for review by the township prior to system approval. 
(b)	An operating and maintenance manual suitable for resident use shall be provided to each new resident that uses the community treatment and disposal system. This manual shall address at a minimum a description of the system, operational procedures that could affect the collection, treatment and disposal system, materials and practices that should not be used, troubleshooting procedures, and emergency response requirements. 
(c)	Easements shall be provided for access of maintenance personnel to on-lot components of the collection and treatment systems and the community septic systems. 
(d)	The community association or owner of the community sewer system must contract with a responsible maintenance entity for the operation of the community collection, treatment and disposal system. 
(e)	The frequency of operation inspections of the community system shall be set in the operation and maintenance plan. 
(f)	Annual inspections of on-lot components of the collection and treatment systems shall be performed by the contracted maintenance entity. 
(g)	As outlined in the township's community sewer system ordinance the township has the authority to intercede to effect repairs or maintenance if the system owner or operator fails to perform and the township has the right to assess the association or owner for costs incurred. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 9-8, 3-17-2008)
Secs. 14-252-14-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - SANITARY SEWER COLLECTION SYSTEMS 

Sec. 14-281. - Intent. 
    This article establishes the minimum requirements for the design and construction of sanitary sewer collection systems located within the township. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 10-1, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-282. - General. 
    The design and construction of all sanitary sewer systems shall meet all applicable Ten State Standards of the Great Lakes-Upper Mississippi River Board of State Public Health and Environmental Managers (GLUMRB), the standards of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) and all other applicable standards. 
(1)	An MDEQ construction permit is required for the sanitary sewer construction.
(2)	The standards herein apply to the collection of sanitary sewage for transportation to a community or regional treatment and disposal facility. This section generally refers to gravity sanitary sewer systems. Other types of sanitary sewer systems (i.e., force main and pump station, low pressure force main with grinder pumps, etc.) will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. 
(3)	For the design and construction of a community treatment and disposal system (i.e., septic field or wastewater treatment plant), please reference article IX of this chapter, pertaining to community on-site sewage systems. 
(4)	Community sewage systems, including the collection, treatment, and disposal facilities are subject to article IX of this chapter, pertaining to on-site sewage systems. 
(5)	The township is generally a community which relies primarily on individual or community on-site sewage disposal systems. Until such time, if ever, a public sanitary sewer system is constructed, all sanitary sewer collection and treatment facilities shall remain private and are to be maintained in accordance with article IX of this chapter, pertaining to on-site sewage systems. However, the township reserves the right to impose design and construction requirements in foresight of connecting individual sewage collection, treatment, and disposal facilities into a municipal system. These requirements may include, but are not limited to: 
a.	Extension of sanitary sewers, of a diameter determined by the township, across the frontage of the property; 
b.	Providing stubs to property lines for future upstream connections;
c.	Upsizing main lines to handle future flows;
d.	Provide piped outlet from treatment/disposal facility to accessible point for future outlet connection; 
e.	Providing easements which allow the township to access, connect, etc., to the onsite system. 
(6)	At no time shall downspouts, weep tile, footing drains, or any stormwater conduits be permitted to discharge to the sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 10-2, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-283. - Design considerations. 
(a)	Location of sanitary sewers. 
(1)	Sanitary sewers shall generally be located on the opposite side of the street from any proposed or existing water mains and within the road right-of-way. 
(2)	Easements for sanitary sewers not within the road right-of-way shall have a width suitable for proper access and maintenance, centered upon the sewer. The minimum width for a sanitary sewer easement shall be 20 feet. Such easements shall be deeded or dedicated to the owner (i.e., subdivision or condominium association), maintenance agency, and the township, with restrictions against the use or occupation of easements by the property owners and/or by other utilities in any manner which would restrict sewer maintenance or repair operations. Easements for possible extensions shall be provided to the property lines at locations designated by the township. 
(3)	Within unplatted projects, sanitary sewers shall be installed parallel to property lines, building lines, with clearance distances to accommodate the full width of the proposed easement. 
(4)	Sewers shall preferably be constructed outside of paved parking areas, streets, and drives. 
(5)	Ten feet of horizontal separation must be maintained between sanitary sewers, water mains, and storm sewers. The minimum vertical separation between all utilities shall be 18 inches. 
(b)	Sewer capacity. 
(1)	Sanitary sewers shall be designed to serve all areas within the defined service area as determined by the township, anticipating full development of such areas, with due consideration given to topography, existing natural features, established zoning, the adopted township master land use plan, and any other documents published by the township in this regard. 
(2)	For design purposes, population shall be based on a minimum of 3.5 persons per detached single-family home site, and 2.8 persons for each multiple-family dwelling unit. Submissions for review shall include a tabulation of occupancy (usage) types and the conversion of these into terms of equivalent single-family units. The area of the site, in acres, may be used to calculate dwelling units based on density allowed in chapter 46, pertaining to zoning. The adopted unit factors as published by the county drain commissioner shall be used to convert the different usage types not listed herein to equivalent single-family units. 
(3)	For service areas with design populations of 500 or less, sewer design capacity shall be 400 gallons per capita per day, as specified under the Ten State Standards of the Great Lakes-Upper Mississippi River Board of State Public Health and Environmental Managers (GLUMRB). For service areas with design populations greater than 500, but less than 28,400, sewer design capacity shall be based on the following formula: 
    Q = 100 18 + P where, 
    4 + P 
    Q = Design capacity in gallons per capita per day 
    P = Design population expressed in thousands 
(4)	The sewage system outlet must be investigated to determine if adequate capacity is available. The township engineer may be able to provide information about the service area and available capacity in the downstream system. 
(c)	Minimum pipe size for sanitary sewers shall be eight inches nominal internal diameter or as required by the township. 
(d)	Hydraulic calculations shall be based on Kutter's or Manning's formulas, with n = 0.013. Minimum design velocity shall be two feet per second, and maximum design velocity shall be ten feet per second, with pipe flowing full. The slope of the sewer between the last two manholes at the upper end of any lateral shall be increased to 0.60 percent or greater to obtain cleaning velocities. 
(1)	Allowable pipe slopes.
Pipe Diameter
(Inches)Minimum Slope
(Feet per 100 Feet)Maximum Slope
(Feet per 100 Feet)80.4010.00100.287.00120.225.30150.153.9018 0.122.9021 0.102.3224 0.0801.9227 0.0671.6430 0.0581.4436 0.0461.12 
(2)	Maximum flow velocity for full pipe flow shall be maintained by continuity of the 0.80 diameter depth above invert for pipe size increases and also with intersecting sewer grade raised to compensate for head loss due to direction change. 
(3)	Provide a drop of 0.10 feet in the downstream sewer invert for direction changes in excess of 30 degrees to compensate for velocity head loss of the incoming flow. 
(e)	Allowable types of pipe and pipe joints.
(1)	Materials and certifications. 
a.	Truss pipe and fittings shall be described under ASTM Designation D 2680-80, Standard Specifications for Acrylonitrile-Butadine-Styrene (ABS) Composite Sewer Pipeline. Appendix XI of said specification shall be as modified by the bedding requirements outlined below. Composite ABS plastic and Perlite concrete truss pipe material shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D-2680-74, or latest revision thereof. Joints on truss pipe shall consist of ABS plastic couplings chemically cemented to the ends of the pipe being connected. Solvents and methods used in making the chemical bond shall be in accordance with manufacturer's printed instructions, and the installation technique shall conform to ASTM Designation: D-2321, or latest revision thereof. 
b.	PVC pipe and fittings shall be as described under ASTM Designation D 3034-81, standard specification for polyvinyl chloride sewer pipe and fittings. Minimum wall thickness shall be SDR 26. Deflection of pipe shall be limited to a maximum of five percent. Joints for PVC pipe shall be push-on type or solvent cemented joints in special applications as specified by the township's engineer. Push-on type joints shall conform to ASTM Specification D-3212, latest revision. Solvent cemented joints, where specified, shall conform to ASTM Specification D-2855, latest revision. 
c.	Solid wall ABS pipe for six inch house connection sewers shall be SDR 23.5, conforming to ASTM Designation D 2751-80 Standard Specification for Acrylonitrile-Butadiene-Styrene (ABS) Sewer Pipe and Fittings. Solid wall pipe shall be installed in accordance with bedding requirements outlined below. 
d.	All pipes shall be certified by the manufacturer to meet the applicable ASTM specification requirements. Certification forms, together with a report of the test results, shall be provided the construction inspector with pipe deliveries and copies shall be forwarded to the engineer or the owner. Certification forms shall include project name, location, contractor, and test lot number. Lot sizes shall be acceptable to the engineer. 
e.	All pipes and fittings shall be suitably marked to provide the manufacturer's name or trademark, lot or production number, ASTM designation, PVC cell classification, SDR number, and nominal diameter. Fittings, however, need not contain lot number, cell classification, or SDR number. Pipe shall have a "home" mark. 
(2)	Bedding. 
a.	Bedding for PVC, truss or ABS solid wall pipe shall be in accordance with current specifications of ASTM D 2321, except: 
1.	Only class I and class II materials having a maximum particle size of 11/2 inches may be used, 
2.	Embedment shall extend to minimum 12 inches above top of pipe, and
3.	Flooding or puddling shall not be used. It is essential that it be recognized that the successful use of flexible pipe requires bedding that provides unyielding side support and complete bedding contact under pipe haunches. Bedding material must be properly placed and compacted to provide lateral restraint against deflection in the pipe diameter. Pipe must be bedded to true line and grade throughout its length. Bell holes shall be provided where required. 
b.	Where unstable bottoms are encountered, the contractor shall provide a foundation consisting of an approved graded processed angular stone or gravel to act as an impervious mat to prevent migration or vertical movement of unstable soils or bedding materials. Where trench sheeting, plates, or a trench box are used due to severe ground conditions, all voids to the side and below the top of the pipe caused by the sheeting, plates, or box withdrawal shall be completely filled or the supports left in place below the top of the pipe. 
c.	Concrete cradle bedding shall not be used where allowable trench widths are exceeded. In lieu of concrete cradle bedding, standard pipe bedding shown shall be provided to the full width between undisturbed trench walls or at least 2.5 pipe diameters on both sides of the pipe. 
d.	Due to potential damage to exterior walls of plastic pipe, particularly under cold weather conditions, if rocks, frozen material or large objects strike the pipe, the contractor shall carefully avoid dumping any materials other than approved bedding sand or stone on the pipe until 12-inch cover is placed on it. Pipe walls and joints shall also be protected from abrasion and damage during handling, and shall be fully inspected just prior to placing in the trench. 
e.	Care should be taken during bedding compaction to avoid distorting the shape of the pipe or damaging its wall. Mobile equipment shall not be used over the pipe trench until 48 inch of cover has been placed. 
f.	House connections shall be made to wye fittings. Bedding for house connection sewers shall be equal to that of the main sewer bedding. Risers in deep and unstable trenches should be bedded in class I angular stone to avoid settlement. Concrete shall not be used for bedding. End caps or plugs shall be braced or anchored to withstand air test pressures. Caps or plugs shall not be chemically welded in place. 
(3)	Special conditions. 
a.	The completed installation shall at no point have out-of-round pipe deflections greater than five percent. The engineer shall have the option of requiring deflectometer or go/no-go gauging tests run prior to acceptance on pipelines where high deflections are suspected. 
b.	Air test requirements as specified by the township engineer shall be met. Flexible manhole joints shall be provided in all new manhole construction to maintain the flexibility of the pipe materials, concrete encasement of drop connections shall not be used. Where adapters to other materials are required, only approved adapters and joints may be used. Where connections are made to existing manholes, a rubber waterstop shall be used around the pipe. 
(4)	Materials and conditions. 
a.	Depth of sewers. 
1.	Unless specifically otherwise approved, no sanitary sewer shall have less than five feet of cover. In general, sanitary sewers shall have a minimum of eight feet of cover below the finished road surface grade. 
2.	Unless otherwise approved, the top of any sanitary sewer shall be at least ten feet below finished grade elevation at the building setback line of each fronting property which the sewer is designed to serve. 
b.	Building leads. 
1.	Unless otherwise approved because of unusual circumstances, construction of building leads from the public sewer to the easement and/or property line for each fronting parcel which the sewer is designed to serve shall be included with the construction of each sanitary sewer. 
2.	Where the construction of building leads to the property line is not required concurrently with the sanitary sewer construction, a wye branch or tee inlet with riser is required. Said tee, wye, or riser shall be provided with a watertight stopper or plug with type of joint used for the sewer pipe shall be installed for every lot or building site which the lead is designed to serve. 
3.	Where depth of sewer from top of pipe to finished surface exceeds ten feet, risers shall be installed from wyes and tees to an elevation ten feet below finished surface. All risers that are installed without building leads shall include an approved stopper. 
4.	Minimum size for building leads shall be six-inch nominal internal diameter. Maximum length of building lead without a cleanout shall be 100 feet. 
5.	Minimum slope for building leads shall be one percent.
6.	Joints for wyes, tees, and stoppers shall be of the same type as the joint used for the sanitary sewer pipe. 
7.	The ends of the leads shall terminate with an approved stopper at the property line or easement line unless otherwise noted. The ends shall be marked with a four inch by four inch pressure treated post placed vertically from the pipe invert to two feet above the ground surface. The portion above ground shall be painted with a florescent paint. 
8.	All connection branches in the sewer pipe shall be securely and completely fastened to, or formed in, the wall of the pipe during manufacture. All pipes containing such connection branches shall be installed with the main sewer. Wyes for vacant property shall be installed opposite the center of the frontage unless otherwise indicated. The final location of the wye shall be determined by the township engineer at the time of construction. All wyes that are installed with building leads shall include an approved stopper. 
c.	Manholes. 
1.	Manholes shall be constructed at every change in sewer grade, alignment, and pipe size, and at the end of each sewer line. Maximum distance between manholes shall be 350 feet or as approved by the township engineer. 
2.	Manholes shall be constructed of precast reinforced concrete sections.
3.	An external drop manhole shall be constructed whenever an inlet sewer pipe enters a manhole at an invert elevation 18 inches or more above the invert elevation of the outlet sewer pipe. Use of internal drop connections must be approved by the township engineer. 
4.	Where future connections to a manhole are anticipated, stubs or blind drop connections with watertight plugs shall be provided. 
d.	Special structures and appurtenances. 
1.	Preliminary plans for special structures and appurtenances required for sanitary sewer systems shall be submitted to the township engineer for review and comment prior to their inclusion in the construction drawings. 
2.	Inverted siphons will not generally be allowed.
3.	Sewage pumping stations shall have at least two pumps or ejectors, each sized to handle maximum design flow. For three or more pumps or ejectors, sizing of units shall be such that design flows can be handled with the largest unit out of service. Design features shall conform to the Ten States Standards of GLUMRB. When all pumps are operating, the pumping station shall not discharge flows which exceed the capacity of any downstream sewers. 
4.	Pipe for force mains shall be designed to withstand both internal pressures and external trench and live loads. Design computations shall be submitted by the proprietor's engineer for review and approval. Pipe materials shall be cast iron, ductile iron, or PVC pressure pipe. Cast iron pipe and ductile iron pipe shall be cement lined. Joints and fittings shall be equal to the township's requirements for pressure pipe used in the domestic water distribution system. Force mains shall be pressure tested for water tightness to a test pressure equal to twice the total system head but no less than 50 psi held for a minimum one-hour period. Amount of leakage shall be limited to not more than 25 gallons per inch diameter per mile of pipe per 24 hours at required test pressure. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 10-3, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-284. - Plan requirements. 
    All construction plans shall be submitted to the township for sanitary sewer approval and shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information: 
(1)	Overall layout of the sewer system with manhole numbers and with direction-of-flow arrows. 
(2)	District limits of service area as approved by the township.
(3)	Locations of all manholes and other sewer appurtenances and special structures.
(4)	Building leads, wye branches, or tee inlets to be constructed or installed concurrently with sewer construction, with locations at easement and/or property lines. Length, size, end of lead invert elevations, and amount of riser shall be shown on the plan for each building lead. 
(5)	Dimensions to manholes and sewers to property lines, right-of-way lines, or buildings.
(6)	Size, slope, length, type, and class of pipe, and controlling invert elevations for each section of proposed sewer between manholes in profile view. Also include limits of special backfill requirements in profile view. 
(7)	Profile over centerline of proposed sewer, of existing and finished ground, and pavement surfaces. Existing profile shall be obtained from actual field survey data. 
(8)	Location of existing or proposed installations crossing the line of the sewer or otherwise affecting sewer construction in profile view. 
(9)	Location, by station, of every proposed manhole, with manhole number, invert elevation of all inlet or outlet pipes, top of casting elevation, and manhole type in profile view. 
(10)	Location, by station, of all building leads, wye branches or tee inlets, to be constructed or installed concurrently with proposed sewer construction in profile view. Building lead information should include all required risers and invert elevation at property line. 
(11)	Manholes shall be identified by numbers assigned consecutively. Rim elevations for each manhole should be shown. 
(12)	Each plan and profile sheet shall include a tabulated list of quantities appearing on that sheet. 
(13)	Specific and complete details for all sewer appurtenances and structures to be included with the sewer construction and special or unusual construction requirements. Scales utilized for special details shall be selected to clearly portray intended construction and component or equipment arrangement. Scales used shall be clearly identified. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 10-4, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-285. - Construction standards. 
(a)	Connections to and construction of sanitary manholes. 
(1)	The contractor shall install a suitable bulkhead to prevent construction water, sand, silt, etc., from entering the existing sewer system. Such bulkhead shall be left in place until such time as the governing agency authorizes its removal by the contractor. 
(2)	Wherever existing manhole structures or sewer pipes are to be tapped, the tap is to be made by core drilling. No break connections will be permitted. The pipe (stub or saddle) to be placed in the opening with a core-and-seal type "boot" shall be cast flush with the inside wall of said structure. Voids outside the pipe barrel, placed in the pipe opening, shall be sealed with an approved nonshrinking grout. A concrete collar shall then be poured 12 inches thick around the pipe and extended a minimum of 12 inches beyond the outside wall surface of the manhole with the remainder of the pipe cradled in concrete. During construction the contractor shall take precautions to keep dirt, brick, water, tools, and any other deleterious materials out of the existing structure. Any materials that are dropped into the structure shall be promptly removed. 
(3)	All manholes shall be provided with waterproof lid frame and cover bolted to the cone section of the manhole with rubber O-ring gasket compressed between the frame and the top of the cone. The frame and cover shall be East Jordan Iron Works 1040 or equivalent. Covers shall be cast with the words "SANITARY SEWER" in raised letters spaced in from the periphery of the cover. 
(4)	The contractor shall raise the elevation of manholes by adding a sufficient number of grade rings or brick and mortar courses to obtain the desired elevation. 
(b)	Manhole materials and appurtenances. All materials under this specification shall conform to the requirements of section 5.14.02 MDOT Standards for Construction and county department of public works standards and specifications for sanitary sewer construction except as otherwise specified herein. 
(1)	Precast reinforced concrete sections shall conform to ASTM C478. Joints between precast sections shall be modified tongue and groove type using O-ring synthetic rubber gaskets. 
(2)	Manhole steps shall be reinforced polypropylene plastic No. PS-2-PFS, manufactured by M.A. Industries, Inc., of Peachtree, GA, or approved equal, or E.J.I.W. No. 8500, or approved equal. 
(3)	Where manholes are located outside of pavements and sidewalks, final grade adjustments shall be made with precast concrete grade adjustment rings; brick construction will not be allowed except where located in paved surfaces. Grade rings shall be a minimum of three inches thick and reinforced with two full circles of three-sixteenths-inch diameter steel reinforcing wire. Manhole casting frame and concrete adjustment rings shall be secured to precast cone section with a minimum of four five-eighths-inch diameter cadmium coated threaded studs or bolts. All joints in the assembly shall be sealed with rubber O-ring gaskets. Concrete grade rings should have a minimum compressive strength of 4,000 psi at 28 days. Concrete grade ring, shall be reinforced and shall be in conformance with ASTM C-478. 
The exterior joint between the manhole frame and the brick block or grade ring adjustment section (chimney) shall be sealed by using either a polyurethane or butyl rubber joint sealant, or approved equal. 
(c)	Casting adjustments. 
(1)	Adjustments to manhole castings shall be accomplished prior to final acceptance by using precast concrete adjustment rings bolted to the cone section of the manhole with rubber O-ring gaskets compressed between each adjacent ring. A maximum of 15 inches of precast adjustment shall be placed on the cone section of all precast concrete structures. 
(2)	Manhole castings located within pavement areas shall be adjusted a maximum of 15 inches using four cadmium coated five-eighths-inch diameter threaded studs with adjustment support nuts for setting frame to correct grade as detailed on the plan. The void between casting and top of cone section shall be completely filled with stiff MDOT 30M or 30P concrete mix. A Caddilloc brand rubber wrap for watertightness shall be applied to the exterior of the adjustment after the concrete has taken its initial set and is resistant to damage, unless otherwise specified by the township's engineer. 
(d)	Sanitary test manhole. The first manhole upstream from point of connection to existing sanitary sewer system shall have an 18-inch deep sump which shall be filled with concrete and channeled upon successful completion of infiltration testing. The outlet pipe from this manhole shall be plugged with a waterproof stopper to prevent discharge to the existing system until acceptance of the system by the township. The requirement to provide a sump may be waived by the engineer where testing is to be done by either low pressure air testing or exfiltration testing. 
(e)	Acceptance testing. All sanitary sewer systems shall be subjected to and successfully pass a preliminary infiltration, air, or exfiltration test, or a combination thereof in accordance with the following requirements prior to scheduling of a final acceptance test of the system with the township engineer and prior to removal of bulkhead as required in the section entitled, "Connections." 
(1)	Sanitary sewer testing. 
a.	All sewers over 24-inch diameter and all smaller sewers where the groundwater level is more than seven feet above the top of the sewer, shall be subjected to an infiltration test. Maximum allowable infiltration shall not exceed 100 gallons, per inch of diameter per mile of pipe per 24 hours for the overall project and all sewers being tested by the infiltration method shall be allowed to stabilize for a period of 24 hours with the test bulkhead in place. 
b.	All sewers of 24-inch diameter or less, where the groundwater level is seven feet or less above the top of sewer, shall be subjected to either exfiltration tests or air tests, as determined by the township engineer. 
(2)	Exfiltration test. 
a.	For the purpose of exfiltration testing, the internal water level shall be equal to the external water level, plus seven feet as measured from the top of the highest pipe in the system being tested. This could be either a house lead or a lateral. However, the maximum total height of water above the invert of the pipe at the lower end shall not exceed 20 feet. A prospective test that would exceed this 20-foot limit should not be taken. The line under construction can be broken down into smaller sections so that the maximum head of 20 feet will not be exceeded. 
b.	The actual exfiltration of leakage from the sewer line can be measured by recording the volume of water lost over a given period of time in a standpipe or pipes connected in the upstream and/or downstream manhole, or the upstream manhole can be used provided the test water level is below the bottom of the tapered section. It may be necessary to add a measured amount of water during the testing time interval to maintain water in the standpipe at the specified level so that the total volume of water lost would be based upon the amount of water added and the difference in elevation of water at the end of testing converted to gallons. When the standpipe method is used, the time interval to record the difference in elevation of the water surface shall be a minimum of 15 minutes. When the upstream manhole method is used, the time interval shall be a minimum of two hours. 
c.	A minimum of four hours should elapse after the test section is filled with water to permit the escape of trapped air and to allow for maximum absorption. After such absorption and escape of air has taken place, water should be added to the specified test level, and the test begun. 
(3)	Air test. The procedure for air testing of sewers shall be as follows: 
a.	The sewer line shall be tested in increments between manholes. The line shall be cleaned and plugged at each manhole. Such plugs shall be designed to hold against the test pressure and shall provide an airtight seal. One of the plugs shall have an orifice through which air can be introduced into the sewer. An air supply line shall be connected to the orifice. The air supply line shall be fitted with suitable control valves and a pressure gauge for continually measuring the air pressure in the sewer. The pressure gauge shall have a minimum diameter of 31/2 inches and a range of 0-10 PSIC. The gauge shall have minimum divisions of 0.10 PSIG and an accuracy of 0.04 ;pm; PSIG. 
b.	The sewer shall be pressurized for four PSIG greater than the greatest back pressure caused by groundwater over the top of the sewer pipe. At least two minutes shall be allowed for the air pressure to stabilize between 3.5 and four PSIG. If necessary, air shall be added to the sewer to maintain a pressure of 3.5 PSIG or greater. 
c.	After the stabilization period, the air supply control valve shall be closed so that no more air will enter the sewer. The sewer air pressure shall be noted and timing for the test begun. The test shall not begin if the air pressure is less than 3.5 PSIG, or such other pressure as is necessary to compensate for groundwater level. 
d.	The time required for the air pressure to decrease 1.0 PSIG during the test shall not be less than the time shown in the air test tables in subsection (e)(2)h of this section. 
e.	Manholes on sewers to be subjected to air tests shall be provided with a one-half-inch diameter, galvanized, capped test pipe installed through the manhole wall and extending three inches into the manhole at an elevation equal to the top of the sewer pipe. Prior to the air test, the groundwater elevation shall be determined as follows: 
1.	The test pipe in the downstream manhole shall be cleared by blowing air through it.
2.	A length of clear plastic tubing shall then be attached to the end of the test pipe and extended vertically upward to or near the top of the manhole. 
3.	Groundwater will enter and rise in the tubing to the elevation of the groundwater level at the manhole and will be readily visible. 
f.	The air test pressure shall be adjusted to (one foot H2O = .433 psi) to compensate for the maximum groundwater level above the top of the sewer pipe to be tested. After all tests are performed and the sewer is ready for final acceptance, the test pipe shall be plugged in an acceptable manner. If a sewer fails to pass any of the previously described tests, the contractor shall determine the location of the leaks, repair them, and retest the sewer. The tests shall be repeated until satisfactory results are obtained. Repair procedures must be approved by the township's engineer. All visible leaks and cracks shall be repaired regardless of test results. 
g.	Television inspection.
1.	All constructed sanitary sewers shall be televised. The contractor shall furnish all materials, labor, equipment and all else necessary for performing a television inspection of new sanitary sewers. Included will be any necessary cleaning of debris obstructing a clear image of the sewer. 
2.	All television inspection shall be recorded and turned over to the township engineer. The recording shall be made in a format suitable to the township (i.e., VHS, DVD, etc.). 
3.	The inspection shall involve the visual observation by closed circuit television. The inspection shall be performed at a rate of speed which will allow examination of all points of infiltration, cracked or crushed pipe, defective joints, misalignment in line or grade, location of wye openings and any defects which may appear. Any items which, in the opinion of the engineer, require repair shall be precisely located and described by a detailed statement of the condition. As part of the television inspection, the precise location of each wye shall be noted in relation to the downstream manhole. These locations shall be entered on the wye location sheet supplied by the contractor. 
4.	If the camera encounters a dip in the sewer such that water is standing above the springline of the sewer pipe, and if the camera lens becomes submerged because of the condition, the camera rig shall be withdrawn from the sewer and inserted from the other end as far as possible. At all times, backflooding into the reach from the adjacent section shall be prevented. 
5.	Two copies of all notes, wye locations and other pertinent information shall be made as a part of the television inspection. One set of this information shall be turned over to the township engineer upon the completion of the inspection of each line. The second copy of the information shall be held by the contractor until completion of the project, at which time it shall be neatly assembled and turned over to the township engineer. 
h.	Air test table.
Length
of Line
in FeetMinimum Holding Time in Seconds Required for Pressure to Drop from 3.5 to 2.5 psig Pipe Diameters 4"6"8"10"12"15"18"21"24"27"30"36"25 4101828 40 628912115820024835650920 35 5579124178243317401495713751330538311918526736447560174310201001840 7011015824835648563476585112522 508813819830944659568015026 5910616523837151017531 5912319327742520035 7914122031722540 8915824834025044 99176275275481091942833005311921135062139227400701584507917050088550976001066501131702272833404255105956807658511020 
Note: To be used when testing one diameter only. For more than one pipe size in a test section, the minimum holding time shall be computed by the engineer in accordance with ASTM Spec. C-828. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 10-5, 3-17-2008)
Secs. 14-286-14-303. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - RURAL FIRE PROTECTION FACILITIES 

Sec. 14-304. - Intent. 
    This article is to serve as a guide for applicants to design and construct facilities for fire suppression needs such as cisterns, ponds, dry hydrants, etc. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 11-1, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-305. - General. 
(a)	The township is a rural community, which is not currently served by a municipal water system. Currently, the fire department relies on tanker trucks, surface water, dry hydrants in lakes, cisterns, and private water sources for firefighting purposes. This article is to be used to standardize the design and construction of such similar systems where the township has determined they are required. The township retains the right to require larger systems or additional facilities, including special provisions, and considering current published and generally accepted fire protection standards, which may be necessary to meet appropriate health, safety, and welfare standards. 
(b)	The specifications are divided into three sections: dry hydrants, cisterns and ponds. The dry hydrant standards are to include both individual hydrant assemblies for installation into proposed or existing ponds and piping systems from cisterns. Therefore, the dry hydrant standards apply to all systems except where specifically noted in the other sections. 
(c)	All on-site fire suppression systems will require review and approval by the township fire department. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 11-2, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-306. - Dry hydrants. 
(a)	Design considerations. 
(1)	All hydrant systems are to be designed to provide the required flow rate within the allowable total head loss as specified: 
a.	The suction piping system must be capable of delivering 1,250 gpm for the entire required water volume. 
b.	Total head loss must be less than 20 feet.
c.	Static lift is not to exceed 15 feet.
(2)	Each design must be specific to the proposed site and based on actual soil conditions, layout, water source, etc. 
(3)	Longevity and ease of long-term maintenance are of high priority. Innovative approaches to this are encouraged provided the minimum standards herein can be achieved. 
(4)	Seasonal variations such as ice formations, snow pack, accessibility, etc., must be considered and the system designed for yearround and all-weather use. 
(b)	Materials. 
(1)	All dry hydrants shall be constructed of six-inch diameter or larger pipe and fittings.
(2)	Ductile iron pipe (DIP) Class 52, Schedule 40 galvanized steel, PVC Schedule 40, or heavier pipe and fittings are to be used. 
(3)	Mechanical restraint fitting connections and field lock pipe joints are to be used for DIP. Solvent welded premium joints with concrete thrust blocks are to be used for PVC pipe. All connections should be clean and free of debris and sealed to the manufacturer recommendations for an airtight seal. 
(4)	All exposed, aboveground fixtures are to be primed and painted with high visibility red paint to prevent deterioration and corrosion. Each fixture is to be clearly identified and labeled. 
(5)	Prefabricated screens or strainers must be installed at the intake. Holes are to be five-sixteenths-inch diameter and be of sufficient number to allow the proper flow rate. Strainers should be on only one longitudinal half of the pipe to prevent whirlpooling. Brand and manufacturer of strainer must be shown on the plans. 
(6)	The hydrant connection is to be National Standard Tread (N.S.T.), six-inch diameter swivel female thread. 
(c)	Calculations. The following calculations must be included with the design for township review: 
(1)	Determination of required static lift.
(2)	Total linear feet of straight pipe including the screen, laterals, and riser.
(3)	Total straight feet equivalent for all fittings connections, adapters, etc. Reference material used for the values of equivalent footage, based on pipe type, is to be included. 
(4)	Total length of straight pipe equivalent.
(5)	Using 1,250 gpm determination of the total head loss due to friction for the piping system. Reference material used to determine friction losses to be provided. 
(6)	Total head loss from pipe friction and static lift.
(d)	Layout. 
(1)	Hydrants are to be located as directed by the township or generally within equal distances of travel from all structures in the development, if intended to serve as a new development. 
(2)	The hydrant must be located so the connection is no more than six feet from the edge of an improved road or designated access road as permitted by the township. 
(3)	Maximum horizontal distance from the intake to hydrant connection will be based on the site and the total discharge that can be obtained. 
(4)	Wide sweep bends (i.e., two-45 degree bends with a short piece of pipe in between in lieu of 90-degree bends) are preferred to provide the fire department with the ability to insert a smaller diameter suction hose through the assembly should the hydrant connection be damaged and inoperable. 
(5)	A minimum number of 90-degree bends should be used, preferably less than two, in the hydrant assembly. 
(6)	The static water level should remain below the frost line. Where not possible insulation suitable to the township must be placed around the piping. 
(7)	All horizontal suction piping should be placed to slope slightly upwards toward the hydrant connection. With long distances, the fire department may require that the pipe is laid so that the water will come to vertical elbow, which will require less air to be displaced. 
(8)	Where a hydrant is installed in an existing lake and the potential for damage due to boating exists, the end of the hydrant is to be marked with a buoy or visible stake. 
(9)	The hydrant connection should be 20 to 24 inches above the grade where the vehicles would park to connect to the system. The hydrant connection should be slightly lower than the connection on the vehicle. 
(10)	The hydrant connection should be anchored below the frost line or to the cistern where appropriate. 
(11)	The bottom of the suction pipe in a cistern to the hydrant connection should not exceed 14 feet. 
(12)	A 11/2 inch circulating line shall be provided to maintain drafts.
(e)	Construction. 
(1)	Construction in existing watercourses is subject to the state department of environmental quality (MDEQ) permits and all other permits as required. 
(2)	The dry hydrant assembly must be placed on undisturbed ground or on engineered fill as specified by a certified geo-technical consultant. Special provisions for unstable soils such as pile support, mud mats, geo-textile fabrics, etc., must be included in the design. 
(3)	Proper soil erosion control measures around the upland construction area and in the water are to be installed and maintained throughout the construction. 
(4)	The trench is to be excavated full length and the trench bottom is to be checked for unstable soils. 
(5)	The hydrant assembly is to be constructed outside of the trench. Joints should be allowed to dry fully prior to placing the entire assembly into the trench. 
(6)	The riser must be braced vertically and the pipe backfilled starting at the riser. backfill to be clean native material or as specified by the project engineer. 
(7)	Where the assembly extends more than four feet into the water, braces to the water source bottom must be installed. 
(8)	Hydrant fittings, connections and supports should be installed at the proper grade once finished grade is established at the connection. 
(9)	Entire system must be tested by the fire department prior to final approval and acceptance.
(Ord. No. 119, § 11-3, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-307. - Cisterns. 
(a)	General design considerations. 
(1)	Minimum capacity of any cistern shall be 10,000 gallons or as determined by township.
(2)	A means to maintain the required water level in the tank must be included in the design. This may include an onsite water source suitable to the township or the required connections for pumping into or filling up the cistern from a water transporter. 
(3)	Locking MIOSHA standard access openings for maintenance and inspection must be included in the design of any system. Multichamber systems or systems with more than one tank must have access ports in all chambers or tanks. Steel reinforced polypropylene steps are to be built into the tank to provide access. 
(4)	Each design must be site specific to existing soil conditions, groundwater levels, seasonal frost cycles, etc. 
(5)	A licensed professional structural engineer shall certify the design of any prefabricated or built-in-place cistern. 
(6)	Long-term maintenance factors such as silt potential, evaporation, freezing, etc., or other factors as determined by the township are to be addressed. 
(7)	The cistern system shall be designed for ease of maintenance and longevity. Innovative approaches to this are encouraged provided that the minimum requirements herein are met. The cistern design shall incorporate the proposed access means for maintenance. 
(8)	Formed-in-place concrete or prefabricated concrete, steel, fiberglass or plastic cisterns are allowed. Detailed shop drawings including material testing results and specifications must be submitted to the township for review. 
(b)	Design. 
(1)	The cistern must be designed and rated for highway loading.
(2)	The design of the cistern must take into account how it is to be refilled.
(3)	The collection and transportation of surface waters into a constructed cistern is not permitted for fire suppression. 
(4)	All cisterns with a water level above the frost line are to be insulated with vermin-proof insulation. A means to break ice formations such as a pike pole or floating barrel are to be included in the design considerations for those systems above the frost line. 
(5)	The cistern must not float when empty and must be adequately anchored when placed in areas of high ground water. 
(6)	Should multiple tanks be used to achieve the required volume, two 12-inch diameter concrete pipes are to be installed between tanks and be located along the bottom. 
(7)	It must be demonstrated that the tank will be waterproof. Hydrostatic testing results of prefabricated systems should be provided to the township. The joints, floor and walls of built-in-place tanks must be waterproofed by an approved method suitable to the township. 
(8)	Prior to acceptance by the township, successful testing by the fire department is required. The applicant is to provide a full tank for testing prior to final approval. 
(c)	Piping. 
(1)	All suction and fill piping should be ASTM schedule 40 galvanized steel or PVC.
(2)	PVC piping for water elevation test tubes or ventilation pipes shall be schedule 40 or heavier PVC. PVC joints should be solvent welded with PVC glue. All-purpose cement should not be used. 
(3)	The ventilation pipe is to be minimum four-inch diameter pipe mortared into the top of the tank. The pipe is to have a 180-degree bend installed with an insect screen. The inlet to the ventilation pipe is to be 36 inches from finished grade. 
(4)	A 2.5-inch diameter PVC pipe with cap is to be mortared into the top of the tank for checking the water level without having to open the tank. The cap should be 24 inches from the finished grade. 
(5)	The suction line is to be schedule 40 galvanized steel or PVC mortared into the concrete and fastened to the top of the tank with a minimum eight inch riser clamp welded to the pipe. 
(6)	The suction line is to be installed to six inches from the bottom of the tank. A four foot by four foot by one-quarter inch galvanized steel anti-vortex plate is to be welded to the suction pipe and anchored to the bottom of the tank. The hydrant connection should be 20-24 inches above finished grade. 
(7)	The filler pipe is to be mortared into the top of the tank and a two foot by two foot by one-quarter inch galvanized steel plate welded to the pipe and anchored to the top of the tank. A single four-inch diameter Storz fitting with cap is to be installed for the filler pipe. The filler pipe shall be located 36 inches above the finished backfill grades. 
(d)	Construction. 
(1)	The entire cistern should be completed, and inspected before it is backfilled
(2)	Clean backfill material should meet Class III granular material specifications and be compacted to 95 percent density. 
(3)	The bedding should be specified based on soil borings taken at the cistern location. A minimum of 12-inch thick class II sand or 21AA aggregate on undisturbed ground is required. Cisterns placed in fill areas are generally not permitted without specialized fill and construction provisions certified by a certified geo-technical specialist. 
(4)	The top of the tank should be lower than the frost line or be properly insulated.
(Ord. No. 119, § 11-4, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-308. - Ponds; design. 
(a)	Ponds designed or retrofitted to provide the required storage volume must provide a minimum volume of 20,000 gallons, in addition to stormwater design volumes, or as required by the township yearround. Volume available in the pond shall be measured from the invert of the intake to the low water elevation as determined by a professional engineer and with consideration of freezing, seasonal drought conditions and recorded historical data. 
(b)	The storage elevation must be two feet above the top of the intake pipe to avoid cavitation and loss of pump capacity. Ice layers are not to be included in the specified two feet. 
(c)	The intake pipe must be at minimum, 18 inches above the pond bottom or as determined by the township engineer with consideration to siltation potential, vegetative growth, potential for clogging, etc. 
(d)	Elevations of the pond bottom, intake, design permanent water surface, low water surface in drought conditions, ice cap depth, etc., must be clearly labeled on the plans. 
(e)	The pond must be accessible near the hydrant for inspection of the intake, maintenance of the intake, and use, should the hydrant be damaged, to provide a secondary pumping source. 
(f)	The project engineer shall demonstrate that the permanent water elevation in any open water body intended to provide fire service will provide the sufficient fire flows as listed herein even during a 50-year drought period. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 11-5, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-309. - Access. 
(a)	Access to dry hydrants, cisterns and ponds must be all weather bituminous or gravel roads. 
(b)	Access roads are to have a maximum sustained grade of eight percent.
(c)	Roads are to be a minimum of 12 feet wide.
(d)	Maneuverability and provisions for the turn around capabilities of fire vehicles must be included in the road layout. 
(e)	Access must be free of obstructions including landscaping.
(f)	Drainage improvements must be included in the design to provide positive drainage away from the road and the fire facility. Culverts should be installed in ditch lines to convey stormwater under the road. 
(g)	When located near the road, guardrails, concrete bollards, timber posts, etc., must be installed to protect the cistern and the exposed hydrant connection pipes. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 11-6, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-310. - Easements. 
(a)	The entire fire facility must be situated within a dedicated easement granted to the township. This easement is to be located in an outlot or open area in residential developments. The easement must be accessible from a public road or a dedicated access easement from the nearest public road. 
(b)	The easement must be sized and the site designed to allow construction equipment to maneuver around the perimeter of the facility for future maintenance. 
(c)	The easement area is to be free of both buried and overhead utility lines.
(d)	The easement area should be designated with warning signs and delineated from other areas of the development with landscaping or decorative fencing. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 11-7, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-311. - Maintenance. 
(a)	Until final acceptance by the township, the applicant must maintain the fire facility.
(b)	After final acceptance, the fire facility shall be maintained by the township. As a condition of final acceptance, the applicant shall provide the township with recordable documents providing consent to the establishment of a special assessment district for maintenance costs or the establishment of an escrow account for maintenance costs as the township may determine. 
(c)	Access roads shall be plowed in the winter. Snow plowing shall not block access to the cistern or dry hydrant. 
(d)	For pond water sources, vegetative control measures and scheduling must be taken into consideration and included in the development master deed, bylaws, or maintenance agreement. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 11-8, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-312. - Plan requirements. 
    The following requirements shall be included in all fire protection facilities' plans: 
(1)	Location of fire facilities.
(2)	All pipe types, size, joints used, etc.
(3)	Specify type of red paint to be used.
(4)	Include notes on labeling all pipes in field.
(5)	Suction screen brand and manufacture with hole size and number.
(6)	Specify hydrant connection type (N.S.T. six-inch diameter female thread).
(7)	All pipe sizing calculations with back up reference material.
(8)	Dimension, of facilities to road edge water source, nearest structure, and furthest structure. 
(9)	Assembly configuration including all bends and connections.
(10)	Show static water elevation and dimension the lift height.
(11)	Extent and type of insulation and waterproofing.
(12)	Buoy or marker types and locations for pump installation.
(13)	Dimension to all connections from proposed finished grades.
(14)	Proper soil erosion control measures.
(15)	Specify backfill and compaction requirements.
(16)	Intake and connection brace or supports.
(17)	Specify the means to maintain cistern water level.
(18)	Show access openings and specify cover type, brand and manufacturer.
(19)	Include detailed cistern shop drawings, material certifications; design loading, buoyancy potential. 
(20)	Include plan notes, stating testing responsibilities.
(21)	Show connections between multiple tanks.
(22)	Details for pipe connections to the cistern.
(23)	Construction sequence of operation.
(24)	Tank elevations.
(25)	Required volume calculation.
(26)	Elevations for permanent pond elevations, documented low water, intake, pond bottom, ice cap, etc. 
(27)	Location of access road.
(28)	Access road cross-section.
(29)	Provisions for fire truck maneuverability.
(30)	Necessary drainage improvements.
(31)	Locations of bollards, posts guardrail, protective landscaping, fences, etc.
(32)	Limits and dimensions of easement area.
(Ord. No. 119, § 11-9, 3-17-2008)
Secs. 14-313-14-342. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - PUMP HOUSES FOR COMMUNITY POTABLE WATER SYSTEMS 

Sec. 14-343. - Intent. 
    This article is intended to provide a sound but reasonable basis for the design, preparation of plans, and construction of community well pump houses affecting the public. Standard specifications and plans should facilitate improved operation and maintenance by providing standard parts and similar mechanical and electrical plans. The provisions of this article may not apply to all conditions, and alternate solutions based on published and/or generally accepted technology may be permitted as approved by the township. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 12-1, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-344. - Background. 
(a)	The township is a community that does not have a municipal water supply. Residents rely on individual or community wells and distribution systems. Until such time as a municipal system is established, all water systems shall remain private. 
(b)	The provisions of this article shall be used in conjunction with the requirements of local and state health departments for publicly controlled water systems. These standards are only intended to supplement county and state requirements. (The more strict interpretation of such requirements between these standards and those of OCHD and MDEQ shall be used.) 
(Ord. No. 119, § 12-2, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-345. - General. 
(a)	All construction work, materials and equipment shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, and regulations or utility company rules. 
(b)	Equipment and material brand names, types and sizes specified are an indication of design criteria. Other makes, styles, types and sizes may only be used at the direction of the project engineer and with prior written approval of the township, and if they are considered equal to the item specified. All deviations must be approved by the township before any construction will be accepted. 
(c)	Please check with township for the current review fees required.
(d)	A hydrogeologic study shall be prepared of the site including sinking a test well. All geological formations encountered while drilling the test well shall be recorded in a well log including the depths at which they are found. A pump shall be placed in the test well and the well shall be pumped for a period of not less than 24 hours in order to determine the amount of water that can be withdrawn from the well for an indefinite period. 
(e)	As a minimum the following data shall be recorded during the pumping test:
(1)	Date, time and location of test.
(2)	Static level, which is the distance from the ground surface to the water in the well measured after at least 12 hours without pumping. 
(3)	Pumping rate at which the water is withdrawn from the well.
(4)	Pumping levels, which are the distances from the ground surface to the water in the well measured every five minutes for the first hour of pumping and every one-half hour thereafter for the duration of the tests, which shall be at least 24 hours. 
(5)	Recovery levels which are the distances from the ground surface to the water in the well measured every five minutes for the first hour after the pumping stops and every one-half hour thereafter until no change in level is noted. 
(6)	Towards the end of the pumping test, a water sample shall be taken by a qualified technician or by a township representative. The sample shall be delivered to a testing laboratory acceptable to the township where it shall be tested for total coliform, metals, other inorganic chemicals, VOC, total trihalomethanes, arsenic, and any other compounds required to obtain approval from the state department of environmental quality. 
(f)	A sheet of the plan set shall contain a service district map drawn at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet showing each lot or parcel to be serviced by this well. This sheet shall also show the calculation of the design peak water usage requirement for the entire service area. These calculations shall clearly identify the demand associated with each parcel in the district. The fire flow requirements or provisions of the well system shall be stated and approved by the township. 
(g)	One or more sheets of the plan set shall be dedicated to and include the pump discharge curves; all well logs and sieve analyses; the diameter, size of opening, and length of the screens; the proposed settings for the screens and pumps; motor nameplate data; proposed hydropneumatic tank sizing calculations and drawings; and reference to the hydrogeologic study. 
(h)	Prior to construction, a pre-construction meeting shall be scheduled as required by this article. Attendees shall include the maintenance company representatives, the general contractor, the construction contractor, the well driller, and others as appropriate. Prior to final acceptance, a meeting of the same people shall be scheduled by the applicant to address the punch list items. 
(i)	All wells shall be properly disinfected by chlorination before being placed into service. After disinfection a water sample shall be submitted to a testing laboratory, satisfactory to the township, for microbiological analysis. Results obtained shall be acceptable to the state department of environmental quality. 
(j)	At the discretion of the township or the state department of environmental quality, radiological testing may be required. 
(k)	The exterior of all pump housing shall be architecturally compatible to the development and approved by the township. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 12-3, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-346. - Construction. 
(a)	All applicable township building permits shall be obtained by the applicant, and all inspections performed and approved at the applicant's expense. 
(b)	State building and construction codes are to be adhered to.
(c)	All pump house walls shall be minimum eight-inch masonry block. Only eight-inch glass block window openings will be allowed. All exposed interior wall surfaces shall receive two coats of masonry paint. 
(d)	Roofs shall be of frame construction and shall be hip or gable style with a minimum four-to-12 pitch. 
(e)	Either gable attic ventilators with insect screens at each gable or screened ridge vents shall be provided. Soffit vents, gutters and down spouts shall also be provided. 
(f)	Polyurethane sealants shall be used to seal all joints between exterior metal frames, siding, etc., and adjacent surfaces. 
(g)	Insulation is required on the foundation walls and in the ceiling. Insulation shall provide the following minimum value: 
Foundation wallsR-10Building wallR-11CeilingR-24 
(h)	Insulation thickness and type of material shall be detailed on construction plans.
(i)	The finished floor shall be 3,500 psi concrete, six inches thick reinforced with not less than six inches by six inches, W7 × W7 welded wire fabric with a four inch sand base compacted to 95 percent density and thoroughly moistened (plastic vapor barrier shall be used) before pouring. The floor shall pitch two inches per ten feet to the building wall opposite the doors and shall be finished smooth. A floor drain trough for the full length of pump house floor four inch wide and four inch deep shall be installed six inches from the building wall opposite the doors. This trough shall drain to a four-inch diameter C.I. pipe at the center of the trough length with a screened free fall gravity outlet to the outside. Finish floor elevation shall be a minimum of 12 inches above finish grade. 
(j)	Where the water system supply main exits through the pump house floor, there shall be a 24 inches × 24 inches floor opening filled with pea gravel. 
(k)	Removable roof hatches with township approved lockable covers shall be provided through the pump station roof and ceiling. These hatches shall be designed to facilitate all well, pump and motor maintenance and sized accordingly. Hatches will be "Bilco" Security Services, or equal, with three-sixteenths-inch aluminum cover and one-inch glass fiber insulation hinged perpendicular to the roof ridge. Latches shall be operable from the inside of the well house only. 
(l)	Internal pump house ventilation shall be provided by closable, ceiling registers connected by minimum six-inch diameter sheet metal duct work to low profile, roof vents. Two minimum, one per 4,000 cubic feet of interior building size, are required. In addition, an approved through the wall propeller exhaust fan with an aluminum gravity damper in combination with an approved motorized aluminum air intake damper with blade edge and joints seals shall be provided in the vicinity of any planned chemical area. Approved stormproof aluminum louvers shall be provided on the building exterior at the fan and damper locations. The exhaust fan shall be sized to change the air within the well house six times per hour. 
(m)	Two thru-wall vents (minimum size eight inches x 16 inches) shall be installed six inches above the finish floor in the wall behind the hydro-pneumatic tank. Thru-wall bricks vents shall have cast iron grilles or five-eighths-inch diameter steel rod guards, insect screen, water stop and interior register with damper control. Two minimum, one vent per each 4,000 cubic feet of interior building space shall be installed. 
(n)	A one-half inch exterior grade, plywood or Oriented Strand Board (OSB) ceiling shall be provided at the top of the block wall and secured to the underside of ceiling framing with screws and adhesive. The ceiling section under the hatches may be readily removable on hinges with the insulation sandwiches between the ceiling and another layer of three-eighths inch exterior grade plywood. The generator room ceiling shall have a lay of one-hour fire rated damp proof drywall applied over the plywood ceiling. 
(o)	Doors shall be 13/4-inch insulated with no cardboard fillers, a minimum of 36 inches by 80 inches in size, of G60 galvanized metal flush type swing doors without louvers or windows, as manufactured by Fenestra, Inc., complete with frame, hardware, and threshold. Door frames shall be manufactured from G-60 galvanized metal with mortar-filled jambs. Doors shall be completely weather-stripped and weather-sealed with adjustable metal door sills. All doors shall open to the outside. Locks shall be provided by the applicant and approved by the township. Doors must have moisture drain holes in the bottom. Hydraulic door closures with hold open arms shall be installed on all doors. 
(p)	A one-half inch minimum expansion joint shall be installed completely around all concrete tank cradles, pump bases, and well house perimeter. 
(q)	Splash pads, four foot by ten foot by four inches with curbs three sides six inches high (to direct flow) of 3,500 psi concrete construction shall be installed outside of the pump house centered and extending ten feet from the blow off pipe discharge end. Ground shall be swaled in such a fashion as to direct all flow away from building area with the first six feet being formed from natural stone rip-rap. Air relief valve and pressure relief valve exterior discharges shall be directed way from pedestrian areas, and pressure relief valve discharges shall also be directed to a splash pad or paved area. A relief valve shall discharge to the south or east of the building. 
(r)	Adequate consideration shall be given to the quantity of water that may be discharged during maintenance, testing, or blow off. Suitable drainage shall be provided away from the building. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 12-4, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-347. - Electrical. 
(a)	All electrical work shall meet local, state, and federal requirements and shall conform to the state construction code current revisions. 
(b)	All electrical equipment shall be as manufactured by Allen Bradley, Square D, ITE, BW Controls, Diversified Electronics or approved equal that has a local stocking agency. 
(c)	When a back-up generator is not required as part of the original well house construction, a three-way (utility, off, generator) manual transfer switch shall be wall mounted inside the pump house. Also an Appleton receptacle (AJA 200 34250RS) for portable generator hook-up shall be installed whenever a generator is not provided. The generator receptacle shall be installed on an interior wall adjacent to the generator parking area. A six inches by six inches through wall double doored access hatch shall be provided adjacent to the receptacle to permit passage of the generator cord. The access hatch doors shall be lockable from the interior of the well house only. 
(d)	All distribution and control equipment shall be mounted in one location, as practical, to four foot by eight foot by three-quarter inch sheet of exterior grade, pressure treated plywood securely lagged to the wall three feet above the floor. All electrical equipment must be a minimum of 24 inches above finished floor level. A minimum of three foot clear work space shall be maintained in front of all electrical equipment mounted to the plywood. All heavy electrical equipment such as transformers shall be lag bolted through the plywood into the block wall. 
(e)	Each motor shall be controlled by a NEMA rated magnetic motor starter and fusible disconnect of proper size. The starter shall be provided with a built-in switch to provide "Manual," "Off" and "Automatic" control and shall be as manufactured by Allen Bradley with nonadjustable overload relays. All pump motors 40 h.p. and above shall have reduced voltage starting of the part winding autotransformer or delta-wye types only. This is to reduce generator size and cost. Allen-Bradley Smart motor controllers or a unit of equal design as approved by the township are also acceptable where a slow start and stop are required. 
(f)	Disconnect switches shall be as manufactured by ITE, or equal, and shall have auxiliary contacts to interrupt the motor control circuit. All motor fuses shall be Buss or equal dual element fuses. 
(g)	Automatic alternating control of starting of pumps shall be provided by means of B/W Controls or approved equal. The electrodes for these controls shall be installed on the front of the tank with gate valves, and unions so electrodes can be removed for cleaning with the tank pressurized. 
(h)	In general, all conductors or cable shall be 600 volt, 98 percent conductivity copper with code types "THHN, or THWN" for control and code types "XHWW, THHN or THWN" for power and type MTW for control panel wiring, insulated per National Board of Underwriters. All wire shall be run in rigid steel, hot dipped galvanized conduit below grade or in concrete floors, walls, block, etc., with necessary expansion joints provided. Electrical metallic tubing SCH 40 PVC or thin wall conduit may be used above grade except for building exterior where only rigid steel galvanized conduits and fittings may be used. Flexible liquid tight metallic conduit may be used where rigid conduit is impractical and shall be Sealtite or others approved by the Underwriter's Laboratories. All motors shall be hooked up with a 24-inch section of flexible conduit directly adjacent to the motor. Conduit for pump motors shall be case into concrete floor and brought up to motors. The generator connector shall be wired with type "G" cable to allow freedom of movement of the connector pins. 
(i)	All electrical panels, starters, and switches shall be identified by permanent one-half-inch letters as to the equipment they serve and applicable voltage. All wiring shall be numbered, and a corresponding as-built electrical ladder diagram for all electrical shall be provided. The ladder diagram shall be complete showing all switches, relays, etc., per pump house installation. Attached to the electrical diagram shall be an equipment listing giving brand names and model or part numbers. Manufacturer's diagrams are not acceptable. Ladder diagram and list shall be provided on one 24 inches by 36 inches Mylar sheet suitable for reproduction. The contractor shall provide a copy of all operations manuals for all equipment bound in three-ring binders to the owner, the maintenance entity and the township. 
(j)	Two natural gas unit heaters with blowers shall be ceiling, swivel mounted in each pump house with BTUH rating adequate to maintain a 55-degree Fahrenheit minimum inside temperature at outside temperature of minus 20 degrees Fahrenheit. Heating shall be controlled by a built-in low range thermostat (minimum setting of 50 degrees Fahrenheit must be possible) calibrated in degrees. Unit heaters shall be all gas with electric spark ignitions. Generator rooms shall have electric unit heaters with fans and built-in low range thermostats. 
(k)	Lighting.
(1)	Inside. All building indoor lighting shall be with fluorescent open strip fixtures equipped with electronic ballasts and 2-F40 energy saving cool white bulbs in each location. A minimum of six shall be installed in the main building and/or two in the generator room. Generator room lights shall be switched at all entrance doors. Switches for the inside lighting shall be provided at all building entrances. 
(2)	Outside. One each 50-watt HPS fixture and lamp with photo cell shall be installed at each building entry door, controlled through three- or four-way switch, as needed from inside of each door. Light fixtures will have vandal-resistant lens covers, Lexan or equal material. Lighting must conform to the standards set out in chapter 46, pertaining to zoning. 
(l)	As a minimum, a duplex, wall-mounted 120-volt, 20-amp electrical duplex outlet shall be provided at or immediately adjacent to each pump, in the vicinity of hydropneumatic tank controls, at the control panel, and at each doorway. All utility outlets shall have ground fault protection. 
(m)	Running time meter shall be installed in the electrical panel with readings available from the panel face for each pump. The read out should be in hours and tenths, Cramer 635K or equal. 
(n)	A 120 volt AC electric clock shall be provided and mounted with the electrical equipment.
(o)	Each three-phase motor shall be protected by a phase monitor as manufactured by Diversified Electronics, Model #SLA 440-ALE. 
(p)	A programmable time delay relay such as Diversified Electronics TDU-120 AKA or Omron H3CA-A shall be provided to delay pump motor start after pre-lube solenoid activation. Motors shall be protected from phase problems due to switch over from gen/normal power with time delay in transfer unit that will allow sufficient time for phase to stabilize before motors are restarted. Motors and pumps as a unit shall be mounted in a level manner. 
(q)	A liquid level sensor, such as Flygt ENH-10, shall be installed inside the pump house to interrupt all electrical service from a water level one foot equals zero inches above finished floor level. A liquid level sensor bypass shall be installed in the control panel. This will also shut down the generator unit. 
(r)	The pump house shall be provided with a secondary lightning arrestor such as Square D SP-3650. 
(s)	An electrical duplex outlet energized with the pump motor for each well shall be provided on the pump house wall opposite the electrical control panels for the operation of chemical injection pumps. 
(t)	If the well house is required to be equipped with a permanent standby generator, it shall be sized and equipped to automatically operate all well pumps and all associated equipment during any electrical power failure. This will be a permanently mounted unit sized to operate all equipment and loads necessary to keep facility at 100 percent operation. 
(u)	If required by the township, the well house shall be equipped with a telemetering system approved by the township engineer. 
(v)	An indicating pilot light for each incoming utility power leg shall be Allen Bradley Model 800T or equal and located on the control panel visible from the auxiliary power receptacle. The indicating lights shall be of the transformer type with low voltage lamps. 
(w)	An automatic transfer switch/exerciser shall be provided for generator and shall be set up to exercise generator with or without load. Transfer switches shall be equipped with a means of preventing out of phase transfer of loads such as programmed transition or an in-phase relay. 
(x)	Pilot devices shall be full size NEMA 13 with engraved nameplates. Indicator lights shall be pushed to test transformer type with low voltage lamps. Selector switches shall be Allen Bradley 800T or equal and have standard operators and replaceable contact blocks. 
(y)	Pressure switches shall be of the sealed mercury type as manufactured by Honeywell or approved equal and shall be type L404A for add air and low pressure alarm and type L404B for void air control. 
(z)	Solenoid valves shall be NEMA 4 pilot operated with forged brass bodies as manufactured by ASCO or equal. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 12-5, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-348. - Mechanical. 
(a)	Pumps. 
(1)	Pumps shall be capable of delivering water at 90 psi. Pumps shall be Deming deep well turbines or approved equal, 1750 RPM, with water-lubricated bearings open or semi open impellers. Clearance between impellers and bowls shall be adjusted by a nut on top of motor. Closed impeller pumps are not acceptable. The pumps shall be equipped with a close coupled shaft with anti-reversing ratchets. Manufacturer's certified test curves and physical dimension sheets shall be furnished for approval. Pumps shall be subject to field testing to assure performance in accordance with specifications. Motors shall be G.E., Westinghouse, or U.S. with final horsepower requirements determined after analysis of manufacturer's curves. No aluminum windings will be allowed in any motors. 
(2)	Stainless steel or nylon altimeter lines with direct reading altitude gauges, and air valves shall be installed at the elevation of the discharge pipe centerline for each well. The altimeter gauges on each pump shall be supplied with air by means of a nylon three-eighths-inch O.D. 200 psi line, valved at hydro-preumatic tank and valved at altimeter gauge. This line shall be capable of providing sufficient air to drive altimeter line for accurate readings. A valved connection shall also be provided at each pump to permit the use of a hand-operated pump. One hand-operated air pump shall be provided. This line is required on deep well vertical turbines as well as all submersibles. No tailpieces will be allowed on pumps. Pump bowl shall be set five feet above top of screen. 
(3)	A capped three-inch observation pipe is required, mounted on a 45-degree upward angle on each well casing. This cap shall contain a minimum one inch vent mounted with the screen pointed down; a brass foot valve minus the check flapper is suitable for this application. This shall protrude from the base a sufficient length to permit easy removal of the cap. This may not be under pipes or in the aisle-way. 
(4)	Sample cocks shall be installed at each pump and in discharge piping from storage tank. All sample cocks shall be one-half inch corporation stop with one-half inch 90-degree copper elbow attached. Chemical injection taps and necessary sampling points shall be provided for each well. The water main sampling tap shall be located ten feet beyond the pump house outside wall with a direct one inch corporation tap (no saddles allowed) to the water main. A one-inch, type K copper line shall be run a minimum of five feet deep under the pump house foundation to a typical sample cock located three feet above the pump house floor. 
(5)	A permanently installed eye wash and separate sample sink shall be installed at each well house. Drains from these fixtures may discharge to the building exterior. 
(6)	Each pump shall have four stainless steel one-half inch diameter minimum (set six inch into pedestal) anchor bolts installed on concrete pump foundation. The well casing shall extend one inch above the concrete pump foundation. Each pump shall be grouted at the pump base after installation. 
(7)	Submersible well pumps will be evaluated by the township engineer on a case-by-case basis. 
(b)	Pressure tank. 
(1)	The pressure tank shall have minimum one-quarter-inch steel plate sides and five-sixteenths-inch plate ends. All tanks shall have a minimum acceptable certified 150 psi test by manufacturer and shall be tagged with ASME code. The tank shall be lined with an epoxy lining, NSF approved for use in potable water supplies. 
(2)	A minimum of two 12 inches by 16 inches manholes (one on side near end and one on side near opposite end) and sufficient taps for sight glasses, controls, relief valves, compressor, etc., shall be located in the front end of tank. One two-inch diameter capped opening shall be provided at the top of the tank. 
(3)	A six-inch bottom drain and gate valve shall be located near the rear end of the tank in the bottom and piped to outside the pump house. No standpipes inside the tank will be allowed. Tanks over 10,000 gallons shall have eight-inch drains. 
(4)	All openings in the tank including those required for sight glasses and controls, except the manhole, shall have a gate valve immediately adjacent to the tank. All pressure gauges shall have snubber valves in front of them. All pressure gauges shall be liquid filled with stainless steel case and brass movements. All valves three inches and larger shall be flanged. 
(5)	A minimum four-inch Trerice pressure gauge, zero-150 psi range with gauge lock for pressurized gauge removal shall be installed in the top of the front face of the tank. 
(6)	A minimum of four steel, properly sized saddles shall be provided on each tank. Saddles shall be set on reinforced concrete stub walls. Steel saddles shall be set on nonshrink grout on top of stub walls. 
(7)	An adequate air pressure relief valve shall be provided at the pressure tank. This shall be vented to the outside at ceiling height and a suitable muffler installed to reduce the noise level below 75 dB (A). This relief valve shall be gate valved for removal from a pressurized tank. A typical setting shall be ten psi above the high operating pressure, generally 80 psi. Void air pressure switch shall control a solenoid valve, which will open at high air level to void all excess air. 
(8)	An air compressor of adequate size shall be securely wall mounted above the floor, equipped with self unloader, as a Quincy compressor, with three-quarter h.p., three-phase, 480 V.A.C., motor with minimum of three C.F.M. at 100 psi required ratings. It shall be located three to four feet above floor. 
(9)	Generally, the operating pressure range shall be 60 psi to 80 psi. However, considerable ground elevation variation throughout the system will require the pressure range to be adjusted accordingly. 
(10)	Tank size shall be such that a minimum three-minute running cycle for the production well is provided. Calculations showing the running cycle for the largest production well and corresponding tank water levels shall be provided for tank size to be approved. Tank sizing from the "Recommended Standards for Water Works," Great Lakes-Upper Mississippi River Board of State Sanitary engineers is also acceptable. Controls for the tank shall be wall mounted and not on the tank face. 
(c)	Piping. 
(1)	Steel dresser couplings with five-eighths-inch minimum tie rods shall be used on discharge lines from both pumps and from the tank. Where uni-flange style pipes and fittings are used, tie rods of one-half-inch minimum diameter are required across all joints. Middle rings of dresser couplings shall be sandblasted and coated with coal tar epoxy suitable for use in potable water systems. Rigid victaulic style grooved couplings are also acceptable. 
(2)	Propeller type meters as manufactured by Sparling or Water Specialties with readings in gallons shall be installed on the discharge piping of each pump. A straight length of pipe recommended by the manufacturer shall be installed on each side of the meter. One blank plate/cover (to factory specifications) for each water meter in the building shall be provided to allow for continued operation of the plant while meters are out for repair. 
(3)	Check valves shall have externally weighted arms, as manufactured by Apco or Valve and Primer, with brass trim. Check valves eight inches and larger shall have a soft style stop or anti-slam device. Globe style silent check valves may also be acceptable upon review by the township engineer. 
(4)	Undergroundwater mains shall be in accordance with the township's ductile iron water main specifications. Pump house water main shall be all flanged joint constructed of cement lined ductile iron class 53 pipe or ASTM A-53, Schedule 40 steel pipe. Ductile iron water main shall extend a minimum of ten feet outside the pump house foundation wall. One fire hydrant shall be located in an isolation area beyond the well house isolation valves. 
(5)	Pumping equipment, piping, and all appurtenances shall be arranged with a minimum of 48 inches of clearance from walls, except minimum of 36 inches of clearance from the backside of the hydro-pneumatic tank to the back wall. Clearance from floor to bottom of tank shall be a minimum of 24 inches and clearance from ceiling to top of tank shall be a minimum of eight inches, for tank maintenance. All four-inch through eight-inch pumping shall be kept at the same plane except the blow-off lines to outside. 
(6)	A minimum two-inch air relief valve for deep wells as Crispin D 210 or Apco Series 140 shall be provided between the check valve and pump. Minimum two-inch air relief piping shall be sloped to an easterly or a southerly building elevation, at a seven-foot six-inch minimum elevation with a brass screen fitting pointing downward one foot from the pump house exterior wall. The air release shall have a defuser mounted to reduce slam. 
(7)	All blow-off lines and hydro-pneumatic tank drains shall have exterior pipe caps installed. Exterior pipe caps shall have four, minimum one-quarter-inch diameter holes for freezing protection. The water pressure relief line shall have a flap valve at the discharge and outside of the building. 
(8)	All gate valves of four-inch diameter and larger piping shall be flanged and conform to AWWA C509, resilient wedge or AWWA C500, double disk. Valves shall have hand wheels with arrows indicating the direction of opening, and all valves shall open counter-clockwise and have nonrising stems. Valves shall be as manufactured by East Jordan, U.S. Pipe, American Flow Control, Mueller or approved equal. 
(9)	Vertical discharge piping through the floor of the pump house shall be tied with four five-eighths-inch minimum diameter stainless steel rods designed to resist 150 psi test pressure. 
(10)	Adequate pipe supports shall be provided on minimum ten-foot spacing, under bends, under all valves, under heaving fittings or as required by the township engineer. Concrete pedestals shall be provided under check valves and water meters 12 inches in diameter and larger. 
(11)	A one-half-inch copper tubing pre-lube system with gate valves shall be installed to the pressure side of the check valve for each well. Pump re-lube shall be activated 15 seconds to two minutes before pump motor start through a solenoid valve in the pre-lube piping. 
(12)	A Trerice, pressure gauge, zero-100 psi range, minimum four-inch diameter dial and snubber valve shall be installed by tapping the top of the pipe adjacent to each well before the check valve. 
(d)	Painting. 
(1)	The tank, all piping, and blow-off lines shall be given one prime coat of 769 Damp-Proof Red Primer, one second coat of 960 Zinc Chromate Primer, and one third coat of color coded piping enamel as manufactured by Rust-Oleum Corporation. 
(2)	The floor shall be provided with a nonskid finish.
(3)	The color coded scheme shall be:
Pressure TankGreenWater PipingBlueWater ValvesRedWater Blow-Off, PipingOrangeAir Blow-Off PipingGray 
(4)	The pump house interior walls and ceiling must receive prime and finish coats of paint. Paint color shall be semi-gloss white or light gray. 
(e)	Well isolation area. 
(1)	The well isolation area, including access road if any, shall be described in the master deed or recorded as an easement. 
(2)	No construction or buildings are allowed on isolation areas per state requirements. No sanitary or storm sewers may intersect the isolation area radius. 
(3)	The entire well isolation area shall be properly graded, a minimum of three inches of top soil provided, fertilized and seeded or sodded. The pump site shall be landscaped with bushes and/or trees to be compatible with the proposed development. 
(4)	A 12-foot-wide drive shall be provided with a minimum of eight-inch compacted 21AA aggregate road from the existing road to the pump house. This drive shall be properly drained and have a maximum grade of seven percent. Culverts shall be installed across all drainage ditches. A parking area shall be provided adjacent to pump house well maintenance hatches. Parking area shall match driveway specifications. A turnaround shall be provided with sufficient space to permit a generator pulled by a stake truck to conveniently enter and exit the well isolation area, while parking the generator adjacent to the well house. 
(5)	The drive shall be secured by a four-inch diameter post one each side with a minimum three-eighths-inch cable ready for padlock. Posts must be set in 12 inches by 12 inches by 42 inches deep concrete bases. 
(f)	On-site generator requirements. If required to provide an onsite generator by MDEQ or the township the following shall apply: 
(1)	The maximum dip allowed when equipment is activated will be ten percent. All data shall be supplied by the company supplying the unit. This data must confirm the engineering data supplied by the project design firm. 
(2)	The entire unit must come with a full 100 percent warranty for not less than five full years from the date of acceptance with the parts and labor inclusive. 
(3)	Only liquid cooled units are allowed. Each unit shall have a thermostatically operated block heater to maintain the unit at starting temperatures. The critical ambient outside temperature shall be 20 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(4)	Generators may be natural gas or diesel driven as determined by the township. Diesel driven units shall have a minimum 72 hours of fuel in storage tank calculated at 50 percent load. Diesel units shall have an outer vat, surrounding steel storage tank, that will hold 125 percent of any spillage that could occur. This vat shall meet M.D.P.H. codes as well as any local codes and shall include a leak alarm sensor. The tank shall be sized to provide 24 hours of full load operation and shall be provided with a fuel level indicator. A screened, two-inch outside fuel tank vent shall be provided. The fuel tank shall have a two-inch fill port. 
(5)	These units shall be equipped to automatically operate upon a power failure and shall be provided with a programmable exerciser that will have the capability of exercising with or without a load. A battery charger shall be supplied with each unit that is of the demand type. Units shall be equipped with critical silencing mufflers. A battery charger shall be permanently mounted and hardwired into the unit. 
(6)	All louvers and shutters on the generator air intake shall be mechanically operated and mounted on the interior of the building. The exterior of the building shall be provided with fixed storm proof louvers with screens to prevent insects and bug infestation of the room proper. These are to cover intake and exhaust louvers entirely. 
(7)	A complete instrument package shall be provided on engine monitoring board. All engine monitoring gauges shall be affixed to the main generator unit or an adjacent wall within reach of the unit. When available, gauges shall be supplied in lieu of lights. Minimum gauges package shall include engine temp, water temp., engine RPM, gen hz., oil pressure, voltage of battery, exciter voltage and current, auto/man operator switch, panel lights, latching type unit, trouble lights with acknowledge switch. Field circuit breaker and all normal systems operations shall be monitored in such a fashion that they will protect the unit from failure. Overcrank, overspeed, and overrun circuitry for shut down. 
(8)	Maximum RPM on engine shall not exceed 2,000 RPM. Gear boxes to reduce engine/to/generator RPM are not acceptable under any circumstances. 
(9)	Import units are acceptable only if a local distributor is available and that distributor has original equipment parts of the entire unit in stock as well as factory-authorized service and factory-trained personnel fulltime on staff. A local distributor is defined as one in the Greater Detroit Metropolitan area. The distributor must also provide 24-hour emergency service. 
(10)	Four sets of parts and service manuals shall be supplied and stored at the pump house before the unit is to be accepted, in addition to warranty documents and as-built drawings. 
(11)	The load test will be conducted at the applicant's expense, which will consist of six hours at full load. The applicant will supply manpower and all necessary fuels. This test shall be witnessed by a township representative with not less than 72 hours notification to township authorized representative. 
(12)	Diesel fuel tanks shall be turned over to the applicant full of fuel before final acceptance of the facility will be given. 
(13)	All generator units shall be mounted on skid rails and shall have sufficiently large vibration isolators to put as little vibration to building floor as possible. 
(14)	Generator units shall be mounted no less than 16 inches above the finished floor. The remainder of the electrical equipment shall be mounted no less than 24 inches above the finished floor to the bottom of the panel or any other electrical device. Adequate room shall be provided to service the unit including draining oil pans. Oil pans on engines shall be provided with a drain plumbed to the outside perimeter of the unit where oil can be captured in a container. 
(15)	The concrete floor beneath generator unit shall be sized and constructed to accommodate the weight and loading of the proposed generator. Also, the generator floor should allow for utility piping. 
(16)	Adequate room shall be provided around the generator to facilitate servicing the unit including the drawing of oil pans. Oil pans shall be provided with a drain plumbed to the outside perimeter of the unit where waste oil can be conveniently collected in a container. 
(17)	Unit-mounted radiator cooling.
a.	Duct work should be as short, straight, and as unobstructed as possible. Static pressure of more than one-half inch (1.27 cm) water column on the fan from inlet or exhaust restrictions will reduce air flow to the point of limiting maximum power and/or ambient temperature at which overheating will occur, and will not be allowed. 
b.	The connection from the radiator duct flange to the duct work shall be heavy canvas or similar flexible material to prevent noise and vibration transmission. In general, the outlet duct shall have an unrestricted area 150 percent greater than that enclosed by the radiator duct flange. The inlet opening shall be at least as large and preferably 50 percent larger than the outlet. If screens, louvers, or filter are used in the inlet or outlet openings, the openings shall be increased in size to compensate for restriction. In general, when louvers are used, the opening area shall be increased by 50 percent; when insect screening is used, the opening area shall be increased by 80 percent; when furnace filters are used, the opening area shall be increased by 120 percent. 
c.	Air inlet and outlet locations shall be chosen to prevent air recirculation inside or outside the enclosure. Consideration should also be given to prevailing winds, facing inlets into the expected winds, and outlets on the down wind side where possible. Inlets and outlets shall be located where they will not be blocked by accumulated snow or any other obstruction. The bottom of any air intake or exhaust louvers shall be located not less than 16 inches above floor level to prevent snow intrusion. 
d.	Any temperature controlling louvers shall be designed so that inlet air is not restricted to the point that pressure inside the building is reduced. The generator room and well house shall be designed to permit the generator to be removed from the building without major building demolition. 
e.	Bringing large quantities of winter air into a building can waste building heat and even result in frozen water pipes in normally heated spaces. Thermostatic controls can eliminate such problems and allow recovery of engine heat to supplement the building heating system. For cold outdoor ambients, louvers to the exterior would close, with those to the interior open. Controls would be set to reverse the condition for warm outdoor temperatures. 
f.	General. It is the intent of this specification to secure an emergency generator system that has been prototype tested, factory built, production tested, site tested, of the latest commercial design, together with all accessories necessary for a complete installation as shown on the plans and drawings and specified herein. The equipment supplied and installed shall meet the requirements of the state construction code and all applicable local codes and regulations. All equipment shall be new, of current production by a national firm which manufactures the generator, controls, and transfer switch; and assembles the generator set as a matched unit. 
g.	Submittal. Submittals shall include specification sheets showing all standard and optional accessories to be supplied, schematic wiring diagrams, dimension drawings, and interconnection diagrams identifying by terminal number each required interconnection between the generator set, the transfer switch, and other remote devices if included elsewhere in these specifications. 
h.	Testing. To assure that the equipment has been designed and built to the highest reliability and quality standards, the manufacturer shall be responsible for design prototype tests as described herein: Components of the emergency system, such as the engine/generator set, transfer switch, and accessories shall not be subjected to prototype tests since the tests are potentially damaging. Rather, similar design prototypes, which will not be sold, shall be used for these tests. Prototype test programs shall include the requirements of NFPA-110 and the following: 
1.	Maximum power (kw).
2.	Maximum starting (kva) at 35 percent instantaneous voltage dip.
3.	Alternator temperature rise by embedded thermocouple and by resistance method per NEMA MGI-22.40 and 6.40. 
4.	Governor speed regulation under steady-state and transient conditions.
5.	Voltage regulation and generator transient response.
6.	Fuel consumption at one-fourth, one-half, three-fourths and full load.
7.	Harmonic analysis, voltage waveform deviation, and telephone influence factor.
8.	Three-phase line-to-line short circuit test.
9.	Cooling air flow.
10.	Torsional analysis testing to verify that the generator set is free of harmful torsional stresses. 
11.	Endurance testing.
i.	Warranty. The emergency generator system shall be warranted by the manufacturer for five years or 1,000 hours, whichever occurs first, from the date of the site start-up with parts and labor included. 
j.	Products.
1.	The standby generator set shall be rated continuous standby (defined as continuous for the duration of any power outage) 480 volts, three phase, four wire, .8 power factor, sized to accommodate the pump motor and building load requirements. Vibration isolators shall be provided between the engine-generator and welded steel base or between the base and the floor. Data required above shall be provided by the developer as required for each specific well house. The final production test for each generator set shall be under varying loads with guards and exhaust system in place. Tests shall include: 
(i)	Single-step load pickup.
(ii)	Transient and steady-state governing.
(iii)	Safety shutdown device testing.
(iv)	Voltage regulation.
(v)	Rate power.
(vi)	Maximum power. Upon request, arrangements to witness this test will be made or a certified test record will be sent prior to shipment. 
2.	Engine. The engine shall deliver the required horsepower at a governed speed of 1,800 RPM to accommodate the pump motor and building loads. The engine shall be equipped with the following: 
(i)	Engine driven or electric fuel transfer pump, fuel filters and electric fuel shut-off valve. 
(ii)	Isochronous governor capable of 0.25 percent steady-state frequency regulation.
(iii)	12- or 24-volt positive engagement solenoid shift-starting motor.
(iv)	35-ampere minimum automatic battery charging alternator with solid-state voltage regulation.
(v)	Positive displacement, full pressure lubrication oil pump, cartridge oil filters, dipstick, and oil drain. 
(vi)	Dry-type replaceable air cleaner elements.
(vii)	A unit-mounted radiator, blower fan, water pump, thermostat, and radiator duct flange (unhoused only) shall properly cool the engine with up to 0.5 inch water external static pressure on the cooling system. 
Note- Engines requiring glow plugs will not be acceptable. 
3.	Generator.
(i)	The alternator shall be salient-pole, reconnectable ten lead, self-ventilated of drip-proof construction with amortisseur rotor windings, made from copper and skewed for smooth voltage waveform. The insulation material shall meet the NEMA standard (MGI-22.40 and 16.40) for class H and be vacuum impregnated with epoxy varnish to be fungus resistant per MIL I-24092. Temperature rise of the rotor and starter shall be limited to NEMA class F. The excitation system shall be of brushless construction controlled by a solid-state voltage regulator with adjustable Volts-per-Hertz operation capable of maintaining voltage within or 0.5 percent at any constant load from 0 to 100 percent or rating. The regulator shall be sealed from the environment and isolated from the load to prevent tracking when connected to SCR loads. 
(ii)	On application of any load up to the rated load, the instantaneous voltage dip shall not exceed ten percent and shall recover to plus or minus 0.5 percent of rated voltage within one second. 
(iii)	The generator shall be capable of sustaining at least 250 percent of rated current for at least ten seconds under a three phase symmetrical short by inherent design or by the addition of an optional current boost system. The generator shall be capable of delivering the proper electrical power with a maximum instantaneous voltage dip of seven percent when loads are started as specified elsewhere or on the drawings. 
(iv)	A resettable line current sensing circuit breaker with inverse time versus current response shall be furnished and shall not automatically reset preventing restoration of voltage if maintenance is being performed. This breaker shall protect the generator from damage due to its own high current capability and shall not trip within the ten second specified above to allow selective tripping of down-stream fuses or circuit breakers under a fault condition. 
(v)	The generator, having a single maintenance-free bearing, shall be directly connected to the flywheel housing with a semi-flexible coupling between the rotor and the flywheel. 
4.	Controller. Set-mounted controller capable of facing right, left, or rear shall be vibration isolated in the generator enclosure. The microprocessor control board shall be moistureproof and capable of operation from -400 degrees Celsius to 850 degrees Celsius. Relays will only be acceptable in high current circuits. Circuitry shall be of plug-in design for quick replacement. The controller shall be equipped to accept a plug-in device capable of allowing maintenance personnel to test the controller performance without operating the engine. The controller shall include: 
(i)	Fused DC circuits.
(ii)	Complete two-wire start/stop control, which shall operate on closure of a remote contact.
(iii)	A speed sensing system and a second independent starter motor disengagement system shall protect against the starter engaging with a moving flywheel. Battery charging alternator voltage will not be acceptable for this purpose. 
(iv)	The starting system shall be designed for restarting in the event of a false engine start, by permitting the engine to completely stop and then reengage the starter. 
(v)	Cranking cycler with a 15-second ON and OFF cranking periods.
(vi)	Overcrank protection designed to open the cranking circuit after 75 seconds if the engine fails to start. 
(vii)	Circuitry to shut down the engine when the signals for high coolant temperature, low oil pressure, or overspeed are received. 
(viii)	Engine cool down timer factory set at five minutes to permit unloaded running of the standby set after transfer of the load to normal. 
(ix)	Three-position (Automatic - OFF - TEST) selector switch. In the test position, the engine shall start and run regardless of the position of the remote starting contacts. In the automatic position, the engine shall start when contacts in the remote control circuit close and stop five minutes after those contacts open. In the off position, the engine shall not start even though the remote start contacts close. This position shall also provide for immediate shutdown in case of an emergency. Reset of any fault lamp shall also be accomplished by putting the switch to the off position. 
(x)	Indicating lights to signal:
Not-in-autoflashing redOvercrankredHigh engine temperature/low coolant levelredOverspeedredAir damperredFuel tank leakingredBattery charger malfunctionred*Low battery voltagered*Low fuelred*System readygreen*Pre-alarm high engine tempyellow*Pre-alarm low oil pressureyellow*Low coolant temp.red**Required to meet NFPA-99 or NFPA-100 Level 1 Regulations 
(xi)	Test button for indicating lights.
(xii)	Alarm horn with silencer switch per NFPA-100.
(xiii)	Terminals shall be provided for each signal in subsection (f)(17)j.4(x) of this section above for connection to remote monitoring devices. 
5.	Instrumental panel. A set mounted instrument panel shall include:
(i)	Dual range voltmeter, 31/2-inch, plus or minus two percent accuracy.
(ii)	Dual range ammeter, 31/2-inch, plus or minus two percent accuracy.
(iii)	Volt meter-ammeter phase selector switch.
(iv)	Lights to indicate high or low meter scale.
(v)	Direct reading pointer-type frequency meter, 31/2-inch, plus or minus five percent accuracy, 45 to 65 Hz scale. 
(vi)	Panel illuminating lights.
(vii)	Battery charging meter.
(viii)	Coolant temperature gauge (liquid cooled models).
(ix)	Oil pressure gauge.
(x)	Running time meter.
(xi)	Voltage adjust rheostat (plus or minus five percent range).
6.	Accessories. The following accessories shall be provided:
(i)	Overvoltage protection which shall shut down the unit after one second of 15 percent or more overvoltage. 
(ii)	Battery rack, battery cables, 12-volt battery capable of delivering the minimum cold-cranking amps required at zero degrees Fahrenheit per SAE Standard J-537. 
(iii)	Gas proof, seamless, stainless steel, flexible exhaust connector ending in pipe thread.
(iv)	Flexible fuel line rated 300 degrees Fahrenheit and 100 psi ending in pipe thread.
(v)	Engine exhaust silencer, coated to be temperature and rust resistant, rated for critical applications. Exhaust noise shall be limited to 85 dB(A) as measured at ten feet in a free-field environment. 
(vi)	Block heater of proper wattage and voltage, thermostatically controlled to maintain engine coolant at 90 degrees Fahrenheit (32 degrees Celsius) to meet the start-up requirement of NFPA-99 or NFPA-110 Regulations. 
(vii)	Ten ampere automatic float and equalize battery charger with plus or minus one percent constant voltage regulation from no load to full load over plus or minus ten percent AC input line variation, current limited during engine cranking and short circuit conditions, temperature compensated for ambients from minus 40 degrees Celsius to plus 60 degrees Celsius, five percent accurate voltmeter and ammeter, fused, reverse polarity and transient protected. Optional alarm circuit board to meet the requirements of NFPA-100 for low battery voltage, high battery voltage, and battery charger malfunction shall be provided. 
(viii)	Sixteen light remote annunciator shall monitor all controller functions described in article 10 of the controller section plus line power and generator power monitoring. An integral lamp test and horn silence switch shall be included that meets NFPA-110. 
(ix)	Diesel fuel systems shall include a steel or fiberglass fuel tank with fill pipe, vent pipe and a lockable fill cap, meeting all applicable requirements of the Environmental Protection Agency as well as state and local regulations. The fuel tank size shall be large enough to produce a 24-hour run minimum at 100 percent load. 
(x)	Natural gas fueled systems shall include all required components and accessories including, but not limited to, the primary and secondary regulators, solenoid valve, fuel filter and supply line flexible connector, etc. 
7.	Execution. The equipment shall be installed as shown on the plans, in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and all applicable codes. 
8.	Site tests. An installation check, start-up, and building load test shall be performed by the manufacturer's local representative. The engineer, regular operators, and the maintenance staff shall be notified of the time and date of the site test. The tests shall include: 
(i)	Fuel, lubricating oil, and antifreeze (liquid cooled models) shall be checked for conformity to the manufacturer's recommendations under the environmental conditions present and expected. 
(ii)	Accessories that normally function while the set is standing by shall be checked prior to cranking the engine. This shall include: engine heaters, battery charger, generator strip heaters, remote annunciator, etc. 
(iii)	Start-up under test mode to check for exhaust leaks, path of exhaust gases outside the building, cooling air flow, movement during starting and stopping, vibration during running, normal and emergency line-to-line voltage and phase rotation. 
(iv)	Automatic start-up by means of simulated power outage to test remote-automatic starting, transfer of the load, and automatic shutdown. Prior to this test, all transfer switch timers shall be adjusted for proper systems coordination. Engine temperature, oil pressure and battery charge level along with generator voltage, amperes, and frequency shall be monitored throughout the test. 
(v)	Labor, fuel, and load bank for six hour test shall be supplied at the developer's/builder's expense. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 12-6, 3-17-2008)
Secs. 14-349-14-369. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - WATER MAINS 

Sec. 14-370. - Intent. 
    This article establishes the minimum requirements for design and construction of water distribution systems located within the township. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 13-1, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-371. - General. 
(a)	The township is a community that does not have a municipal water supply. Residents rely on individual or community wells and distribution systems. Until such time as a municipal system is established, all water systems shall remain private. 
(b)	The design and construction of all water main systems shall meet all applicable standards of the state department of environmental quality (MDEQ), township ordinances, and all other applicable standards. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 13-2, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-372. - Design considerations. 
(a)	General requirements. 
(1)	The distribution system in all developments requiring more than 600 feet of water main shall have a minimum of two connections to a source of supply and shall be a looped system. Water mains are to be looped whenever possible. The water main design must provide for the average daily flow rate plus a fire demand of 1,250 GPM with a residual pressure of 20 psi at the most remote hydrant. 
(2)	Generally, water mains shall be installed on the opposite side of the road as the sanitary sewer where present. All water main easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide and shall be dedicated to the authority having jurisdiction over the system. A barrel to barrel horizontal separation of ten feet shall be maintained between the water main and all sanitary sewers. Vertical separation between water main and sanitary sewer shall be a minimum of 18 inches. 
(3)	Water mains shall preferably be constructed outside of paved parking areas, streets and drives. 
(4)	Easements for possible extensions for looped connections shall be provided to the property lines at locations designated by the township. At the discretion of the township, the applicant may be required to extend a stub for future connection to the development property line or across the frontage of the property. 
(5)	The easement descriptions shall include hydrant leads and shall extend a minimum of ten feet beyond the hydrant. The easement documents shall contain a provision prohibiting the construction or locating of any aboveground structures within the limits of such easements. 
(6)	All water mains and appurtenances shall be manufactured in the U.S. unless otherwise approved. No secondhand or salvaged materials or equipment will be permitted. 
(7)	All water mains on which fire hydrants are located shall be considered accessible (to the public in the event of a fire) mains and must have easements dedicated to the township for access only. The township will not maintain said water mains unless otherwise approved by the township. 
(8)	Water main design, relative to pipe bedding and locations, shall reflect the proper selection of materials and construction method compatible with the field conditions. Areas which show unsatisfactory ground material for pipe bearing or possible chemical deterioration due to soils shall be avoided, or the pipe shall be suitably installed on adequately designed bedding and/or enclosed in protective wrap or coating. 
(9)	A tracer wire shall be installed and secured in place on all water main and appurtenances. A 12-gauge single strand copper wire shall be attached to the top of the main for the entire length of the main being installed. The wire shall be run to the top step of each manhole and tied off. When splicing wire, a knot shall be placed in the wire to relieve stress at the connection. A grease filled, underground splice kit shall be used for all connections. 
(10)	No building permits will be issued above the foundation for any development prior to the active service of the community mains and hydrants and adequate firefighting equipment. No occupancy shall be allowed in any instance without the required mains, hydrants, and sprinklers being in active service. 
(b)	Water mains. 
(1)	Feeder mains 12 inches or larger in diameter shall be provided as required by the township. 
(2)	In new developments, water mains shall be installed from boundary to boundary in abutting roads and interior streets, and at other locations as may be deemed necessary by the township's engineer for future extensions. 
(3)	Mains within new developments shall be eight inches in diameter minimum, and larger as design dictates for residential and commercial developments. Water mains of 12-inch diameter minimum size will be required for industrial developments. 
(4)	Hydrant water mains not exceeding 75 feet in length shall be a minimum diameter of six inches. 
(c)	Valves. 
(1)	A tapping sleeve, valve, and well shall be provided at every connection to existing mains unless otherwise approved by the township's engineer. All such connections shall be provided so as not to disrupt the existing water service. Cut in tees may be approved in some applications at the discretion of the township engineer. 
(2)	In general, valves on cross connecting mains shall be arranged so that no single line failure will require more than 800 feet of main to be out of service. Valves shall be so arranged that any section can be isolated by closing not more than three valves with a maximum of 30 residential units being out of service. 
(3)	A valve shall be provided at every dead end where required, for future extension, by the township. 
(4)	Valves shall generally be located far enough back from the intersection of street, right-of-way lines for the gate well structure to clear crosswalks. 
(5)	Valves shall be located so as to equally balance the number of services within each section of main between valves. 
(6)	Pressure reducing valves:
a.	In systems where two or more pressure districts are to be connected for a looped supply, the plans shall include a pressure reducing valve near the point of connection to the higher pressure district to balance pressures across the new water system. 
b.	A line gate valve shall be installed both upstream and downstream of each pressure reducing valve to permit isolation of the pressure reducing valve for maintenance or repair. If an alternate service ("looped" supply) to the water system is not available to permit repair on the pressure reducing valve with a complete shutdown of the system, then a bypass line of equivalent size pipe as the water main and an additional bypass gate valve and well shall be provided. 
(d)	Gate wells. 
(1)	A gate well shall be provided for all valves except for valves for hydrants and service leads under three inches in diameter. 
(2)	The top of the base for each gate well shall be positioned at least four inches below the bottom of the valve. A mortared brick or formed concrete support shall be provided from the floor to the valve. 
(3)	Riser sections shall be reinforced concrete sized as follows:
Nominal I.D. of Main
(inches)Size of Well
(I.D.)6 through 105'0"Over 106'0" 
(4)	All pipe openings in gate wells shall be closed with brick and mortar in a manner that will make them watertight. 
(5)	Extension stems and stem guides shall be provided in each gate well wherein the valve operating nut is further than five feet below the top of the gate well cover. Extension stems shall extend to within five feet of the top-of-cover elevation. 
(6)	A one-inch corporation stop shall be installed in the water main on each side of the line valve in each gate well. When a corporation is outside a gate well, a bronze double-strap tapping saddle (service clamp) shall be installed. 
(e)	Fire hydrants and appurtenances. 
(1)	In general, hydrants shall be spaced to provide adequate coverage to all proposed structures, or as directed by the township. 
(2)	Hydrants shall be located for double coverage, but in no case shall they be located closer than 35 feet from a single-family residence or 50 feet from other structures. 
(3)	Spacing of hydrants around commercial and/or manufacturing establishments shall be considered as individual cases and shall be determined by consultation with the township. 
(4)	Fire hydrants shall be located at street intersections where feasible. Spacing between hydrants and gate wells shall be sufficient to facilitate roadside grading. 
(5)	A hydrant shall be installed at the end of every dead end main. A one-inch corporation stop with ten feet plus or minus of copper or PVC service pipe attached shall be provided adjacent to the hydrant for the purpose of obtaining water samples when the nearest gate well is more than one pipe length away. 
(6)	Hydrants should be placed at high spots along the main for air release and at low spots along the main for sediment blowoff. 
(7)	In general, hydrants shall be located in the road right-of-way not more than ten feet from back of curb or edge of pavement. The maximum distance to a hydrant from the centerline of the right-of-way of streets or roads having one-half right-of-way width greater than 40 feet (or from the centerline of the nearest roadway in the case of a divided highway) shall be 30 feet. The location of hydrants with respect to the right-of-way line shall generally be 7.5 feet from the side lot lines extended. 
(8)	A six-inch gate valve with a three-piece cast iron valve box (51/4-inch diameter screw shaft) shall be placed at each hydrant. 
(9)	The pumper nozzle of each hydrant shall face the street centerline unless otherwise directed by the township. 
(f)	Special crossings. 
(1)	Railroad. Water main shall be installed within an encasement pipe specified by the railroad. Details shall include encasement pipe thickness and diameter, water main bedding, and complete pressure grouting with a flowable fill approved by the project engineer. A valve shall be installed on each side of the railroad. 
(2)	Stream or regulated wetland crossing. Ball joint river pipe shall be used unless otherwise approved by the township. A valve shall be installed on each side of the crossing. 
(g)	Water services. 
(1)	The basis of design for size shall be considered using a flow rate of 20 gpm per residential dwelling unit. The basis of size other than for residential use shall be determined by the developer's engineer and submitted for approval by the township prior to submittal of final site plans. Minimum size of service shall be one inch. 
(2)	Water leads shall be less than 100 feet in length and for multiple type uses, the following minimum sizes shall apply: 
Number of Units
Per BuildingWater Service Size
(Inches)411/21211/216 224232 3 
(3)	All service lead material must meet the current state plumbing code.
(h)	Backflow prevention. 
(1)	All lawn sprinkler and irrigation systems shall be equipped with suitable backflow preventors in compliance with the state department of environmental quality where they are connected to a community water supply system. 
(2)	Special requirements for automatic sprinkler fire protection systems. Sprinkler systems directly connected to the community water supply mains only, with no other physical connections to or for any supplemental water supplies, will not require backflow prevention provided no antifreeze or other additives of any kind are used and the sprinkler system drains to the atmosphere. 
(3)	Sprinkler systems directly connected to public water supply mains and also having supplemental supplies of nonpotable water, or being located within 1,000 feet of a body of water, shall be isolated from the public water main by an approved double check valve assembly of back flow preventor such as those manufactured by Watts or Beco, or equal. 
(4)	Sprinkler systems directly connected to public water supply mains which incorporate an elevated storage tank for fire protection only shall be isolated from the public water main by double check valves. 
(i)	Automatic fire sprinkler service connections. 
(1)	The township will allow installation of unmetered fire service connection provided adequate provision is made to prevent the use of water from such fire service for purposes other than fire extinguishing. 
(2)	In no case should hydrants be placed downstream of any check valve used for automatic sprinkler protection. Where hydrants are necessary, separate mains shall be installed for fire sprinkler service and hydrant protection. 
(3)	Sprinkler systems are not a substitute for standard requirements for hydrants.
(Ord. No. 119, § 13-3, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-373. - Plan requirements. 
    All construction plans shall be submitted to the township for water main approval and shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information: 
(1)	Dimensions to property lines, right-of-way lines, and buildings from the water mains.
(2)	Service line location and diameter shall be shown to all buildings other than single-family detached dwellings, including location of curb stop box. 
(3)	The plans shall indicate the finish grades of all fire hydrants, gate well rims, hydrant valve boxes, and all other water structures. 
(4)	Water mains 12 inches and larger in diameter shall be shown in profile as directed by the township. The township may also require profiles be shown where multiple utility crossings provide the potential for conflicts. 
(5)	The elevation at the top of mains at all points of potential conflict with other utilities (for all water main regardless of size) must be shown. 
(6)	Plans must show size, type, and class of pipe, with distances between fittings, valves, and other appurtenances. The plans must also include a list of quantities. 
(7)	Detail sheets.
a.	Details and notes shall be included in the plan set as prepared by the applicant's engineer. 
b.	Detail sheets shall include specific and complete details for all water main appurtenances and structures to be included with the water main construction, and special or unusual mains or allied construction requirements. 
c.	Scales utilized for special details shall be selected to clearly portray intended construction and component or equipment arrangement. Scales used shall be clearly identified. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 13-4, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-374. - Construction standards. 
(a)	Construction materials. 
(1)	Water mains. 
a.	Water mains shall be designed for 150 psi minimum pressure.
b.	Ductile iron conforming to ANSI A21.51 (AWWA C151), Class 54 shall be used for all water mains. 
c.	Ductile iron pipe shall be marked as required by ANSI A21.51 (AWWA151).
d.	Where construction methods for ductile iron water main would cause too much disruption or environmental impacts, then high density polyethylene (HDPE) and fittings may be used in accordance with the materials specifications. All additional appurtenances shall meet the minimum materials specifications. The engineer shall specify the pipe wall thickness. The contractor shall supply all pipe, fittings, and special connections and cost shall be incidental to the unit bid price per linear foot of high density polyethylene (HDPE). All pipes installed by directional drilling shall be joined by an approved butt fusion or electrofusion technique according to the manufacturer's specifications. 
e.	High density polyethylene (HDPE) pipe shall be produced from resins meeting the requirements of ASTM D3350, and meet a cell classification of PE345464C. High density polyethylene (HDPE) shall also meet the requirements of AWWA C901 and C906. Material taken from the high density polyethylene (HDPE) pipe shall meet the minimum stability requirements of ASTM D3360. Pipe shall be legibly marked at intervals of no more than five feet with the manufacturer's name, trademark, pipe size, high density polyethylene (HDPE) cell classification, appropriate legend such as SDR 11, ASTM D3350, AWWA C901, C906, dates of manufacture and point of origin. Pipe not marked as indicated above will be rejected. 
f.	High density polyethylene (HDPE) pipe used shall be DRISCOPIPE PRISMA, Series 4000 AWWA C905 or equivalent, with a SDR of 11. The pipe shell shall be colored on the exterior to meet the owner's requirements and black on the inside. 
g.	The contractor shall transport, handle and store the product pipe and fittings as recommended by the manufacturer and as required to prevent damage. Pipe and fittings that become damaged before or during installation shall be replaced at no additional cost to the owner. 
(2)	Joints and fittings. 
a.	Push-on type joints, when specified, shall be in conformity with the current ANSI A21.11 (AWWA- C111) standard specification, shall be "Tyton," "Super Bell-Tite," or approved equal. The bulb or main body portion of the gasket shall have a maximum compression set of 20 percent after 22 hours at 158 degrees Fahrenheit as determined in accordance with ASTM Designation D-395, Method B. Two brass wedges shall be installed on either side of the barrel at each joint. 
b.	Mechanical type joints, when specified, shall be in conformity to the current ANSI A21.11, "Rubber Gasket Joints for Cast Iron Pressure Pipe and Pipe and Fittings." The bolts shall be of the high-strength, low alloy steel type. 
c.	Flanged joints shall conform to ANSI B16.1.
d.	Bell and socket joints shall be "Clow Bell Joint River-Crossing Pipe," "Usiflex," or equivalent, as approved by the township's engineer. 
e.	Fittings shall conform to ANSI A21.10 (AWWA C110).
(3)	Cement mortar lining. Ductile iron pipe and fittings shall be lined with cement mortar, twice standard thickness, conforming to ANSI A21.4 (AWWA C104). 
(4)	Pipe coating. 
a.	The inside and outside of all unlined pipes and the outside of all lined pipes shall be covered with a uniform coating of coal tar varnish or enamel applied hot. The coating materials shall be applied uniformly and shall be of a quality necessary to provide a firm, tenacious and tough coating which will not deteriorate when exposed to high or low temperatures and shall resist corrosion. 
b.	Two coats of cold-applied coal tar base paint may be substituted for the hot-applied enamel provided all other requirements of these standards are met. 
c.	These coatings after drying 48 hours shall have no deleterious effect upon the quality, color, taste, or odor of potable water. 
(5)	Valves. 
a.	Gate valves shall be iron body, fully bronze-mounted, double disc, parallel seat type, nonrising stem, opening counter-clockwise, and conforming to AWWA C-500 standards, or resilient seat valves per manufacturer and AWWA C-515 standards. All water main valves should be placed in wells, except hydrant valves. 
b.	Pressure reducing valves shall be hydraulically operated and of the self-contained differential piston type. The valve shall be flanged, with globe body, fully bronze-mounted, external pilot operated, with free-floating piston. The valve piston shall be of cast bronze provided with renewable leather cup and rubber seat securely held in place. It shall be possible to remove the piston or liner from the valve without removing the valve body from the water main line. Pressure reducing valves shall be Golden-Anderson Figure 45-D or approved equivalent. 
c.	The pilot valve shall be of the single-seated, balanced design type, globe body pattern. It shall be diaphragm operated and spring-loaded permitting convenient adjustment over a range no less than 30 psi. Pilot valves shall be two-inch size, with screwed ends, Golden-Anderson Figure 43-D, or approved equivalent. 
(6)	Gate wells. 
a.	Precast reinforced concrete sections shall, as a minimum, conform to ASTM C478.
b.	Steps shall be steel, encased with polypropylene plastic, equivalent to M.A. Industries, Inc., PSI for precast wells and PSI-B for brick wells. 
c.	Covers shall be East Jordan Iron Works, No. 1040, with Type A cover, per East Jordan Iron Works Catalog No. 8, or approved equivalent. Covers shall be supplied with raised letters thereon as directed by the township. The combined weight of frame and cover shall not be less than 400 pounds. 
d.	Extension stems and stem guides shall be as manufactured by Traverse City Iron Works, or approved equivalent. 
e.	One-inch corporation stops shall be Mueller H-15000, or approved equivalent.
f.	Bronze double-strap tapping saddles, (service saddles, service clamps) shall be Clow F 1280, or approved equivalent. 
(7)	Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be East Jordan Iron Works (EJIW) 5BR-250 Traffic Model, or approved equal, and shall have the following configuration: 
a.	Two-2.5 inches in diameter N.S.T. hose nozzles.
b.	One-four inches in diameter Storz pumper nozzle.
c.	11/2-inch Pentagon operating nut.
d.	Hydrant shall be left hand open.
e.	Hydrant to be cleaned and painted with a red, rust inhibitive, oil based paint such as "Rustoleum." 
(b)	Construction provisions. 
(1)	Minimum cover. Minimum cover over mains shall be five feet six inches including crossings through ditch sections. When installed parallel to a ditch, mains shall have five feet six inches of cover minimum, as measured from the nearest point in the ditch cross section. 
(2)	Pressure tests. 
a.	No permanent connection to existing water mains shall be made before the newly constructed water mains have undergone a satisfactory pressure test as witnessed by the township's engineer. Temporary connections (jumpers) between existing water mains and the newly constructed system, which connections may be made for chlorinating and flushing purposes, shall include a back-check valve to prevent back-flow and possible contamination of the community water supply. Preliminary pressure testing of the mains shall be done by the contractor to ascertain if there are any major breaks. 
b.	The contractor shall pressure test sections of water main as directed by the engineer. Pressure testing shall be made in increments of 2,000 feet or less, unless otherwise authorized by the engineer, and then only the allowable leakage for 2,000 feet will be permitted. 
c.	Before applying the specified test pressure, all air shall be expelled from the pipe. If hydrants are not available at high points, the contractor shall make the necessary taps to release the air and insert plugs after the test has been completed, or install corporation stops and leave them in place after testing. 
d.	The contractor shall furnish proper appliances and facilities for testing and draining the main without injury to the work and surrounding territory. The contractor shall be responsible for furnishing, and for the cost of, all water required for pressure testing. The contractor shall test by filling the main with clean water under a minimum hydrostatic pressure of 150 pounds per square inch. In no case shall the leakage in any stretch of pipe being tested exceed the following amounts in a two-hour period. 
Pipe Size
(inches)Maximum Leakage
(gallons per 100 linear feet)60.1180.15120.2216 0.11 
e.	If, as a result of leaking, draining, or flushing, streets, sidewalks, driveways, or parking area subbases become saturated, the material shall be removed or repaired by the contractor, as directed by the township's engineer. 
(3)	Disinfection of water mains. 
a.	The contractor shall disinfect all new water mains in accordance with state department of environmental quality requirements. If required by the township, the contractor shall disinfect the new system in increments. 
b.	Water samples, for bacteriological testing, shall be taken from the end of each main and at any other locations selected by the township engineer or governing agency. Samples shall be taken from corporation stops only, unless authorized by the township engineer. If mains dead end with no hydrant or gate wall within one pipe length of the main terminus, the contractor shall install a one-inch corporation stop with ten feet plus or minus of copper service pipe attached for purposes of obtaining water samples. 
c.	The contractor shall flush out the new pipe lines until the water runs clear. This shall be done after the pressure test and before disinfection. 
d.	Bacteriological water samples shall be collected by the township engineer or his duly authorized representative. 
e.	Each valved section of the newly laid pipe shall be flushed separately with potable water. The contractor shall be responsible for furnishing, and for the cost of, all water required for flushing and disinfection. 
f.	Two samples taken approximately 24 hours apart are required as a minimum. Analysis of each sample must be made by a laboratory approved by the state department of environmental quality. 
g.	If analysis of any sample indicates that the water is unsafe for human consumption, the disinfection, sampling, and analysis procedures shall be repeated until samples obtained on two successive days are found to be safe. 
(4)	A suggested method of disinfection is as follows:
a.	After satisfactory hydrostatic tests are obtained, the new system shall be chlorinated. A chlorine gas-water mixture shall be applied by means of a solution-feed chlorinating device. The chlorine solution shall be applied through a corporation stop at the beginning of the main. A slow flow of water shall be let into the main approximately at the point of injection of the chlorine solution at a rate such that the chlorine dosage of the entering water shall be at least 50 mg/l. An open discharge shall be maintained at all extremities of the system, and the introduction of chlorine solution and water shall be continued until the full dosage of chlorine reaches each outlet. 
b.	The chlorinated water shall remain in the system at least 24 hours, and at the end of that time, the chlorine residual at pipe extremities and other representative points shall be at least 25 mg/l. If the chlorine residual is found to be less than 25 mg/l at the end of 24 hours, further application of chlorine shall be made and the retention period repeated until the required 25 mg/l residual is obtained. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 13-5, 3-17-2008)
Secs. 14-375-14-391. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - FRANCHISED UTILITIES 

Sec. 14-392. - Intent. 
    The intent of this article is to set forth the requirements of private utility construction within developments required to submit final site plans to the township. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 14-1, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-393. - General. 
(a)	All procedures, design, and construction of utilities shall be in conformance with the requirements of the supplying utility company. 
(b)	Plans of all proposed utilities, whether or not in public rights-of-way, shall be submitted by the utility company to the township for review and approval prior to starting construction. 
(c)	All existing and proposed utility information, including lines, poles, and surface equipment shall be shown on the final site plan. 
(d)	Every effort shall be made to install all proposed utilities underground for their full length. Specific approval by the township board or its authorized representative shall be required for the placement of aboveground utilities and shall be based on a showing of substantial hardship or practical difficulty with underground installation. Existing overhead utilities on site shall be relocated under ground. 
(e)	Surface equipment shall be located so as not to interfere with traffic flow, parking, building access, or access to fire hydrants. 
(f)	Surface transformers, pedestals and similar equipment shall be screened from view and the screening shall be shown on the landscape plans. 
(g)	Electrical, telephone, gas and cable lines, etc., may not share a common trench with sewer and water mains and shall maintain a minimum of ten feet of separation from them. 
(h)	If the utility company installs their utility after final grading has been completed, the utility company shall be responsible for restoring the area disturbed by their work to its original condition. If the utility company fails to restore the disturbed area, it shall be the responsibility of the developer to complete the restoration. 
(i)	The developer is advised to submit plans to the utility companies for their review and approval prior to the start of construction. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 14-2, 3-17-2008)
Secs. 14-394-14-414. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - GENERAL CONSTRUCTION PROVISIONS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 14-415. - Intent. 
    This article is intended to provide the applicant with general construction requirements to be adhered to throughout the duration of the project. Failure to do so will result in a stop work order being issued to the contractor requiring the issue to be resolved prior to reinstatement. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 15-1, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-416. - General provisions. 
(a)	The contractor shall supply adequate project supervision.
(b)	The township will provide observation/inspection personnel in accordance with section 14-48. 
(c)	Prior to starting any construction, the contractor must obtain all required permits, establish all necessary escrow accounts, pay all fees, provide the required insurance certificates and attend the preconstruction meeting. 
(d)	All improvements must also be field staked under the supervision of a licensed professional. Staking must be in accordance with the approved plans. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 15-2, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 14-417. - Construction requirements. 
    Construction requirements are as follows: 
(1)	Working space. The contractor shall confine the work operations to the minimum space possible within the project limits. Stockpiling of construction material and equipment will be permitted as necessary, but in no case shall traveled roadways, driveways, or entrances be unduly obstructed. Any offsite storage or disposal areas within the township must be shown on the final site plan drawings and approved by the township. It shall be the contractor's responsibility to use such methods and/or materials, including sheeting, so as to prevent any portion of the work from encroaching on private property. 
(2)	Locating work. The contractor shall accurately locate the work from reference points established by the project engineer/surveyor along the surface of the ground and the line of work. Cut sheets for all underground work will be furnished to the contractor and the township by the applicant. Reference points shall be protected and preserved by the contractor. 
(3)	Survey monuments. Monuments or other recognized property boundary markers at street intersections, section corners, acreage or lot corners, and right-of-way lines shall be preserved and protected. Where such monuments or markers must be removed during construction, the township shall be notified and the contractor shall make all necessary arrangements with a land surveyor registered in the state to have these monuments or markers properly witnessed prior to disturbance or removal and later reset by the registered land surveyor at no cost to the township. 
(4)	Trench backfill. Backfilling is defined as the placement in the trench of approved material by an acceptable method, from the top of the bedding to proposed ground surface grade. All backfill material shall be free from cinders, ashes, refuse, organic matter, boulders, rocks or stones, or other material which, in the opinion of the township engineer, is unsuitable. Unless otherwise authorized by the township engineer, all excavations shall be backfilled at least to a point one foot above the pipe immediately after installation. 
a.	From the center of the pipe to a point one foot above the top of the pipe, the trench shall be backfilled with sand approved by the township engineer, placed in six-inch layers, and thoroughly compacted. 
b.	In locations where compaction of the backfill to a specific density is not required by the provisions of this article, backfill may, where practicable, be machined placed. Excavated material (other than clay) may be used for backfill and compacted by a small dozer in lifts of not over nine inches loose measure. Machine compaction of backfill may be required by the township engineer. 
c.	No frozen material shall be buried more than two feet below the final elevation of ground. At no time shall frozen materials be permitted for use as backfill under pavement structures. 
d.	All backfill placed within three feet of manholes, catchbasins, gate wells and other underground structures shall be approved sand, placed in one-foot layers and compacted. After the structure and/or exterior masonry plaster has set up sufficiently to resist damage, backfilling shall be performed in a manner that will not cause unequal pressure on the structure. 
e.	Special backfill shall be used at all locations and of the type called for on the drawings, and at other locations specified herein whether called for on the drawings or not. The type and method of backfilling is dependent on its locations and function and shall conform with the requirements of subsection (d)(6) of this section. The applicant will supply materials and compaction testing on the special backfill compaction requirements. 
f.	Backfilling of trenches in the shoulder area and under private gravel drives shall be carried to within six inches of the existing surface as specified under trench A or trench B as required. The shoulder shall be defined herein as the area within five feet of the pavement edge, or the width of the existing graveled shoulder, whichever is greater. The remaining depth shall be backfilled with six inches of compacted 21AA aggregate. Backfilling of trenches crossing gravel roads or streets shall be carried to within eight inches of the existing surface and the remaining depth shall be backfilled with eight inches of compacted 21AA aggregate. Compaction shall be performed by a pneumatic-tired roller or a vibratory compactor until the compaction requirements as required for trench A or trench B and as detailed in the following sections are met. 
g.	The requirements as specified herein are in addition to the conditions provided for under permit granted by the road commission for the county (RCOC) or the state department of transportation (MDOT) where applicable. 
h.	Trench A. All trenches under existing or proposed graveled, slag or hard surfaced roads, pavements, hard surfaced parking lots and driveways, sidewalks, curbs and where the trench edge is within three feet of a pavement shall be backfilled with bank run sand meeting the requirements of granular material, state department of transportation class III. The material shall be placed by the controlled density method or other effective means having the approval of the engineer and is to be compacted to 95 percent of maximum unit weight as determined by ASTM D-1557 modified proctor. Trenches under pavement to be constructed in the near future, as noted or shown on the drawings, shall be backfilled with granular material, meeting the requirements of current state department of transportation standard specifications for construction. 
i.	Trench B shall be used where called for on the drawings.
j.	All trenches shall be backfilled with granular material, state department of transportation class III to a point 12 inches above the pipe for diameters less than 24 inches and up to the spring line with materials meeting the requirements of the current state department of transportation standards for diameters 24 inches or larger. This portion of the backfill is to be placed in layers not exceeding six inches in depth, and shall be thoroughly compacted by mechanical tamping to not less than 95 percent of maximum unit weight utilizing ASTM D-1557 modified proctor. The remainder of the backfill shall be made with suitable excavated material (excluding blue and gray clays, peat, muck, marl or other organic materials) placed in one-foot layers with each layer being thoroughly compacted by approved mechanical methods, or other effective means having the approval of the engineer, to a density of 90 percent of maximum unit weight utilizing ASTM D-1557 modified proctor. 
(5)	Maintenance and restoration of pavements, road surfaces, structures and trench backfill. 
a.	Where trenches cross existing improved roadways or drives or where the trench parallels an existing improved roadway which is disturbed by the contractor's operations, the contractor shall consolidate the trench backfill and shall immediately place a temporary gravel fill, meeting 21AA aggregate gradation at least eight inches thick; and shall, during the life of the project maintain the same in good condition with additional gravel as settling takes place. All structures, including curbing, walks, paving, gravel, or street road surfaces, etc., that may be damaged or destroyed by the contractor's operations, shall be repaired and replaced by the contractor at their expense. In restoring pavement, a saw shall be used and a cut equal to the thickness of the existing pavement shall be made on each side of the part to be restored. Concrete shall be 3,500 psi, using six sacks of cement per cubic yard of concrete, unless otherwise required. 
b.	If the pavement removed had an asphaltic concrete surface, the surface shall be removed to a distance one foot beyond the limits of the removed concrete pavement. The butt joint in asphaltic concrete removal shall be prepared by sawing through the total depth of asphaltic concrete. The surface shall be replaced with a nominal three inches of state department of transportation bituminous surface mixture as required by the township and meeting the requirements of the state department of transportation as to materials and method of replacement at no extra cost to the township. 
(6)	Protection of the public. The contractor shall provide sufficient barricades, guard railings, fencing, advance construction signing, coverings or other means to protect the public from injury due to the work operations, including completed or uncompleted work, at all times until final approval of the work by the township. 
(7)	Preservation of trees. The contractor shall protect and preserve all trees and natural areas along the line of work, not scheduled for removal. Construction fencing shall be placed to fence off designated areas at the drip edge of the trees to be protected. Where necessary to preserve a tree and its main roots, the contractor shall tunnel under such tree. Where specifically required, the contractor shall remove trees completely, including stumps and main roots. Tree branches shall be tied back to protect them from the contractor's machinery where necessary. 
(8)	Replacement of landscaping. The contractor shall protect and/or replace all shrubbery, trees, lawns, and landscaping damaged or destroyed by operations under his contract. 
(9)	Restoration. The contractor shall restore all disturbed areas to the finished grade shown or to conform with existing grades and provide a smooth and uniform surface to meet existing ground surface. Ground cover must be established and conform to the approved site plan and landscaping plan. 
a.	Where areas are to be planted at a later date or construction schedules result in areas exposed for extended periods, they are to be temporarily seeded with an annual rye grass to prevent erosion as soon as rough grade is established. Replant restored areas as needed to provide a well established vegetative ground cover. 
b.	The contractor shall go over the entire area and regrade and fill any areas that may have settled, including fills made from excess excavated materials and all other areas that may have been disturbed during construction operations. Ground covers must be established on all such areas after repair. 
c.	Where established lawn or grass areas have been disturbed by the contractor's operations, the contractor shall provide, unless otherwise specified or called for on the drawings or in the specifications, not less than the minimum depth of approved top soil and shall grade, seed, fertilize and mulch or install Class A sod where directed by the township. 
d.	Restoration areas are to be kept moist by the contractor for 14 days after planting to insure growth. 
(10)	Public and private utilities. 
a.	The contractor must provide adequate protection for water, sewer, gas, telephone, TV, cable, fiberoptics, drainage, or any other public or private utilities encountered. The contractor will be held responsible for any damages to such utilities arising from his operation. 
b.	When it is apparent that construction operations may endanger the foundations of any utility conduit, or the support of any structure, the contractor shall notify the utility owner of this possibility and shall take steps as may be required to provide temporary bracing or support of conduit or structures. 
c.	When construction operations may impact existing drainage facilities, the contractor shall make necessary provisions to maintain the integrity of the drainage facility and of flow. 
d.	In all cases where permits or inspection fees are required by utilities in connection with changes to or temporary support of their conduits, the contractor shall secure such permits and pay all inspection fees. 
e.	Where it is the policy of any utility owner to make repairs to damaged conduit or other structures, the contractor shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the utility and shall see that construction operations interfere as little as possible with the utilities operations. The contractor shall pay any charges for these repairs. 
f.	Where existing gas mains and services are encountered, the contractor shall arrange with the gas company for any necessary relaying, and shall pay for the cost of such work unless otherwise provided. 
(11)	Pumping, bailing and draining of trenches. 
a.	The contractor shall provide and maintain adequate pumping and drainage facilities for removal and disposal of water from trenches or other excavations. No direct discharge to existing watercourses is permitted. The contractor shall contact the township for approval of the discharge point. 
b.	All pumping and drainage shall be done without damage to any roadway or other property, public or private, and without interference with the rights of the public or private property owners and in accordance with the MDEQ and local requirements for soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
(12)	Sheeting, shoring and bracing. Where necessary, in order to construct the work called for on the approved plans, the contractor shall use and, if necessary, leave in place, such sheeting, shoring, and bracing as is needed to carry out the work or to adequately insure the stability of such work, to protect adjoining areas. 
(13)	Disposal of excavated material. With the exception of an amount of excavated materials sufficient for backfilling and construction of fills, all broken concrete, stone, and excess excavated materials shall be disposed of away from the site by the contractor unless an onsite disposal area has been reviewed and approved by the township. The contractor will be required to obtain his own disposal ground and indicate the location at the preconstruction meeting. If disposal site is within the township, the site must have prior approval from the township. 
(14)	Disposal of waste materials. Unless otherwise directed by the township, all scrap lumber, stumps, brush, concrete, other waste materials and debris resulting from the construction work shall be removed from the premises. No waste materials may be buried or burned on site. Wood may be chipped and used on site for landscaping mulch or paths, but wood-chip stockpile areas must be approved by the township. 
(15)	Site dewatering. Any anticipated construction dewatering activity requires approval by the township during the construction plan review process. If the unexpected need for dewatering arises during construction, dewatering provisions must be submitted to and approved by the township prior to dewatering. The dewatering provisions shall include the number and location, depth, and size of all proposed pumps. The maximum flow from each pump should be indicated. In addition, the provisions shall indicate the precise location for discharge of the water. All water must be retained on site, unless extenuating circumstances are demonstrated and the township approves of the concept to discharge offsite. The contractor shall be responsible for obtaining permission from the appropriate property owners and regulatory agencies that may have jurisdiction over the proposed receiving waters for offsite discharge. Proper soil erosion control and water quality measures must be properly installed at the outlet. 
(16)	Progress of work. The work shall start promptly and continue uninterrupted. If the township determines it is necessary or advisable that certain portions of the work be done immediately, the contractor, upon written order, shall proceed with such work without delay. 
(17)	Explosives. If explosives are used, the contractor shall comply with all laws, rules, and regulations governing their use. The contractor shall be fully responsible for the safety of all persons and property and any approval by the township shall not relieve the contractor of such responsibility. It shall also be the contractor's responsibility to provide written notification to property owners and tenants within 200 feet of the use of explosives. 
(18)	Schedule of operations. If requested by the township, the contractor shall submit, for the township's review and approval, a schedule of his proposed operations. The contractor's schedule shall be complete and shall show in detail the manner in which he proposes to complete the work under his contract. 
(19)	Requirements pertaining to work within railroad rights-of-way. Where the approved drawings call for work within railroad rights-of-way or where the work crosses under railroad tracks, the contractor shall secure the approval of the railroad company of the method and schedule of operations and shall carry out the work in strict accordance therewith, all to the satisfaction of the railroad company. Plan notes, provisions, requirements, etc., for the railroad right-of-way work must be shown on the plans. 
(20)	Dust control. The contractor shall provide adequate measures to control dust caused by his operation. The methods employed, and frequency of application shall be as approved or as directed by the township. 
(21)	Hours of operation. The township permits construction only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, except holidays or as otherwise approved by the township upon formal request. 
(22)	Testing. 
a.	Generally, testing will be required when, but not limited to, engineering fill or trench backfill, pavement compaction, concrete break testing, subgrade compaction, etc. Testing may be required in circumstances where unstable soils are encountered and are to be removed and replaced. Additional testing as determined by the applicant is encouraged. The contractor shall obtain the services of a certified testing laboratory to perform all material testing. Copies of the results shall be furnished to the township and township engineer. 
b.	For materials covered by ASTM, AWWA, state and/or federal specifications, the required tests are to be made by the manufacturer or supplier and his certificates submitted to the township engineer. 
c.	At the request of the township engineer soil density and compaction tests must be made by a representative of the applicant, and will be paid for by the applicant. The tests will be reviewed and accepted by the township engineer. 
(23)	Samples. Where called for by the township or this article, samples of materials in the quantity required shall be submitted to the township engineer for approval. The work shall be in accordance with approved samples. 
(24)	Subcontracts. The contractor agrees to be fully responsible to the township for the acts or omissions of his subcontractors and for anyone employed directly or indirectly by him or them. The contractor agrees to bind every subcontractor and every subcontractor agrees to be bound by the provisions of this article, as far as applicable to his work, unless otherwise specifically approved in writing by the township. 
(25)	Equivalent materials and equipment. Whenever any material or equipment is defined by describing a proprietary product, or by using the name of a manufacturer or vendor, the term "or equal" if not inserted, shall be implied. The specific article, material, or equipment mentioned shall be understood as indicating the type, function, minimum standard of design efficiency and quality desired and shall not be construed in such a manner as to exclude manufacturers' products of comparable quality, design and efficiency. Other manufacturers' products will be accepted provided sufficient information is submitted by the project engineer with their approval to use the alternate material to the township engineer to determine that the products proposed are equivalent to those named. Whenever material or equipment is submitted for approval as being equal to that specified, the final decision of whether or not such material or equipment is equal to that specified shall be made by the township engineer. Upon rejection of any material or equipment submitted as the equivalent of that specifically named, the contractor shall immediately proceed to furnish the designated material or equipment. The approval by the township engineer of alternate material or equipment as being equivalent to that specified shall not in any way relieve the contractor of responsibility for failure of the material, or workmanship, to perform the functions required of them. 
(26)	Owner's responsibility. The owner or his contractor shall assume full responsibility for the work, specifically including jobsite safety, and take all precautions for preventing injuries to persons and property on or about the work; shall bear all losses resulting to him on account of the amount or character of the work or because the conditions under which the work is done are different, or because the nature of the ground in which the work is done is different from what was estimated or expected, or on account of the weather, floods, elements or other causes, and he shall assume the defense and save harmless the township and its individual officers and agents from all claims arising out of the work performed or to be performed; and to any act, or neglect of the Contractor, his agents or employees. 
(27)	General requirements for materials and workmanship. The contractor shall furnish suitable tools and equipment and employ competent labor to perform the work to be done. Any labor or tools or appliances that shall not, in the judgment of the township engineer, be suitable or competent to produce this result may be ordered from the work by the township engineer. 
(28)	Storage of materials. Materials and equipment distributed, stored and placed upon or near the site of the work shall at all times be so disposed as not to interfere with work of other contractors, with drainage, fire hydrants or with access thereto and not to hinder traffic. 
(29)	Contractor's supervision and origination. The applicant shall at all times keep on the site of the work, during its progress, a competent superintendent and any and all necessary foremen and assistants. The superintendent shall represent and have full authority to act for the contractor in the latter's absence, and all directions given to him shall be as binding as if given to the contractor. On request in each case, all such directions will be confirmed in writing to the contractor. Copies of the drawings and specifications shall at all times be kept on file by the contractor at readily accessible points at or near the work. 
(30)	Facilities for inspection. The township, its agents, and its employees shall at all times have the right to enter upon the premises upon which work is being done, or upon which material is stored, to inspect the work and materials and to ascertain whether or not the construction is carried out in accordance with the approved plans. The contractor shall promptly remove from the premises all materials rejected by the township engineer as failing to meet standard requirements. 
(31)	Cleaning up. The contractor shall remove from the site and from all public and private property, all temporary structures, rubbish and waste materials resulting from his operations on a regular basis so as not to create a nuisance. The township reserves the right to require the removal of these materials upon seventy 72 hours' notice should the failure to do so result in unsightly or unsafe conditions. 
(32)	Prohibition of salvaged materials. No secondhand or salvaged materials will be permitted, except upon specific written authorization from the township. 
(33)	Trench enclosures. All trenches shall normally be backfilled at the end of the workday. Only under special conditions and with the approval of the township engineer, shall trenches be left open overnight. Trenches which are allowed to be left open overnight shall be completely enclosed with suitable fencing or lighted barricades. When the trench contains water or when required by the township engineer, the exposed end of the pipe shall be securely closed with a watertight plug. 
(34)	Clean-up scheduling. 
a.	General cleanup, including completion of rough grading of backfilled trench areas, shall continuously progress along with, and shall lag no further than 100 feet behind, the pipe installation operations. 
b.	Final grading and restoration work not dependent on weather or subject to seasonal limitations shall also progress concurrently with and shall lag no further than 500 feet behind pipe installation operations. 
(35)	Excavation. The trench shall be excavated so that the pipe can be laid to the alignment and grade shown on the plan, taking into consideration the bedding specified. Excavation shall include removal of all materials encountered and disposal (off the site) of those materials not suitable or needed for backfilling of the trench. Excavation shall not proceed ahead of pipe laying a distance that will result in a cave in. All adjacent structures encountered, above and below the ground surface, shall be properly supported. 
(36)	Width of trench. 
a.	If the maximum trench widths noted on the plans are exceeded, unless otherwise authorized by the township engineer, the contractor shall construct a concrete cradle or other type of approved bedding to provide support for the additional load. 
b.	When sand bedding is used, the maximum trench widths shall be used to permit compaction of the bedding around the pipe. 
c.	If stone bedding is used, a minimum six-inch clearance shall be provided on each side of the pipe with the maximum trench width as tabulated. 
(37)	Pipe bedding. 
a.	Pipe bedding is defined as the material placed from a minimum of four inches below the pipe to the centerline of the pipe. It shall consist of stone or sand, as noted on the bedding detail. The bedding shall be removed under the bell so that the pipe barrel will be uniformly supported for its full length. 
b.	The bedding material shall be placed and compacted uniformly on both sides of the pipe to prevent lateral movement. Mechanical methods of tamping shall be used when it is possible to do so without damaging the pipe. Bedding shall be placed in layers of six inches or less as necessary to obtain thorough compaction around the pipe. 
c.	In the event density tests become necessary to resolve a question of the sufficiency of compaction of bedding material, the minimum acceptable density shall be considered to be 95 percent of maximum density as determined by the AASHTO T99 method. 
d.	Stone used for bedding shall not lose more than seven percent by washing. Stone used for this purpose shall pass a three-quarter-inch sieve and be retained on a one-quarter-inch sieve. 
(38)	Laying of pipe. 
a.	Proper and suitable tools and appliances for the safe and careful handling, conveying, and laying of the pipe shall be used. Care shall be taken to prevent the coating of cast or ductile iron pipe from being damaged. Pipes, valves, hydrants, and fittings strung along the route shall be placed in such a manner that they will not be submerged or collect water. Dropping of material directly from a truck or platform is prohibited. All pipe and castings shall be carefully examined for defects. If any materials are found to be defective, they shall immediately be removed from the site. 
b.	All lumps, blisters, and excess coal-tar coating shall be removed from both the bell and spigot ends of each length of pipe and each fitting. The outside of each spigot and the inside of each bell shall be wire brushed and wiped clean, dry, and free from oil or grease immediately prior to installation. The inside of the pipe shall be free of dirt and debris. Any damage to exterior pipe coating shall be repaired with an approved coating before the pipe is laid. 
c.	Each pipe shall be inspected by the contractor for possible defects and compliance with the plans before being placed in the trench. Joint surfaces shall be free of foreign matter. Pipe laying operations shall follow immediately behind the excavation. 
d.	Pipe shall be laid from the lower end of the sewer upstream, with bell ends up grade. The use of brick, lumps of clay, wood, etc., to level the pipe will not be permitted. Pipe shall be thrust home and if joints do not remain tightly closed or construction is in saturated sand, a cable and winch, or other approved means, shall be used to maintain a tight joint. Under no circumstances shall pipe be dropped directly into the trench. 
e.	All pipe shall be laid to line and grade as called for on the plans. Each pipe as laid shall be checked by the contractor. The trench shall be excavated to provide equal clearance on both sides of the pipe. After the pipe is set, care shall be taken in backfilling so as not to disturb its line or grade. As work progresses, the interior of the pipe shall be thoroughly cleaned. At all times the open ends of the pipe shall be covered to prevent foreign matter from entering. 
f.	Cutting of pipe lengths, where required, shall be performed by the use of tools or equipment that will provide a neat, perpendicular cut without damage to the plastic. All burns shall be removed by the use of a file, knife, or abrasive paper. Spigot ends on cut pipe shall be beveled similar to factory beveling to prevent gasket damage. 
g.	Bowing or warping of plastic pipe can occur with temperature fluctuations. The contractor shall store and protect the pipe to minimize bowing. Normal pipe lengths of ten feet zero inches, 12 feet six inches, or 20 feet zero inches having deviations from straight greater than one inch shall not be used. 
(39)	Construction in unstable soils or fill sections. 
a.	Pipe and pipe appurtenances must be supported on a firm foundation. The trench bottom shall remain stable during backfilling and all subsequent pipe-laying operations. 
b.	When unstable trench bottoms (wet clays, sands, etc.) are encountered, it will be necessary to excavate below design depth to stable, noncompressible ground and backfill to grade with approved select materials: slag, crushed stone, gravel, etc., one-quarter inch to three-quarter inch in size. 
c.	Where organic materials (peat, marl, muck, etc.) exist at the trench bottom, it shall be necessary to remove these to stable soils and backfill to grade with the aforementioned select materials. Where the material below plan grade is unstable to such a degree that it cannot be removed and replaced with an approved material, the contractor shall construct supports as recommended by the project engineer and approved by the township engineer. 
d.	Where it is necessary to lay pipe in a fill area, unstable or unsuitable material shall be removed before fill material is placed. The embankment shall be of suitable material, one vertical on two horizontal fill slopes, and shall be placed in layers not exceeding one foot in thickness compacted to 100 percent of maximum density as determined by the AASHTO T99 Method, to the proposed top of the pipe. The embankment shall not be less than four diameters plus 12 feet wide at the invert of the pipe and shall be continued up to provide no less than three feet of cover over the pipe. 
(40)	Pipe clearance in rocks. Rocks, boulders, and stones over two inches in diameter shall be removed to provide a clearance of at least six inches from any part of the pipe or appurtenances. 
(41)	Roadway and waterway crossings. All work within a road right-of-way or a waterway shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of the governmental body having jurisdiction over the right-of-way involved. Notice and permits as required shall be given and secured from said governmental body before work starts. 
(42)	Trench box. If the trench box rides below the top of the pipe, then care must be taken to protect the integrity of the pipe bedding, particularly when movement of the trench box leaves a void in the pipe bedding. Care must also be taken to ensure that movement of the trench box does not pull the pipe joints apart and, if necessary, the pipe lines should be secured with a wood crossblock, cable, and winch at the downstream manhole. 
(43)	Bored and jacked casings. 
a.	Requirement. The boring and jacking of steel casings shall be installed in any areas considered to be detrimentally affected by open cut construction in the opinion of the township. 
b.	Materials. 
(i)	Casing pipe. Steel casing pipe shall be electronic-fusion welded pipe, conforming to the requirements of ASTM A-39, Grade B, with minimum one-quarter-inch wall thickness. Pipe ends shall be prepared for field welding of circumferential joints. 
(ii)	Carrier pipe. Pipe materials shall conform to that specified in the applicable sections of these standards. 
(iii)	Grout. Grout material shall be cement-sand mixture containing not less than one part cement to one part sand, unless otherwise approved by the township engineer. 
(iv)	Pipe skids. Necessary skidding materials required to protect the pipe during installation shall be approved by the township engineer and furnished by the contractor. 
c.	Installation. 
(i)	Casing pipe. Casing pipe shall be installed in a continuous augering (or mining) and jacking operation with the casing pipe installation following directly behind the face of the excavation. Water shall not be introduced during the boring-jacking operation. 
(ii)	Grouting. The annular space between the outside surface of pipe and the inside surface of casing pipe shall be pressure grouted with approved materials. The diameter of the casing pipe shall be of sufficient size to ensure proper placement of the pipe to plan line and grade and to allow the proper installation of pressure-grouted material. The ends of the casing pipe shall be closed with a masonry bulkhead at least eight inches thick. 
(iii)	Minimum boring distances. All work shall be performed from boring and jacking pits adequately sheeted to prevent damage to the roadway, railway, etc. The minimum distance from the edge of the pavement to the trench or boring and jacking pit for dual highway and interstate routes shall be 30 feet. For curb or guardrail section, railway track, or two-lane highway, the minimum distance will vary from shoulder point to the toe of slope, as shown on the plans or as directed by the township engineer. 
(44)	Rip-rap. 
a.	Rip-rap shall be installed at all locations as indicated on the plans.
b.	Typically, all rip-rap shall be installed on a suitable geotextile fabric.
c.	Rip-rap material shall be natural stone, limestone, or broken concrete free of any reinforcement materials or other miscellaneous debris. 
d.	Average diameter shall be as indicated on the plans.
e.	Rip-rap shall be placed so individual stones are fit together to form an interlocking mat. Smaller stones are to fill any large voids. 
f.	Grouting rip-rap is permitted in lieu of supplementing settlement.
(45)	Maintenance of traffic. 
a.	During the progress of the work, the contractor shall accommodate both vehicular and pedestrian traffic. In the absence of specific requirements, traffic shall be maintained in accordance with the current edition of the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Access to fire hydrants and water valves shall always be maintained. The contractor's truck and equipment operations on public roads shall be governed by the county or the state department of transportation regulations, all local traffic ordinances, and regulations of the fire department. 
b.	Small road openings necessary for manholes, alignment holes, sewer connections, etc. will be permitted. Such holes shall not be open longer than necessary and shall be protected and any traffic detouring necessary shall be done to the satisfaction of the township. Wherever possible, small openings shall be covered with steel plates at pavement level secured in place during periods that work is not being performed. 
c.	Where roads are partially obstructed, the contractor shall place and maintain temporary driveways, ramps, bridges, and crossings necessary to accommodate the public or as otherwise directed by the township. In the event of the contractor's failure to comply with the foregoing provisions, the township may, with or without notice, cause the same to be done at the contractor's expense. 
d.	The contractor shall provide flagmen, warning lights, signs, fencing and barricades necessary to direct and protect vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
e.	The contractor shall inform the police and fire departments in advance of work operations of road obstructions and detours, so that they can set up plans for servicing the area in case of an emergency. The township supervisor's office, police, and fire department shall be notified at least one week prior to obstructing any road. 
(46)	Construction of and connections to storm and sanitary structures. 
a.	Construction methods for sanitary sewer and drainage structures shall conform to the current state department of transportation standards, inclusive, except as herein provided. 
b.	With the exception of drainage structures having sumps, the bottom of the structures shall be channeled to provide for smooth flow thru manhole. A proper channel shall be also constructed within any existing manhole or other structure to which a connection is to be made to direct the flow to the existing outlet in a manner which will tend to create the least amount of turbulence. Any portion of the existing structure which would interfere with such construction shall be removed. Channels shall be formed using grade B concrete. On a straight through manhole, pipe may be laid through the bottom of the manhole with the top broken out and all voids along the bottom filled with grade B concrete. 
c.	When connections are made with sewers or drains carrying fluids, special care must be taken that no part of the work is built under water. A flume or dam must be installed and pumping maintained, if necessary, and the new work kept dry until completed and any concrete or mortar has set up. 
d.	Pipe shall not extend into a manhole beyond the inside face of the manhole wall. Field cutting of pipe to be used at manholes shall be done in a neat, workmanlike manner, using methods approved by the township. Exposed ends of reinforcing steel shall be cut flush with the pipe end. 
e.	Precast reinforced concrete units shall be such that no more than 50 percent of the circumference, measured on the inside face, shall be deleted on any horizontal plane for sewer pipe openings. There shall be no less than 12 inches of residual concrete measured on any horizontal plane between pipe openings. 
f.	The joint between a precast riser section and the base of the structure or the top of a brick or concrete radial block riser section shall be set in a full bed of mortar. Similarly, the joint between a precast eccentric cone section and the top of a brick or concrete radial block riser section shall be set in a full bed of mortar. 
g.	Joints on precast reinforced concrete risers and tops may be either cold applied bituminous mastic or modified grooved tongue with rubber gasket. 
h.	Brick and radial block used shall be laid in a full bed of mortar and shall be plastered on the outside with at least one-half inch of mortar in a manner that will completely seal the structure. Plastering shall be performed in conjunction with the laying of brick or block. The laying of block shall never be more than two courses ahead of exterior plaster. The laying of brick shall never be more than six courses ahead of the exterior plaster. 
i.	All precast sections shall be set in a full bed of mortar.
j.	A minimum of one course and a maximum of five courses of brick shall be placed on the cone section of all precast concrete and concrete block structures. 
k.	All brick, block, mortar, and concrete work shall be properly cured and protected from freezing for a minimum of 48 hours. When the temperature is 40 degrees Fahrenheit and falling, brick, block, mortar, and concrete shall be heated to a minimum temperature of 60 degrees Fahrenheit. 
l.	After the concrete and/or plaster has set up sufficiently to avoid damage, backfilling shall be done in a manner that will not cause unequal pressure on the structure. 
m.	Brick for casting adjustment or concrete block for manhole, inlet, and catchbasin construction shall conform to the requirements of the state department of transportation standard specifications for road and bridge design and construction. 
n.	Bolt down frames as called for in the contract documents shall be bolted down with four cadmium coated five-eighths inch diameter threaded studs with three-quarter inch by two inches by one-eighth inch thick metal washers three-quarter inch by two inches by one-sixteenths inch thick neoprene sealing washers and nuts. 
(47)	Open cut sewers. 
a.	All labor, tools, equipment, and all materials necessary to excavate for, lay, join, backfill, and finish the sewer shall be considered as part of the sewer construction. 
b.	Unless otherwise allowed under specific specifications for a particular type of sewer or unless permitted by the township engineer, construction shall begin at the outlet end of the sewer and proceed upgrade. 
c.	Pipe shall be laid on a carefully prepared class B bed, consisting of porous sand extending from at least four inches below the pipe to at least one quarter the pipe diameter above the elevation of the bottom of the pipe. 
d.	Plastic pipe shall be laid in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations and good engineering practice. The use of plastic pipe for storm sewer will be only on a case-by-case basis. Typically, no plastic storm pipe shall be placed within the road right-of-way. 
(48)	Cement mortar pointing. All pipe joints on sewers 36 inches in diameter and larger shall be pointed on the inside with approved nonshrink cement mortar composed of one part cement and two parts sand. On bituminous mastic joints the compound shall be removed to a depth of three-fourths of an inch from the inside of the joint and pointed as described in this section. 
(49)	Masonry units. Concrete brick shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C-55-75, Grade N-1 and concrete block shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C139-73 with the following exceptions: 
a.	All concrete masonry brick or block shall have a minimum compressive strength of 5,500 psi at 28 days. The proportion of cement in the concrete mixture used to make brick or block shall be not less than 564 ponds per cubic yard. of concrete. The mixture shall contain six percent (plus or minus 11/2 percent) entrained air. The maximum water adsorption shall not exceed five pounds per cubic foot. 
b.	The blocks shall be solid curved blocks with the inside and outside surfaces curved to the required radii. The blocks shall have tongue and groove or other approved type of joint at the ends so that the units interlock to form a strong, rigid structure. Curved blocks shall have the inside and outside surfaces parallel. 
c.	The nominal dimensions of the block shall be 18 inches maximum for length, eight feet maximum for depth (height), and six inches maximum for width (thickness). The length shall be measured along the chord on the convex face of the block. The tolerances of ASTM C 139-73 shall apply. Where the specified wall thickness on the standard plans is 12 inches, a multiple block wall of two six-inch-wide blocks is permitted. All blocks in one structure shall be of the same height dimension. The blocks shall be designed for length so that only full length or half length blocks are required to lay the circular wall of any one course. Blocks intended for use in the cones or tops of manholes or other structures shall have such shape as may be required to form the structure as shown on the plans with inside and outside joints not to exceed one-fourth inch in thickness. 
d.	Final grade adjustments may be made using either brick and mortar construction or precast concrete adjustment rings at the option of the contractor; all other provisions for grade rings and brick and mortar adjustments stated above shall apply. 
(50)	Mortar. 
a.	Mortar for unit masonry shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C-270 Type M with the exception that it shall be composed of three parts sand and one part a mixture of 50 percent Portland cement Type 1A and 50 percent masonry cement and shall have a minimum entrained air content of 12 percent. Use of mortar for manhole reconstruction shall be limited to within one hour after the water is added to the dry mix. 
b.	Water for concrete and mortar shall be clean and fresh, free from oil, acids, and organic matter. 
c.	Mortar for laying brick and block, pointing of joints, and plastering outside of structures shall be in accordance with current MDOT Standards for Construction. No lime shall be used in the mortar. 
(51)	Elastic joint seal. The exterior joint between the manhole frame and the brick block or grade ring adjustment section (chimney) shall be sealed by using either polyurethane or butyl rubber joint sealant. 
(52)	Construction methods of sanitary structures. Construction methods shall conform to the requirements of these specifications and current MDOT Standard Specifications for Construction with the following stipulations and exceptions: 
a.	Radial block used for the lower riser section of manhole shall be laid in a full bed of mortar and shall be plastered on the outside with at least one-half inch of mortar in a manner that will completely seal the structure. Plastering shall be performed in conjunction with the laying of block. The laying of block shall never be more than two courses ahead of the exterior plaster. 
b.	Concrete placed inside the precast flexible-joint manholes to form the channel through the manhole shall not be placed between the pipe and the opening in the manhole base section so as to interfere in any way with the flexibility of the joint. 
c.	A minimum of three inches and a maximum of 18 inches of adjustment rings with gaskets shall be placed on the cone section of all manholes. 
d.	Manhole assembly shall be in strict accordance with the manufacturer's recommendation. Particular care shall be taken to keep foreign materials from interfering with proper joint assembly. The bell and spigot surfaces shall be wiped clean. The surfaces (bell, spigot, rubber O-ring gasket) shall then be coated with a lubricating material to overcome the friction resistance when setting the precast sections home. 
e.	All lift holes and joints within precast manholes shall be plugged and pointed with mortar in a manner acceptable to the township engineer. 
f.	Manhole structures which are to be left open overnight shall be securely enclosed with suitable fencing and have adequate lighted barricades, unless otherwise approved by the township engineer. 
g.	All manholes shall be supported on a firm, stable foundation. The foundation shall remain stable during backfilling and subsequent operations. Undercutting and the placement of compacted granular material to stabilize the structure is to be completed at the direction of the project engineer. 
h.	All manholes shall be constructed of precast reinforced concrete. Riser sections shall have integral base and cone sections, unless otherwise approved by the township engineer. 
i.	Cone sections shall be eccentrically constructed unless otherwise specified by the township engineer. 
j.	Manholes for pipe sizes 36 inches in diameter and smaller shall be manufactured and constructed as precast flexible-joint sewer manholes, unless otherwise directed by the township engineer. 
(53)	Elastomeric sealant. 
a.	The exterior of the frame/chimney section shall be sealed by using butyl rubber sealant (trowelable grade). Elastomeric sealant used shall be chemically compatible with the elastic joint seal utilized according to manufacturer's recommendations. The contractor shall use compatible primer as required to obtain acceptable bonding under cold, wet, or other adverse conditions. 
b.	The exterior seal material shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and shall conform to any AWWA requirements for waterproofing and sealing. Safety regulations and precautions recommended by the manufacturer and OSHA shall be strictly observed. 
(54)	Pipe joint assembly. Compression joints and couplings shall be assembled in strict accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. Particular care shall be taken to prevent foreign materials from interfering with proper joint assembly. The mating surfaces (bell and spigot) shall be wiped clean. The surfaces shall then be coated with a lubricating material to overcome the friction resistance when thrusting the pipe home. 
(55)	Manhole materials and appurtenances. All materials under this specification shall conform to the requirements of section 5.14.02 MDOT Standards for Construction, and Oakland County Drain Commissioner Standards and Specifications for Sanitary Sewer Construction except as otherwise specified herein. 
a.	All manholes shall contain a bottom precast section of flexible-joints and shall consist of a base integrally cast with a riser section. The base shall be a minimum of eight inches thick and contain reinforcement at least equal to, and which shall be adequately tied to, the reinforcement in the riser section. 
b.	The joint between the pipe and a section of a precast flexible-joint manhole shall be a mechanically compressed joint such as the Res-Seal, Link-Seal, Press Wedge II, or Kor-N-Seal flexible rubber manhole joint. The joint shall be capable of meeting infiltration requirements and shall permit a deflection of at least six degrees in all directions as measured from the centerline of the pipe. 
c.	Mortar for laying block, pointing of joints, and plastering outside of structures shall be composed of one part Type II masonry cement and 21/2 parts masonry sand. 
d.	Resilient connections between manhole and pipe shall conform to ASTM C443 and ASTM C923, except that only synthetic rubber gaskets shall be permitted. Natural rubber will not be acceptable. 
e.	Threaded studs, washers, and nuts shall be cadmium coated.
f.	Rubber O-ring gaskets shall conform to the requirements of ANSI/ASTM C443, except that the gaskets shall be synthetic rubber only. Natural rubber gaskets are not acceptable. 
g.	Concrete cast-in-place shall be 3500 psi.
h.	Final grade adjustment for manholes located in pavements and sidewalks shall be made with brick and mortar. A minimum of three or a maximum of six courses of brick shall be placed on top of the precast cone section. 
i.	Special approved wet area manholes with precast rubber gasket type pipe fittings and lockdown rubber gasket type manhole covers such as E.J.I.W. No. 1040 ZPT, or equal, shall be required in areas of high ground water table and where manholes are to be located in or adjacent to drainage ditches, low areas, and floodplains. Details of this type manhole are included in the standard plan sheets. 
(56)	Safety precautions of air testing. 
a.	The air test can be hazardous under certain conditions. It is extremely important that all air plugs be properly secured and that care be exercised during the test and in the removal of plugs. A 15-inch plug with 4.5 pounds per square inch applied to it exerts almost 800 pounds of force. This is an example of the potential hazard that exists if plugs are not correctly relieved of air pressure before being removed. As a safety precaution, it is suggested that pressurizing equipment be provided with a 10 psi pressure relief device to reduce hazards and to avoid over-pressurization and damaging of any sewer lines. No persons shall be allowed in manholes during air testing. 
b.	All final acceptance tests shall be witnessed by a representative of the township. Further, all final acceptance tests under the jurisdiction of the governing agency shall be witnessed by a representative of that agency. 
(57)	Hydrostatic tests of force mains. 
a.	Prior to acceptance, force mains shall be flushed, inspected, and hydrostatically tested as specified herein. The contractor shall furnish all necessary personnel, temporary bracing, plugs, test pumps, and all other necessary apparatus for conducting the test. 
b.	Before applying test pressure, all air shall be expelled from the pipe. If necessary to accomplish this, taps shall be made at the points of highest elevation in the pipe and such openings subsequently closed, prior to test, with tight threaded brass plugs. 
c.	Test pressure shall be maintained at 100 pounds per square inch at the point of highest elevation in the test section by pumping water into the pipe for a period of two hours and in all cases long enough to permit assurance of a satisfactory test. Leakage, as measured by the quantity of water pumped into the pipe to maintain 100 psi pressure during the test, shall not exceed a rate of 50 gallons per inch diameter of main per mile of pipe in 24 hours. 
(58)	Test for alignment. All sewers shall be laid accurately to the line and grade shown on the approved plans. The sewers will be tested for alignment by shining a light through the pipe at a manhole and viewing the light from an adjacent manhole. Any section of sewer in which a light cannot be seen from one manhole to the next shall be corrected to the satisfaction of the engineer to pass this test. 
(59)	Water main construction measures. 
a.	Utility crossings. 
1.	A minimum of 18 inches clearance shall be provided between the water main and any existing underground utility, unless otherwise required by the township engineer. 
2.	Whenever a main is installed under any existing utility line such as gas, buried electric power, telephone line, sewer or water, provisions shall be made to properly support or distribute any concentrated load to avoid settlement and possible failure of the lower main. Such provisions shall consist of concrete bedding of the main, complete concrete encasement, or some other method as shown on the plans. Water mains passing under sewers, in addition, shall be protected by providing: 
(i)	A vertical separation of at least 18 inches between the bottom of the sewer and top of the water main and adequate structural support for the sewer to prevent excessive deflection of joints and settlement of the sewer above the water main, i.e., a concrete saddle under the pipe with a span length extending to undisturbed earth bearing. 
(ii)	That the water main be encased in concrete with a full length centered on the point of crossing. 
b.	Thrust blocks. 
1.	Thrust blocks shall be constructed using MDOT Grade 30P concrete. Thrust blocks shall be placed at all 111/4 degree bends or greater, dead ends, tees, reducers, hydrants, and crosses and valves as required, unless restrained joints are called for. Area in square feet of concrete thrusting against undisturbed earth shall be computed by dividing the total thrust by the safe bearing load of the soil as follows: 
SAFE BEARING LOADS AGAINST HORIZONTAL THRUST 
SoilSafe Bearing Load
(lbs. per sq. ft.)Muck, peat, etc.0Soft clay1,000Sand2,000Sand and gravel cemented3,000Sand and gravel cemented with clay4,000Hard compacted clay5,000 
2.	In muck or peat all thrust shall be resisted by pile supports driven to solid foundations or by removal of muck or peat and replacement with ballast of sufficient stability to resist thrusts. In all cases, thrust block size and method of thrusting must be approved by the township before placement. 
c.	Construction of gate wells. 
1.	All such structures shall rest on an eight inch thick MDOT 3500 psi concrete base. Precast reinforced concrete bases may be used if a uniform bearing is provided. The base diameter shall protrude a minimum of six inches beyond the outside diameter of the well structure, unless precast concrete bases are used. If precast bases are used, they shall protrude a minimum of four inches beyond the outside diameter of the structure. 
2.	Brick shall, as a minimum, conform to ASTM C32, Grade MS, or ASTM C55, Grade U-1.
3.	Mortar for laying brick or pointing of joints, and for plastering outside of structures shall be composed of one part Type II masonry cement and 21/2 parts masonry sand. 
4.	Water for concrete and mortar shall be clean and fresh, free from oil, acids, and organic matter. 
5.	Radial concrete block shall be Grade V-I conforming to ASTM C139.
6.	All valve structures shall be constructed of precast reinforced concrete sections (ASTM C478). 
7.	All brick, block, mortar and concrete work shall be properly cured and protected from freezing for a minimum of 48 hours. When the temperature is 40 degrees Fahrenheit and falling, brick, mortar, and concrete shall be heated to a minimum temperature of 60 degrees Fahrenheit. 
8.	A minimum of six inches and a maximum of 15 inches height of brick shall be placed on the cone section of all precast structures. 
9.	The joint between a precast riser section and the base of the structure shall be set in a full bed of mortar. The butt section of the precast riser shall be full wall thickness in bearing on the masonry base. 
10.	Joints between precast riser sections, both inside and outside, shall be pointed with mortar. 
11.	All pipe openings in gate wells shall be closed with brick and mortar in a manner that will make them watertight. Water main in the wall shall be wrapped with 15 pound felt or Caddilloc Wrap coated with DeWitt No. 10 mastic prior to closure of the pipe opening. 
12.	Where precast sections are used, the joints and lift holes shall be pointed and plugged, inside and outside, with mortar. 
d.	Fire hydrants. 
1.	Hydrant leads shall have a minimum of five feet, six inches of cover in all areas, including crossings through ditch sections. 
2.	Lucas tees shall not be used unless specifically authorized.
3.	Hydrants shall be carefully plumbed, braced, and backfilled so they remain in plumb.
4.	All grade, facing, and vertical alignment adjustments of hydrants shall be completed prior to pressure testing. 
5.	Prior to acceptance, the lubricant reservoirs in all hydrants having such construction shall be filled with a lubricant acceptable to the state department of environmental quality and recommended by the hydrant manufacturer. 
6.	Backfill around fire hydrants shall be carefully tamped in six-inch layers from the centerline of the lead main to a height of one foot below finished grade. Care shall be taken to insure the hydrant remains plumb during backfilling. Excavated material shall then be used to backfill to grade. 
(60)	Paving construction provisions. 
a.	Concrete. 
1.	Portland cement, aggregates and water shall be furnished only from sources of supply approved by the township before shipments are started. No aggregates shall be used which have become mixed, while in storage, with foreign material. Frozen aggregates or aggregates containing frozen lumps shall be thawed before use. 
2.	Fine aggregate shall consist of natural sand. It shall be composed of clean, hard, strong, durable, uncoated grains and shall conform to current Standard Specifications 2NS for fine aggregate for Portland cement concrete pavement of the state department of transportation. 
3.	Coarse aggregate shall be crushed stone, rock, gravel or blast furnace slag weighing not less than 75 pounds per cubic foot in accordance with ASTM C-29, and shall be composed of hard, sound, uncoated pieces conforming to state department of transportation designation 6A. 
4.	Cement shall be air-entraining Portland cement, Type 1A conforming to ASTM C150. Air-entraining Portland blast-furnace slag cement, Type IS-A conforming to ASTM C595 or high-early-strength air-entraining Portland cement, Type IIIA conforming to ASTM C150. 
5.	The water used in mixing or curing concrete shall be clean, clear, and reasonably free of oil, salt, acid, alkali, sugar, vegetable, organic or other matter or substance injurious to the finished product. If the water is of questionable quality, it shall be tested in accordance with AASHTO T-26. 
6.	Air-entraining agents shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C-260. Air-entraining agents shall have proven compatibility will all local concrete materials, including cement, and shall be capable of providing in the concrete the required air contents and an air-void system known to produce durable, scale-resistance concrete. 
7.	Water-reducing admixtures shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C-494, Type A. Water-reducing retarding admixtures shall be used only when specified or authorized, in which case they shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C-494, Type D. When conditions warrant, the Township may allow or require the use of an accelerator conforming to the requirements of ASTM C-494 for chemical admixtures or ASTM D-98 for calcium chloride. 
8.	The proportioning of concrete mixtures shall be based upon the water-cement ratio.
9.	All concrete must be placed using forms built to current standards.
10.	The subgrade under the forms shall be compacted and cut to grade so that the form when set will be uniformly supported for its entire length at the specified elevation. All forms shall be cleaned and oiled each time they are used. 
11.	Forms shall not be removed from freshly placed concrete until it has set for 12 hours unless slipform is used. The forms shall be carefully removed so that no damage will be done to the pavement. 
12.	The concrete shall be mixed in quantities required for immediate use and shall be deposited on the subbase in such a manner as to require as little rehandling as possible. Necessary hand spreading shall be done with shovels, not rakes. 
13.	The sequence of finishing operations shall be the strike-off and consolidation, floating, if necessary, straightedging, and final surface finish. The pavement shall be struck off and consolidated with a mechanical finishing machine, vibrator strike board, or by hand-finishing methods when approved by the engineer. 
14.	In general, adding water to the surface of the concrete to assist in finishing operations shall not be permitted. If it is permitted, it shall be applied as a fog spray with approved spray equipment. 
15.	Before final finishing is completed and before the concrete has taken its initial set, the edges of the slab and curb shall be carefully finished with an edger of the radius shown on the plans. 
16.	The final surface of the concrete pavement shall have a uniform gritty texture true to the grades and cross-section shown on the plans. The township may require changes in the final finishing procedure to produce the desired final surface texture. 
17.	Concrete shall be cured by protecting it against loss of moisture, rapid temperature change, and mechanical injury for at least three days after placement. 
18.	All longitudinal and transverse joints shall conform to the plans, specifications, and standard details. 
19.	All joints shall be constructed true to line with their faces perpendicular to the surface of the pavement. 
20.	Sealing of joints shall be completed before the pavement is opened to traffic and as soon after completion of the curing period as is feasible. Just before sealing, each joint shall be thoroughly cleaned of all foreign material, including membrane curing compound, and the joint faces shall be cleaned by means of sand blasting and thoroughly blown out with a stream of compressed air and surface-dry when the seal is applied. Material for seal shall be stirred during heating to prevent localized overheating. Joint sealing material shall not be placed when the air temperature in the shade is less than 50 degrees Fahrenheit, unless approved by the engineer. 
21.	The contractor shall take such precautions as are necessary to protect the concrete from rain damage. 
22.	Casting of concrete during hot weather shall be limited by the temperature of the concrete at the time of placing. Concrete shall not be cast when the temperature of the concrete is above 90 degrees Fahrenheit. 
23.	No concrete shall be placed unless the temperature of the air in the shade and away from artificial heat is at least 20 degrees Fahrenheit and rising, unless specifically approved. 
24.	The contractor shall employ whatever measures are necessary to prevent damage to the work and shall be responsible for the concrete placed during cold weather. Any concrete injured by frost action, as determined by the engineer, shall be removed and replaced at the contractor's expense. 
25.	All materials proposed to be used may be inspected and tested at any time and at any place during their preparation, storage and use. All tests of materials will be made in accordance with methods as described or designated in the specifications. All rejected materials shall be removed immediately from the job site. 
26.	The project under construction, or any section thereof, shall not be opened to traffic until so directed or authorized by the township. Whenever any section of the project is in suitable condition for travel, it may be opened for traffic previous to completion of the whole project, when so directed by the Township. 
b.	Concrete curb and gutter. This work shall consist of constructing Portland cement concrete curb, gutter or combination curb and gutter, with or without steel reinforcement as provided on a prepared base. The construction shall follow the construction of concrete base course or concrete pavement but shall be in advance of the construction of non-rigid types of pavement or base course. The materials and construction shall be as specified in the current MDOT specification section. 
c.	Reinforcement. When steel reinforcement or tie bars are called for on the plans, the bars shall be properly spaced and held in the correct position during the placing of concrete by the use of bar chairs or other approved devices. Bars shall be lapped at least ten inches unless otherwise shown on the plans. Reinforcement bar materials shall be in accordance with current MDOT standards. 
d.	Backfilling. After the concrete has sufficiently cured, the curb, gutter or combination curb and gutter, shall be backfilled to the required elevation with approved material, which shall be compacted and left in a neat and workmanlike condition. 
e.	Aggregate shoulder. 
1.	The subgrade for the shoulders shall be graded to an elevation below the finished surface that will permit the placing of the specified thickness of shoulder material. 
2.	The aggregate shall be placed on the prepared subgrade to such a depth that the compacted layer will be not more than five inches thick. Where the completed shoulder is to be more than five inches thick, it shall be constructed in two or more courses. The aggregate shall be deposited on the shoulders by means of an approved mechanical spreader. On irregular areas where the use of a mechanical spreader is not practical, the use of hand tools or power grading equipment will be approved for spreading and shaping of the shoulder material. 
3.	Dumping the aggregate on the road and grading it onto the shoulder will not be permitted.
4.	The aggregate shall be compacted to not less than 100 percent of the maximum unit weight, by the use of pneumatic-tired compaction equipment or vibrator compactors. 
5.	The rolling and compacting operation shall be performed immediately after the shoulder material has been spread. Water shall be applied, when directed by the engineer, to aid in the compaction and shaping of the surface. The water shall be applied by means of approved sprinkler equipment. 
f.	Bituminous paving. 
1.	The bituminous mixture required shall be as specified on the plans. The bituminous mixture shall be designed to meet the applicable requirements for stability, flow, voids in mineral aggregate (VMA) and air-voids, all as specified in current MDOT standards. The aggregates, mineral filler (if required) and asphalt cement shall be combined as necessary to produce a mixture proportioned within the master gradation range limits as included in current MDOT standards. 
2.	For bituminous base course mixtures required to be placed directly on the subgrade or subbase, the density, grade, and cross section shall meet the approval of the township prior to placement of any mixture. The subgrade or subbase shall meet the specified tolerances for grade and elevation and shall be compacted to not less than 95 percent of maximum density as determined by ASTM Method D-1557 for a depth of not less than nine inches. If a prime coat is specified, it shall be placed at a rate of 0.25 gallons per square yard or as directed by the engineer. Before placing the prime coat, the surface shall be clean and free from excessive moisture. Under no circumstances shall pools or excess bituminous prime coat material be allowed to remain on the surface. The prime coat shall be properly cured before placing the bituminous mixture, but in no case less than 24 hours. The prime coat may be omitted or reduced when authorized by the township engineer. 
3.	Prior to placing the bituminous mixture on the aggregate base, the finished surface shall be shaped to line and grade within a tolerance of plus/minus three-eighths inch, unless otherwise specified. The aggregate base course shall be compacted for its full depth to not less than 98 percent of maximum density as determined by ASTM D-1557. The aggregate surface shall be maintained in a smooth, compacted condition and in close conformity to line, grade, and cross-section. No bituminous material may be placed until the aggregate surface has been inspected and approved by the township. 
4.	Catch basin and manhole covers, monument boxes, and water shutoffs shall be adjusted in accordance with current MDOT procedures or under the specific specifications within the approved site plan. 
5.	Before placing any bituminous mixture, the surface of the pavement and paved shoulders, if applicable, shall be thoroughly cleaned of all dirt and debris using a method approved by the engineer. This work shall also include routine blowing, with compressed air, of the joints and cracks to remove loose material. The contractor shall not place any bituminous mixture until the condition of the pavement to be resurfaced has been inspected and approved by the township engineer or the agency having jurisdiction over the road. Existing bituminous patches with high bitumen content, cold patches, or any patches which may cause an unsatisfactory performance of the overlay shall be removed. Prior to placing of an intermediate or surface course, the underlying or level course shall be cleared of all foreign or objectionable matter and debris with power blowers, power brooms, or hand brooms. 
6.	Hand patching consists of filling holes and depressions in the existing pavement and replacing patches. The patches shall be compacted in maximum three inch lifts to a grade which is approximately one-eighth inch above the adjacent pavement surface by use of a machine vibrator or approved roller. 
7.	A bond coat shall be applied to the prepared surface of the existing pavement and/or the previously placed layer of bituminous mixture and to the vertical edge of the adjacent pavement and structures. The rate shall be 0.10 gallons per square yard or less. The bond coat shall be applied ahead of the paving operation for a distance of at least 1,500 feet, depending upon traffic conditions, as determined by the township engineer. The bituminous mixture shall not be placed until the bond coat has cured. 
8.	The bituminous mixture shall be placed by an approved self-propelled mechanical paver to such a depth that when compacted, it will have the thickness specified on the approved plans. Pavers will be required to have an automatically controlled and activated screed and strikeoff assembly except when placing mixtures for: 
(i)	Variable width sections;
(ii)	The first course of a base course mixture on a subgrade or on a sand subbase;
(iii)	Base course mixtures for shoulders and widenings less than 10.5 feet in width; or
(iv)	Top and leveling course mixtures for shoulders and widenings less than eight feet in width. 
9.	When necessary to take out irregularities in the existing road surface, wedging with bituminous mixture shall be done by placing several layers with the paver, or as directed by the township engineer. Any corrections made to the foundation by wedging with bituminous material shall be placed, compacted, and allowed to cool prior to placing base, leveling, or top course mixtures. 
10.	Bituminous base course mixtures shall not be placed in lifts exceeding three inches, compacted, unless otherwise approved by the engineer. Approval to place lifts in excess of three inches will be based on the ability of the contractor to place and compact the base course to the required density, cross section, and within the specified tolerances. 
11.	The base may be opened to traffic for a period of time to be determined by the township engineer prior to placing of the surface. 
12.	When placing the bituminous top course, or the top two courses of multi-level pavement on the traveled portion of the roadway, the paving operation shall be conducted in a combination of widths which will cause the final course longitudinal joint lines to coincide with the proposed painted lane lines. 
13.	When the temperature of the previously placed mat falls below 170 degrees Fahrenheit prior to placement of the adjacent mat, the vertical edges of the initial mat shall be coated with bituminous bond coat material before the mixture is placed on the adjacent section. In placing the mixture adjacent to all joints, hand raking or brooming will be required to provide a dense smooth connection. 
14.	When placing the bituminous mixture in a lane adjoining a previously placed lane, the mixture shall be placed such that it uniformly overlaps the first lane by two to four inches and is placed at a height above the cold mat equal to the breakdown roller depression on the hot mat. 
15.	A sufficient number of experienced shovelers and rakers shall follow the spreading machine, adding hot mixture and raking the mixtures as required to produce a course that, when completed, will conform to all requirements specified herein. Broadcasting or fanning of mixture over areas being compacted will not be permitted. When segregation occurs in the mixture during placing, the spreading operation shall be suspended until the cause is determined and corrected. 
16.	In areas where the use of machine spreading is impractical, the mixture shall be spread by hand. Spreading shall be in a manner to prevent segregation. The mixture shall be spread uniformly with hot shovels and hot rakes in a loose layer of a thickness that, when compacted, will conform to the required grade and thickness. During hand-spreading, each shovel full of mixture shall be carefully placed by turning the shovel over in a manner that will prevent segregation. In no case shall the mixture be placed by throwing or broadcasting from a shovel. 
17.	Each layer of bituminous mixture shall be compacted to the required density. Except for base and leveling courses used for overlays, steel three-wheeled rollers may be used for initial compaction immediately following the paver. On base and leveling courses used for overlays, pneumatic-tired rollers shall be used for initial compaction immediately following the paver except where severe mat displacement takes place, in which case, a steel-wheeled roller shall be used for breakdown followed by a pneumatic-tired roller. 
18.	The final rolling operation on each layer of bituminous mixture placed shall be accomplished by use of tandem steel-wheeled rollers. Vibratory rollers shall be operated in the static mode when used for finish rolling or pinching the joint. Pneumatic-tired rollers will not be permitted on top courses. Steel rollers wheels shall be kept properly moistened with water but usage of an excess is prohibited. Pneumatic-tired rollers shall be wiped down, off the paved surface, with fuel oil prior to rolling. 
19.	Rolling of the mixture shall begin as soon after placing as it will bear the roller without undue displacement, picking up the mat or cracking. Rolling can start longitudinally at the extreme sides of the lanes and proceed toward the center of the pavement, overlapping on successive trips by at least half the width of the drive wheel of the roller. Alternate passes of the roller shall be of slightly different lengths. The maximum roller speed shall not exceed the manufacturer's recommended speed for the type of mixture or thickness of layer being placed. 
20.	When compacting an adjoining lane, the longitudinal joint shall be rolled first with the roller supported mainly on the cold lane with three to six inches of the roller extending onto the freshly placed bituminous mixture. 
21.	Pneumatic-tired rolling of longitudinal joints shall overlap the hot joint. Pneumatic-tired rollers shall not mark or rut the surface or displace the pavement edges. The pneumatic-tired roller shall be ballasted to obtain the required ground-contact pressures. In order to obtain a uniformly textured mat and the desired in-place density, the contractor shall raise or lower tire pressures at any time during the rolling operations. The roller operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to prevent scuffing or chatter marks in the pavement surface. The number of passes made by the pneumatic-tired roller shall not be less than two round trip passes over each area. 
22.	In all places not accessible to the roller, the hot mixture shall be compacted by hand-tampers. Skin patching on an area that has been rolled will not be permitted. Any mixture that becomes contaminated, or is in any way defective, shall be removed, replaced with hot mixture, and compacted to the density of the surrounding area. 
23.	When the placement rate exceeds 800 square yards per hour, a separate finish roller shall be used in addition to the roller used in establishing the rolling procedure. Roller speeds shall not exceed those established by the rolling pattern. Rolling shall proceed continuously until the required in-place density is attained. This density shall be not less than 97 percent of density of laboratory compacted specimens of the same mixture, using the Marshall Method with 50 blows per side. If specified on the plans, the compaction of the bituminous mixture may be controlled by the MDOT Nuclear Gage Method, in which case requirements of MDOT Section 4.00.11 will apply. 
24.	Finish rolling shall continue until all roller marks are eliminated. No traffic shall be allowed on the surface being placed until rolling has been completed and the surface has cooled sufficiently to prevent damage from traffic. 
25.	After final rolling, the surface may be tested by the engineer using a ten-foot straight-edge at selected locations. The variation of the surface from the testing edge of the straight-edge between any two contacts with the surface shall at no point exceed one-quarter inch. Variations in excess of the specified tolerance shall be corrected. 
26.	Joints between old and new pavements or between successive day's work, or joints that have become cold because of delay, shall be made carefully to insure continuous bond between old and new sections of the course. All joints shall have the same texture, density, and smoothness as other sections of the layer. Contact surfaces of previously constructed pavements that have become coated with dust, sand, or other objectionable material shall be cleaned by brushing or cut back with an approved power saw, as directed. The surface against which new material is to be placed shall be sprayed with a thin, uniform tack coat of bituminous material. The material shall be applied far enough in advance of placement of the fresh mixture to insure adequate curing. Care shall be taken to prevent damage or contamination of the sprayed surface. 
27.	The roller shall pass over the unprotected end of freshly placed mixture only when placing of the layer is discontinued or when delivery of mixture is interrupted to the extent that unrolled material may become cold. In all cases, the edge of the previously placed layer shall be cut back to expose an even, vertical surface for its full thickness. In continuing placement of a strip, the mechanical hot mixture will be spread to obtain a joint after rolling which conforms to the required density and smoothness specified. When required, the fresh mixture shall be raked against the joints, thoroughly tamped with hot tampers, and smoothed with hot irons and rolled. 
28.	Longitudinal joints in surface course or leveling course shall be so placed that the joint will be offset from that of any underlying course by at least one foot. Edges of previously placed strips that have cooled or are irregular, honeycombed, poorly compacted, damaged, or otherwise defective, and unsatisfactory sections of the joint shall be cut back to expose a clean, sound surface for the full thickness of the course as directed. When required, fresh mixtures shall be raked against the joint, thoroughly tamped with hot tampers, smoothed with hot irons, and rolled. 
29.	Bituminous material shall not be applied when rain is threatening or when the temperature in the shade is lower than 60 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 15-3, 3-17-2008)
Chapter 16 - EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Continuity of government during an emergency, Mich. Const. art. IV, § 39; governor's emergency powers, MCL 10.31 et seq.; emergency management act, MCL 30.401 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1-16-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency management act, MCL 30.401 et seq.

Sec. 16-19. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose and intent of this article to establish an organization that will ensure the complete and efficient utilization of all municipal resources during periods of emergency and disaster. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.012; Ord. No. 77, art. I, § 2, 4-15-1985)
Sec. 16-20. - Duty to perform normal functions. 
    This article will not relieve any elected officials or municipal departments of the normal responsibilities of authority given by general law or local ordinance, nor will it affect the work of the American Red Cross or other volunteer agencies organized for relief in a natural disaster. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.013; Ord. No. 77, art. I, § 1, 4-15-1985)
Sec. 16-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Disaster means an occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from a natural or humanmade cause, including, but not limited to, fire, flood, snowstorm, ice storm, tornado, windstorm, wave action, oil spill, water contamination, utility failure, hazardous peacetime radiological incident, major transportation accident, hazardous materials incident, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, or hostile military action or paramilitary action, or similar occurrences resulting from terrorist activities, riots, or civil disorders. 
    Emergency operations center shall mean the Brandon Fire Department, Station No. 1, located at 53 South Street, Ortonville, Michigan, 48462, where heads of departments or agencies, or their representatives, will be assembled during disasters to facilitate coordinated disaster responses and recovery, or any secondary facility designated by the disaster coordinator. 
    Emergency operations plan or disaster plan means the township emergency operations plan which has been prepared under section 16-30, to coordinate disaster response and recovery within the township. The emergency operations plan is also called the emergency preparedness plan for the purpose of section 10 of Public Act No. 309 of 1976 (MCL 30.410). 
    Emergency preparedness coordinator or disaster coordinator means the township supervisor, or in the event the township supervisor is unable to act; a person appointed by the township board, or the township board, to coordinate emergency planning services within the township, and to protect the public health, safety, and welfare during emergency situations and disasters. 
    Emergency services shall have a broad meaning to include preparations for, and relief from, the effects of natural and manmade disasters as defined herein, and to include civil defense. 
    Emergency services forces or command officers means all disaster relief forces; all departments or agencies of this municipal government, private and volunteer personnel, public officers and employees; and all other persons or groups of persons having duties or responsibilities under this article or pursuant to a lawful order or directive authorized by this article. 
    Emergency services volunteer shall mean any person duly registered and appointed by the coordinator and assigned to participate in the emergency services activity. 
    Emergency situation means any situation confronting a community requiring emergency actions of a lesser nature than a disaster, as defined in this section, including, but not limited to, civil disturbances, labor strikes, visits by national or international dignitaries, and build-up activities prior to an actual disaster. 
    Secondary emergency operations center means the Brandon Fire Station No. 2, located at 3560 Sashabaw Road, Ortonville, Michigan, and the municipal offices located at 395 Mill Street, Ortonville, Michigan. 
    State of disaster means a declaration by executive order or proclamation by the governor under the provisions of Public Act No. 390 of 1976 (MCL 30.401 et seq.), which activates the disaster response and recovery aspects of state, local and interjurisdictional disaster emergency plans authorized by the employment and use of any municipal forces to which the plan applies. 
    State of emergency means a declaration by the supervisor pursuant to this article which activates the disaster response and recovery aspects of the township emergency operations plan and authorizes the employment and use of any municipal forces to which the plan applies. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.020; Ord. No. 77, art. II, 4-15-1985)
Sec. 16-22. - Creation of organization by supervisor, board approval, supervisor as emergency preparedness coordinator. 
    The supervisor, with the approval of the board, is hereby authorized and directed to create an organization to prepare for community disasters and institute the emergency operations plan utilizing to the fullest extent existing agencies within the township. The supervisor, as executive head of the township government, shall be the emergency preparedness coordinator of the township. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.031; Ord. No. 77, art. III, § 1, 4-15-1985)
Sec. 16-23. - Emergency operations center; emergency services forces. 
    The organization for providing emergency services shall consist of the following: 
(1)	An emergency operations center, and a secondary emergency operations center, established within the township. The supervisor shall be the head of the organization, as the emergency preparedness coordinator. Such command officers and other employees as are deemed necessary for the proper functioning of the organization may be employed. 
(2)	The employees, equipment and facilities of all municipal departments, boards, institutions and commissions suitable for, or adaptable to emergency services activities may be designated as part of the total emergency services forces. Such designations shall be by the supervisor with the approval of the board. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.032; Ord. No. 77, art. III, § 2, 4-15-1985)
Sec. 16-24. - Exercise of emergency powers by supervisor, convening of board by supervisor. 
    The supervisor may exercise the emergency power and authority as specified herein. Whenever a situation requires, or is likely to require that the supervisor invoke such power and authority, he shall, as soon as reasonably possible, convene the board to perform its legislative and administrative duties as the situation demands, and shall report to that board relative to emergency activities. Nothing in this article shall be construed as abridging or curtailing the powers of the board unless specifically provided herein. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.041; Ord. No. 77, art. IV, § 1, 4-15-1985)
Sec. 16-25. - When supervisor may declare emergency or disaster. 
    The supervisor may declare that a major emergency or disaster exists in the township and may assemble and utilize the emergency service forces in accordance with the township emergency operations plan, and he may prescribe the manner and conditions of the use of such emergency services forces in accordance with section 10 of Public Act No. 390 of 1976 (MCL 30.410). 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.042; Ord. No. 77, art. IV, § 2, 4-15-1985)
Sec. 16-26. - Declaration of state of emergency and state of disaster. 
    Whenever the supervisor deems that any condition in the township is beyond the control of local public or private agencies or has attained or threatens to attain the proportions of a major disaster, he may request assistance from the county division of emergency services and disaster control. If necessary, the county executive will declare a state of emergency. If the disaster or emergency is beyond the control of both the township and the county, the county disaster coordinator shall request state assistance through the district disaster coordinator. The district coordinator shall advise the governor on further action. If necessary the governor shall declare that a state of disaster exists. Such procedures shall be as set forth in section 12 of Public Act No. 390 of 1976 (MCL 30.412). 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.043; Ord. No. 77, art. IV, § 3, 4-15-1985)
Sec. 16-27. - Powers of supervisor; board approval. 
    The supervisor, with the approval of the board, is hereby empowered and has the authority: 
(1)	To appropriate and expend funds, make contracts, obtain and distribute equipment, materials, and supplies for disaster purposes. 
(2)	To provide for the health and safety of persons and property, including emergency assistance to the victims of a disaster. 
(3)	To assign and make equipment available for duty, the employees, property, or equipment of the township relating to firefighting, engineering, rescue, health, medical, and relative services, police, transportation, construction, and similar items or services for disaster relief purposes within or without the physical limits of the township. 
(4)	In the event of a foreign attack upon this state, to waive procedures and formalities otherwise required by law pertaining to the performance of public work entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of permanent and temporary workers, the utilization of volunteer workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase and distribution with or without compensation of supplies, materials, and facilities, and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.044; Ord. No. 77, art. IV, § 4, 4-15-1985)
Sec. 16-28. - Establishment by supervisor of procedures for succession of government during emergency; board approval. 
    The supervisor, with the approval of the board shall establish procedures for the succession of government during emergencies where officials are unavailable for exercising the powers and discharging the duties of their respective offices. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.045; Ord. No. 77, art. IV, § 5, 4-15-1985)
Sec. 16-29. - Waiver of procedure and formalities by supervisor or board. 
    When obtaining formal approvals would result in delay of relief activity, the supervisor may, until the board convenes, waive procedures and formalities otherwise required pertaining to the performance of public works, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase and distribution of supplies, materials, and facilities and expenditures of existing funds, and the board is also empowered to waive any such procedures and formalities. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.046; Ord. No. 77, art. IV, § 6, 4-15-1985)
Sec. 16-30. - Responsibilities and duties of emergency preparedness coordinator. 
(a)	The supervisor, as the emergency preparedness coordinator, shall be responsible for the administration, planning, coordination and operation of all emergency preparedness activities in the township. He shall maintain liaison with county, state, and federal authorities, and the authorities of adjacent and nearby political subdivisions so as to ensure the most effective emergency operations. In the event the emergency preparedness coordinator is unable to act, the township board shall convene and shall act as the emergency preparedness coordinator, or appoint a person to act as the emergency preparedness coordinator, and designate the change of command. 
(b)	The duties of the emergency preparedness coordinator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: (The emergency preparedness coordinator may delegate any or all of his duties per the township disaster plan of operations.) 
(1)	Institution and development of the township emergency operations plan, and any other appropriate disaster plans, for the immediate use of all the facilities, equipment, manpower, and other resources of the township for the purpose of minimizing or preventing damages to persons or property; and protecting and restoring to usefulness governmental services and public utilities necessary for the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)	Coordinating the recruitment and training of volunteer personnel and command officers to augment the personnel and facilities of the township for emergency purposes. 
(3)	Through public information programs, educating the population as to actions necessary and required for the protection of persons and property in case of a disaster. 
(4)	Conducting practice alerts and exercises to ensure the efficient operation of the township's emergency organization and to familiarize residents of the township with emergency regulations, procedures, and operations. 
(5)	Coordinating the activity of all other public and private agencies engaged in any emergency or disaster relief programs. 
(6)	Negotiating with owners or persons in control of buildings or other property for the use of such buildings or property for emergency or disaster relief purposes, and designating suitable buildings as public shelters. 
(7)	Establishing and maintaining administrative control over a local radiological defense program, to include emergency preparations for both peacetime radiation incidents and international wartime disasters. 
(8)	Coordinating the various departments, agencies, and command officers created pursuant to the emergency operations plan. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 40.051, 40.052; Ord. No. 77, art. V, §§ 1, 2, 4-15-1985)
Sec. 16-31. - Appointment of authorization of emergency services volunteers. 
(a)	Each department, board, or other command office of township government may at any time appoint or authorize the appointment of volunteer citizens to augment the personnel of such township department, board, or command officer in time of emergency. Such individuals shall be enrolled as emergency services volunteers, and shall be subject to the rules and regulations set forth by the respective department, board, or command office for such volunteers. 
(b)	The emergency preparedness coordinator may enlist volunteer citizens to form the personnel of an emergency service for which the township has no counterpart, or to temporarily augment personnel of the township engaged in emergency activities. The emergency preparedness coordinator shall maintain formal records for all such volunteers for workmen's compensation purposes. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 40.061, 40.062; Ord. No. 77, art. VI, §§ 1, 2, 4-15-1985)
Sec. 16-32. - Rights, privileges and immunities of township employees; compensation for employment. 
    Township employees assigned to duty as part of the emergency services forces pursuant to the provisions of this article shall retain all of the rights, privileges, and immunities of township employees under section 11 of Public Act No. 390 of 1976 (MCL 30.411), and shall receive the compensation incidental to their employment. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.071; Ord. No. 77, art. VII, 4-15-1985)
Sec. 16-33. - Performance of governmental function; immunity. 
(a)	This article is an exercise by the township of its governmental functions for the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare. As such, neither the township nor agents and representatives of the township, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, political subdivision, nor trustee, nor any of the agents thereof acting in good faith carrying out, complying with, or attempting to comply with this article shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons or property as a result of such activity. 
(b)	Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants the township the right to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during a disaster or during an authorized practice disaster exercise, shall not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission, or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 40.081, 40.082; Ord. No. 77, art. VIII, §§ 1, 2, 4-15-1985)
Sec. 16-34. - Suspension. 
    At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supercede all other existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations, insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.091; Ord. No. 77, art. IX, 4-15-1985)
Sec. 16-35. - Availability of resources. 
    This article is only intended to provide for response to an emergency situation to the extent that the township has the resources available to respond. Once these available resources are exhausted, the township will be assisted by county as a part of the county disaster plan. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.101; Ord. No. 77, art. X, 4-15-1985)
Sec. 16-36. - Violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any emergency services forces in the enforcement or accomplishment of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or other means of identification as a member of the emergency services forces of the township unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by proper officials. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.111; Ord. No. 77, art. XI, 4-15-1985)
Secs. 16-37-16-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADDRESSING 

Sec. 16-61. - Scope and application. 
    The terms and provisions of this article shall be interpreted and applied as minimum standards and regulations for the purpose of assuring the ability to identify and locate property in emergency circumstances in which humanlife or welfare may be in danger and/or property may be in need of protection from the dangers and hazards of fire. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.221; Ord. No. 87, § 2.1, 8-19-1991; Ord. No. 114, § 2.1, 8-8-2007) 
Sec. 16-62. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of construction and application of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Commercial property means any property zoned for commercial purposes under chapter 46, pertaining to zoning. 
    District court means and refers to the 52nd district court for the state, second division. 
    Fire chief means the chief of the township fire department, and reference to the fire official means and refers to the fire chief. 
    Industrial property shall mean any property zoned for industrial purposes under chapter 46, pertaining to zoning. 
    Person in possession means the person who had the possessory right of particular property and/or improvements, and shall include the agent of such person, and, also, the person having apparent authority with respect to such possession based upon reasonable inferences and grounds. 
    Village means the Village of Ortonville, County of Oakland, State of Michigan. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.231; Ord. No. 87, § 3.1, 8-19-1991; Ord. No. 114, § 3.1, 8-8-2007) 
Sec. 16-63. - Inspections. 
    An annual inspection and approval by the fire official shall be required in order to ensure proper addressing. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.241; Ord. No. 87, § 4.1, 8-19-1991; Ord. No. 114, art. IV, 8-8-2007) 
Sec. 16-64. - Temporary/permanent addresses. 
    Upon issuance of a building permit a temporary address shall be posted, and when occupancy is given a permanent address shall be posted, both to comply with this article. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.251; Ord. No. 87, § 5.1, 8-19-1991; Ord. No. 114, § 5.1, 8-8-2007) 
Sec. 16-65. - Existing addresses; compliance. 
    Existing structures must comply with the ordinance from which this article is derived within 90 days of its effectiveness. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.252; Ord. No. 87, § 5.2, 8-19-1991; Ord. No. 114, § 5.2, 8-8-2007) 
Sec. 16-66. - Owner's responsibility. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property to install all required address numbers. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.253; Ord. No. 87, § 5.3, 8-19-1991; Ord. No. 114, § 5.3, 8-8-2007) 
Sec. 16-67. - Residential installation. 
(a)	All owners of primary residential structures which are located further than 75 feet from the edge of the traveled portion of the nearest road or which are not clearly visible yearround from the road because of vegetation, snow conditions, terrain, or other obstacles shall display their address number on a post. The post shall conform with the following standards: 
(1)	The post shall be located within ten feet of the driveway and at a location which is clearly visible yearround from the road. The post must be placed in a location which is no greater than ten feet from the edge of the traveled portion for roads with a defined shoulder or at least four feet from the edge of the traveled portion from roads without a defined shoulder. 
(2)	A sign on each post which contains the assigned address number on both sides of the sign. The sign shall be installed on the post from one edge and extend perpendicularly away from the road. The bottom of the sign shall be placed at a height which is no less than three feet above the level of the road surface. The sign shall contain white reflective numbers not less than three inches tall on a reflective background. 
(b)	All owners of primary structures which are located less than 75 feet from the nearest road and which are clearly visible yearround from the road must erect and maintain their assigned address numbers on the outside of the primary structure. The numbers must be four inches in height and must be of contrasting color to the structure's surface. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.263; Ord. No. 87, §§ 6.2, 6.3, 8-19-1991; Ord. No. 114, art. VI, 8-8-2007) 
Sec. 16-68. - Commercial industrial properties. 
(a)	All owners of commercial, industrial, or other business structures which are located further than 75 feet from the edge of the traveled portion of the nearest road or which are not clearly visible yearround from the road because of vegetation, snow conditions, terrain, or other obstacles shall display their address number on a post. The post shall conform with the following standards: 
(1)	The post shall be located within ten feet of the driveway and at a location which is clearly visible yearround from the road. The post must be placed in a location which is no greater than ten feet from the edge of the traveled portion for roads with a defined shoulder or at least four feet from the edge of the traveled portion for roads without a defined shoulder. 
(2)	On the post must be placed a sign which contains the assigned address number on both sides of the sign. The sign shall be installed on the structure from one edge and extend perpendicularly away from the road. The bottom of the sign shall be placed at a height which is no less than three feet above the level of the road surface. The sign shall contain white reflective numbers not less than three inches tall on a reflective background. 
(b)	All owners of commercial, industrial, or other business structures which are located less than 75 feet from the edge of the traveled portion of the nearest road and which have clearly visible yearround from the road must erect and maintain their assigned address numbers on the outside of the primary structure. The address numbers must be located on a primary structure surface facing the nearest road. The numbers must be six inches in height and must be of contrasting color to the structure's surface. 
(c)	All owners of commercial, industrial, or other business structures with multiple structures must erect and maintain their assigned address numbers on the outside of each structure. The address numbers must be located on a surface facing the nearest access. The numbers must be six inches in height and must be of contrasting color to the structure's surface. 
(d)	Property owners may apply for a permit to post each address in a horizontal manner on a post within ten feet of the property address location. The bottom of the sign shall be placed at a height which is no less than three feet above the level of the road surface and otherwise comply with all requirements of the fire department. The sign shall contain white reflective numbers not less than six inches tall on a reflective background. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.264; Ord. No. 87, §§ 6.2, 6.4, 8-19-1991; Ord. No. 114, art. VII, 8-8-2007) 
Sec. 16-69. - Violations as municipal civil infractions. 
    Violation of this article is a municipal civil infraction. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.281; Ord. No. 87, § 8.1, 8-19-1991; Ord. No. 114, § 8.1, 8-8-2007; Ord. No. 124, § 2, 7-7-2008) 
Secs. 16-70-16-96. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROPERTY ACCESS 

Sec. 16-97. - Scope and application. 
    The term and provisions of this article shall be interpreted and applied as minimum standards and regulations for the purpose of entering on to property and structures with emergency vehicles in time of an emergency. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.421; Ord. No. 88, § 2.1, 9-19-1991)
Sec. 16-98. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Apparatus means any vehicle or equipment operated by the fire department. 
    Business property means any property zoned for business purposes under chapter 46, pertaining to zoning. 
    Commercial property means any property zoned for commercial purposes under chapter 46, pertaining to zoning. 
    District court means and refer to the 52nd judicial district court for the state, second division. 
    Driveway means any property used as access to property and/or a structure by vehicles. 
    Fire chief shall mean the chief of the township fire department, and reference to the fire official means and refers to the fire chief. 
    Industrial property means any property zoned for industrial purposes under chapter 46, pertaining to zoning. 
    Person in possession means the person who has the possessory right of particular property and/or improvements, and shall include the agent of such person, and, also, the person having apparent authority with respect to such possession based upon reasonable inferences and grounds. 
    Residential property means any property zoned for residential purposes chapter 46, pertaining to zoning. 
    Village means the Village of Ortonville, County of Oakland, State of Michigan. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.431; Ord. No. 88, § 3.1, 9-19-1991)
Sec. 16-99. - Driveway permit; part of building permit. 
(a)	An additional and separate permit under this article shall not be required for the construction of a driveway, but shall be applied for as part of the building permit. 
(b)	A permit is required for a bridge, culvert or overhead obstruction on the driveway.
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 40.441, 40.442; Ord. No. 88, §§ 4.1, 4.2, 9-19-1991)
Sec. 16-100. - Inspection and approval. 
(a)	Fire chief permitted on property; inspection. The fire chief and/or his designates shall be permitted to lawfully enter upon private property for the purpose of making inspections to ascertain compliance with this article. 
(b)	Building inspector approval on new construction. Approval is required by the building inspector for all new construction, site plans, and must detail the driveway length, width, type of material, bridges, culverts, overhead obstructions, turning radius, and degree of rise of any hills. 
(c)	Building department to be provided with plans. Any installation of bridges, culverts, and overhead obstructions, shall be required to provide the building department with detailed drawings showing width, height, type of construction, and verification of gross weight capacity. 
(d)	Fire official approval of plans. All site plans to be reviewed, and approved by the fire official. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 40.451-40.454; Ord. No. 88, §§ 5.1-5.4, 9-19-1991)
Sec. 16-101. - Where required. 
(a)	Property required to have a driveway. Any property that has a structure on it is required to have and maintain a driveway. 
(b)	Structures required to have driveway. All structures on the property shall have a driveway. 
(c)	Driveway to be constructed upon issuance of permit. Upon issuance of a building permit, a driveway shall be constructed off the road that the structure is addressed, the driveway may be temporary, but must be able to support emergency apparatus. 
(d)	Location of temporary driveway. Temporary driveways must be in the same location as will the permanent driveway. 
(e)	Temporary driveway must meet requirements. A temporary driveway that requires a bridge or culvert on it, the bridge, or culvert, must meet the requirements of this article. 
(f)	Owner's responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to install the driveway. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 40.461-40.466; Ord. No. 88, §§ 6.1-6.6, 9-19-1991)
Sec. 16-102. - Driveway specifications. 
    The driveway shall be installed to the following specifications: 
(1)	The driveway surface width shall be 12 feet, the overall width to any obstructions shall be 14 feet. 
(2)	The type of material shall be so the surface will pack solid and create a driveway that will support fire apparatus. 
(3)	The minimum height of overhead obstructions is 14 feet, to include arches, tree branches, banners, covered bridges, utility wires. 
(4)	The maximum weight capacity of any bridge, or culvert built on a driveway. It shall be the burden of the owner to show by certification that the bridge, or culvert is capable of supporting 15 tons for every 20 feet of span. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.471; Ord. No. 88, § 7.1, 9-19-1991)
Sec. 16-103. - Driveway maintenance. 
(a)	Access for emergency apparatus. All driveways are to be maintained to provide access for emergency apparatus. 
(b)	Free of debris. All driveways are to be kept free of debris. 
(c)	Maintained by owner. All driveways shall be maintained by the person in possession of the property. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 40.481-40.483; Ord. No. 88, §§ 8.1-8.3, 9-19-1991)
Sec. 16-104. - Violations as municipal civil infractions. 
    Violation of this article is a municipal civil infraction. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.491; Ord. No. 88, § 9.1, 9-19-1991; Ord. No. 124, § 2, 7-7-2008) 
Chapter 18 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Natural resources and environmental protection act, MCL 324.101 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOXIOUS WEEDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Control and eradication of noxious weeds, MCL 247.61 et seq.

Sec. 18-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commissioner means the township supervisor, or his designee. 
    Noxious weed means and includes the following plants: Canada Thistle (Circium arvense), dodders (any species of Cascuta), mustards (charlock, black mustard and Indian mustard, species of Brassica or Sinapis), wild carrot (Daucus carota), bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis), perennial sowthistle (Sonchus arvensis), hoary alyssum (Verteroa incana), ragweed (ambrosia elatiorl), poison ivy (rhus toxicondendron), poison sumac (toxicondendron vernix) and all types and varieties of grass and weeds which exceed the height of 12 inches above the ground level. 
    Owner means any person, or agent thereof, holding an ownership interest in land in the township upon which there are noxious weeds, or the occupant of said land, provided that, neither a company, association or person owning, controlling or operating a railroad, nor the county road commission shall constitute an "owner" for the purposes of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 35-221- 35-223; Ord. No. 43, §§ 2.1-2.3, 2-7-1977)
Sec. 18-20. - Control growth of weeds. 
    The commissioner shall diligently inquire concerning the introduction and existence of noxious weeds in the township and if they are found growing therein, the commissioner shall have the authority to control such growing and take care that such weeds do not go to seed or otherwise spread or become a detriment to the public health. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-241; Ord. No. 43, § 4.1, 2-7-1977)
Sec. 18-21. - Notice. 
    In the event that the commissioner finds noxious weeds growing upon the land of an owner, the commissioner shall provide said owner with notice of methods of treatment and eradication of said weeds, and notice that it is the duty of all owners, pursuant to state statute and this article, to destroy noxious weeds before they reach a seed-bearing stage, to prevent such weeds from perpetuating themselves and to prevent such weeds from becoming a detriment to the public health. Further, said notice shall apprise said owner that if said owner fails to comply with said duties, the commissioner is authorized to enter upon the owner's land and cut or cause said noxious weeds to be destroyed. Said notice shall further apprise the owner that any expense incurred in cutting or destroying said weeds shall be paid by the owner, and that the township shall have a lien against the land for such expense to be enforced in the manner provided for enforcement of mechanics liens or tax liens, as hereinafter prescribed, and that any owner who shall refuse to cut or destroy such noxious weeds shall be subject to a fine as hereinafter provided. The aforementioned notice shall be given to said owners by certified mail with return receipt requested, or, in lieu thereof, the township may publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in county during the month of March, stating that weeds not cut or destroyed by June 1 of that year will be cut or destroyed by the township, and the owner charged with the expenses as herein provided. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-242; Ord. No. 43, § 4.2, 2-7-1977)
Sec. 18-22. - Subdivided land or lots. 
    On any subdivided land in any subdivision in the township in which buildings have been erected on 60 percent of the lots included in that subdivision, or on lots along all improved streets in common usage, for a depth of ten rods or the depth of the lots, whichever is lesser, if an owner has failed to cut or cause such noxious weeds to be destroyed after receiving notice as provided in section 18-21, the commissioner may enter upon such subdivided land or lots and destroy by cutting, with or without mechanical equipment which will not damage the property or the sidewalk adjacent thereto, any such weeds, and all expenses incurred in such destruction shall be paid by the owner of such subdivided land. The township shall have a lien upon such subdivided land or lots for such expense, to be enforced in the manner prescribed by the general laws of the state providing for the enforcement of tax liens. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-243; Ord. No. 43, § 4.3, 2-7-1977)
Sec. 18-23. - Other land. 
    With respect to land in the township to which section 18-22 is not applicable, if the owner has failed to cut or cause noxious weeds to be destroyed after receiving notice, as provided in section 18-21, the commissioner may enter upon said land and cut or cause said noxious weeds to be destroyed, and all expenses incurred in said destruction shall be paid by the owner of said land. The township shall have a lien upon said land for such expense, to be enforced in the manner provided for enforcement of mechanic's liens. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-244; Ord. No. 43, § 4.4, 2-7-1977)
Sec. 18-24. - Failure to give notice. 
    Failure of the commissioner to give notice, as provided for in section 18-21, shall not constitute a defense to any action to enforce the payment of any penalty or debt created under the provisions of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-245; Ord. No. 43, § 4.5, 2-7-1977)
Sec. 18-25. - Limit on expenditures. 
    The commissioner shall apply the best known means, and use the utmost diligence, in cutting and eradicating noxious weeds. The township may cut weeds on as many separate occasions as may become necessary and charge the expenses incurred for same to the owner as hereinbefore provided. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-246; Ord. No. 43, § 4.6, 2-7-1977)
Sec. 18-26. - Prosecution. 
    It shall be the duty of the commissioner to prosecute or complain to the proper authorities of any owner who may violate any law now existing, or which may hereafter be passed, on the subject of noxious weeds. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-247; Ord. No. 43, § 4.7, 2-7-1977)
Sec. 18-27. - Violations as municipal civil infractions. 
    Violation of this article is a municipal civil infraction. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-250; Ord. No. 43, § 5.1, 2-7-1977; Ord. No. 124, § 2, 7-7-2008)
Secs. 18-28-18-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LITTER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Littering, MCL 324.8901 et seq.

Sec. 18-58. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Litter means, but is not limited to, all rubbish, refuse, waste material, garbage, offal, paper, glass, cans, bottles, trash, debris, junk, parts of vehicles, vehicle frames, vehicle chassis, furniture, oil, carcass of a dead animal, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, piles of metal or wood, or other foreign substances of every kind and description, or any object likely to injure any person or create a traffic hazard. 
    Public or private property means, but is not limited to, the right-of-way of any road or highway, any body of water or watercourse, the shores or beaches of any body of water or watercourse, and includes the ice above such waters, any park, playground, building, refuge or conservation or recreation areas, and all residential or farm properties or timberlands. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 35-421, 35-422; Ord. No. 74, §§ 2.1, 2.2, 8-6-1984)
Sec. 18-59. - Prohibition generally. 
    No person shall dump, deposit, place, store, throw or leave, or cause or permit dumping, depositing, placing, storing, throwing or leaving of, litter on any public or private property within the township other than on property designated and set aside for such purposes, or in receptacles provided for that purpose. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-431; Ord. No. 74, § 3.1, 8-6-1984)
Sec. 18-60. - Manner of placing in receptacles. 
    Persons placing litter in receptacles shall do so in such a manner so as to prevent the litter from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private property. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-432; Ord. No. 74, § 3.2, 8-6-1984)
Sec. 18-61. - Abutting sidewalks and parking areas to be kept clean; sweeping into public places prohibited. 
(a)	Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk and parking places around their premises, and any vacant or occupied parcel, free of litter. 
(b)	No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, ditch, street or other public place within the township the accumulation of litter, or snow, dirt, or ice, from any building, lot or parcel or from any public or private driveway or sidewalk. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-433; Ord. No. 74, § 3.3, 8-6-1984)
Sec. 18-62. - Throwing from vehicles. 
    No person, whether driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the township or upon any private property within the township, except in places designated for such purpose. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-434; Ord. No. 74, § 3.4, 8-6-1984)
Sec. 18-63. - Construction and loading of vehicle loads; dirty wheels on vehicles. 
(a)	No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the township unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents of the load, or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place, or any private place within the township. 
(b)	No person shall drive or move any vehicle or truck within the township, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in or onto any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, or litter of any kind. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-435; Ord. No. 74, § 3.5, 8-6-1984)
Sec. 18-64. - Throwing on private property. 
    No person, including the owner thereof, shall throw, store or deposit litter on any private property within the township except for collection in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited away from the receptacles, and this section shall not be interpreted to prohibit the storage of litter in the receptacles. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-436; Ord. No. 74, § 3.6, 8-6-1984)
Sec. 18-65. - Removal of vehicle and debris after accident. 
    Any person removing a vehicle, wrecked or damaged in any accident on any highway, road or street, shall also remove all glass or other injurious substances dropped on the highway, road or street, as a result of the accident. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-437; Ord. No. 74, § 3.7, 8-6-1984)
Sec. 18-66. - Falling in path of vehicles. 
    No person shall cause any litter or any object to fall or to be thrown into the path of or to hit a vehicle traveling on the highway. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-438; Ord. No. 74, § 3.8, 8-6-1984)
Sec. 18-67. - Permission required for dumping at designated places. 
    In the case of property designated for the purpose of containing or receiving litter, no person shall dump, deposit, place, store, throw or leave, or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, storing, throwing or leaving of litter in such place without the consent of the public authority having supervision of public property or the owner of private property. This section shall not be construed to apply to receptacles placed in public places for public use. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-439; Ord. No. 74, § 3.9, 8-6-1984)
Sec. 18-68. - Construction sites; clean condition. 
    The property owners and the prime contractors in charge of any construction site shall maintain the construction site in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried by the elements to adjoining premises. All litter from construction activities or any related activities shall be picked up at the end of each workday and placed in containers which will prevent litter from being carried by the elements to adjoining premises. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-440; Ord. No. 74, § 3.10, 8-6-1984)
Sec. 18-69. - Abandoned garbage containers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who is in control of any premises upon which is located or on whose behalf there is maintained any container of refuse, waste, garbage or litter which has been containerized in accordance with the contract for its removal to allow that refuse, waste, garbage or litter to remain uncollected beyond the date provided by the contract for its collection and removal, or in any case to allow the container to remain unemptied for longer than 14 days or in any case until after the refuse, waste, garbage or litter creates any condition which is offensive to persons upon any private premises or public place. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-441; Ord. No. 74, § 3.11, 8-6-1984)
Sec. 18-70. - Violations. 
    Violation of this article is a municipal civil infraction; provided, however, violation of section 18-66 is a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine not more than $500.00, or both. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-451; Ord. No. 74, § 4.1, 8-6-1984; Ord. No. 124, § 2, 7-7-2008; Ord. No. 149-13, § 2, 1-7-2013) 
State Law reference- MCL 324.8901 et seq.; MCL 324.8903. 
Chapter 20 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State fire prevention code, MCL 29.1 et seq.; explosives act, MCL 29.41 et seq.; arson and burning, MCL 750.71 et seq.; crimes related to fires, MCL 750.240 et seq.; crimes related to explosives and bombs, MCL 750.200 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1-20-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE CODE 

Sec. 20-19. - Scope and application. 
    The terms and provisions of this article shall be interpreted and applied as minimum standards and regulations for the protection of life and property from exposure to the damages and hazards of fires. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 22.020; Ord. No. 64, § 2.1, 10-19-1981)
Sec. 20-20. - Definitions. 
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Board of appeals shall mean and refer to a three-member body consisting of the following: 
(1)	The fire chief.
(2)	A delegate appointed by the village, which delegate shall serve for a two-year term from and after the date of appointment. 
(3)	A delegate appointed by the township, which delegate shall serve for a two-year term from and after the date of appointment. 
    District court shall mean and refer to the 52nd judicial district court for the state, second division. 
    Fire code shall mean and refer to the code and standards adopted under section 20-24. 
    Periodic inspection shall mean an inspection made in accordance with section 20-21. 
    Periodic inspection plan shall mean the plan prepared for purposes of governing periodic inspections in the township, completed, approved and filed in accordance with the provisions of section 20-23. 
    Person in possession shall mean the person who has the possessory right of particular property and/or improvements, and shall include the agent of such person, and, also, the person having apparent authority with respect to such possession based upon reasonable inferences and grounds. 
    Special inspection shall mean an inspection made in accordance with the provisions of section 20-22. 
    Village shall mean the Village of Ortonville, County of Oakland, State of Michigan. 
(b)	Terms not specifically defined in this article shall have the meanings customarily attributed to them, provided, in the interpretation of the Code, the particular definitions as provided therein shall be applicable. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 22.030; Ord. No. 64, §§ 3.1, 3.2, 10-19-1981; Ord. of 8-28-2006, art. III; Ord. No. 116, art. III, 7-2-2007) 
Sec. 20-21. - Periodic inspections. 
(a)	The fire department, with the advice and approval of the township board, shall prepare an orderly plan for the inspection of structures and improvements in the township for fire code compliance. Such plan shall be based on reasonable administrative standards and shall provide for uniform inspection. Upon completion and approval, the plan shall constitute the periodic inspection plan and shall be filed with the township clerk. Moreover, such plan shall be periodically reviewed and updated in accordance with the same procedure for completion, approval and filing in the first instance. 
(b)	All periodic inspections shall be made in accordance with the periodic inspection plan. 
(c)	The fire chief, or a person appointed by the fire chief, shall conduct such inspections pursuant to the consent, either written or oral, of the person in possession of the premises sought to be inspected. 
(d)	In the event such consent is denied, a warrant authorizing the inspection of the premises shall be sought. 
(e)	Application for such warrant shall be made to the district court and the application shall contain at least the following information: 
(1)	A description of the periodic inspection plan.
(2)	A description of the premises sought to be inspected.
(3)	A statement confirming that the premises sought to be inspected is due to be inspected in accordance with the periodic inspection plan and that the person authorized to do so has attempted to obtain the consent of the person in possession but that such consent has been denied. 
(4)	The names of the person authorized to seek such consent and the person who has denied such consent, and the date or dates of the request and denial of consent. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 22.040; Ord. No. 64, art. IV, 10-19-1981; Ord. of 8-28-2006, art. IV; Ord. No. 116, art. IV, 7-2-2007) 
Sec. 20-22. - Special inspections. 
(a)	In addition to the inspections undertaken as part of the periodic inspection plan, the fire chief and/or the designated and authorized agents of the fire chief may conduct special inspections of improvements and structures on private property in such cases where reliable information has been received showing probable cause to believe that an inspection of such structures and improvements will reveal violations of the fire code. 
(b)	In making such special inspections, the fire chief, or his designated and authorized agents, shall proceed as follows: 
(1)	Obtain consent, either written or oral, from the person in possession of the premises; or 
(2)	In the event that such consent is denied, or otherwise in the discretion of the fire chief, his designate or agent shall seek and obtain the issuance of a warrant to inspect the premises in the district court. 
(c)	Application for a warrant to inspect premises under this article shall contain the following: 
(1)	A description of the premises sought to be inspected.
(2)	A statement made under oath based upon personal knowledge or upon reliable information and belief, alleging such facts and circumstances which, taken as a whole, show a probable cause to believe that fire code violations exist in the described premises. 
(3)	A statement describing the persons who shall perform the inspection, and further indicating that such persons are authorized to make such inspection by the fire chief. 
(4)	A statement:
a.	That consent to make the inspection has been sought and denied;
b.	Showing a reasonable basis for the belief that consent will not be forthcoming and that there exists a reasonable likelihood that one or more fire code violations will be concealed if consent is first sought; or 
c.	That there is a compelling reason why the premises must be inspected for a fire code violation without first seeking the consent of the person in possession in order to protect life and/or property from the dangers and hazards of fire or explosion. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 22.050; Ord. No. 64, art. V, 10-19-1981)
Sec. 20-23. - Public property inspections. 
(a)	The fire chief and/or the designated and authorized agents of the fire chief may, at all reasonable hours, enter any public building or premises not otherwise within the exclusive jurisdiction of the fire marshal division of the state police for the purpose of making inspections under the provisions of this article. 
(b)	The fire chief and/or the designated and authorized agents of the fire chief may, as determined by the fire board and fire chief, work in conjunction with the said fire marshal division for the purpose of making inspections of public property and premises, as well as other facilities, which are within the exclusive and other jurisdiction of the fire marshal division. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 22.060; Ord. No. 64, art. VI, 10-19-1981)
Sec. 20-24. - Adoption of International Fire Code; amendments. 
(a)	The 2003 edition of the International Fire Code, including Appendix B, Appendix C and Appendix D, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as part of this Code. 
(b)	Complete printed copies of the International Fire Code shall be available for public use and inspection at the office of the building department and fire department. 
(c)	The following sections and subsections of the International Fire Code are hereby amended or deleted as set forth, and additional sections and subsections are added as indicated; section numbers used refer to the like numbered sections of the International Fire Code. 
Section 101. 
    Amended Section 101.1 Title. These regulations as set forth herein shall be known as the Fire Prevention Code of the Charter Township of Brandon and are herein referred to as such or as "this code." 
Section 102.1. 
    Amended Section 102.1 New and Existing Conditions. The provisions of this code and the township building, mechanical and plumbing codes shall apply equally to new and existing buildings and conditions. 
    Exceptions: 
1.	Existing conditions which, in the opinion of the code official, do not constitute a distinct hazard to life or property. 
2.	The transportation of any article or substance under the jurisdiction of and in compliance with the regulations prescribed by the military forces of the United States. 
Section 102.2. 
    Amended Section 102.2 Exemptions. Buildings built under and in full compliance with the codes and ordinances in force at the time of construction or alternation thereof, and that have been properly maintained and used for such use as originally permitted, shall be exempt from the requirements of this code pertaining to any of the following matters, except as otherwise provided for in this code: 
1.	Fire protection of building elements except as required for existing buildings under this code or the township building code. 
2.	Exits required, except as required for existing buildings under this code or the township building code. 
3.	Isolation of hazardous operations and mixed uses as required for existing buildings under this code or the township building code; provided, however, that the fire code official requires the installation of fire safety devices or systems (fire extinguishers, fire protective signaling systems, automatic fire detection devices, sprinklers or similar systems) where such devices or systems are necessary to provide safety to life and property. In lieu of requiring the installation of safety devices or systems or when necessary to secure safety in addition thereto, the fire code official shall prescribe limitations on the handling and storage of materials or substances or upon operations that are liable to cause fire, contribute to the spread of fire, or endanger life or property. 
Section 102.6. 
    Amended Section 102.6 Referenced codes, ordinances and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in chapter 45 and such Codes and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. With respect to any references to the prescribed extent of each such reference. With respect to any references to the International Building Code, electrical code, international mechanical code, international plumbing code and international property maintenance code, if the referenced provisions of such codes differ from the building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing or property maintenance codes adopted and/or enforced by the township, to the extent that they are applicable to a given structure, condition, facility and/or situation in the township, the codes adopted and/or enforced by the township shall apply as if specifically referenced. Where differences occur between the provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the more strict provisions shall apply. 
Section 102.10. 
    Added Section 102.10 State regulation. Whenever state law or regulations apply a higher or more restrictive standard or requirement than is provided in this code, the higher requirement or standard of the state law shall prevail. 
Section 103. 
    Deleted Section 103 Department of Fire Prevention. (The establishment of a similar department or bureau of fire prevention may be addressed separately in the ordinances of the municipality.) 
Section 104.12. 
    Added Section 104.12 Enforcement authority. In addition to the code official, this article may be enforced by the fire chief, fire inspectors and designated officers, all of whom shall have the authority to issue appearance citations for violations of this article. 
Section 109.3. 
    Amended Section 109.3 Violation penalties. The penalties for violating a provision of this code are set forth in section 1-11 of the Code of Ordinances. Subsection 109.3.1 of this code, regarding abatement of violations shall apply in addition to the penalties referenced herein. 
Section 109.4. 
    Added Section 109.4 Restitution. When the fire department is called to respond to any emergency or incident which was the result of a violation of any federal, state or local regulation governing fire safety, or from gross negligence, the responsible person or firm shall reimburse the fire department for all costs incurred as a result of the emergency or incident. This provision is supplementary to and does not contravene or supersede other cost recovery or reimbursement ordinances of the township. 
Section 112.1. 
    Added Section 112.1 Improper summoning of fire department. It shall be unlawful for any person to summon, in any way, the fire department unless a valid reason for their response is present. Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor. The fine for a first offense shall be $300.00 and $500.00 for each repeat offense. In addition to the above fines, any person found responsible by a court of competent jurisdiction to have caused or assisted in a false alarm shall be liable for all costs incurred in responding to such alarm. 
Section 112.2. 
    Added Section 112.2 Improper Activation of Fire Alarm Systems. A person shall not activate a fire alarm system in any building or place within the township unless there is a reasonable belief that a valid fire emergency exists within that building or place. A fire alarm system is any system which upon activation warns the occupants of the building or place that a fire emergency exists. 
Section 304.4. 
    Added Section 304.4 Dumpsters. Dumpsters shall be located a minimum of 15 feet from any building or structure. (Exception: Dumpsters connected to a compactor contained within a building or structure.) 
Section 307. 
    Deleted Section 307 Open Burning. 
Section 311.5. 
    Added Section 311.5 Opening Buildings Due to Fire. The fire code official or his duly authorized representative is empowered to order the securing of fire damaged buildings. If the owners of the affected building are present this order shall be given to them. If no owners or representatives of the building are present, and are not located upon reasonable investigation, the fire official or his duly authorized representative may have the building secured. The expense of this securing shall be a debt of the owner of the premises, collectible in accordance with ordinance. 
Section 401.6. 
    Added Section 401.6 Prohibition Upon Boarding or Tampering. A person shall not without proper authorization from the fire official in charge of fire department emergency equipment cling to, attach himself to, climb upon or into, board or swing upon any fire department vehicle, whether the same is in motion or at rest, or sound the siren, horn, bell or other sound-producing device thereon, or to manipulate or tamper with any levers, valves, switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps or any equipment or protective clothing on, or a part of, any fire department emergency vehicle. 
Section 401.7. 
    Added Section 401.7 Vehicles Crossing Fire Hose. A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled over any unprotected fire hose of the fire department when laid down on any street, alleyway, private drive or any other vehicular roadway without the consent of the fire official in command of operations. 
Section 502.1. 
    Amended Section 502.1 Definitions. 
    Fire apparatus access road. A road that provides fire apparatus access from a fire station to a facility, building or portion thereof. This is a general term inclusive of all other terms such as fire lane, public street, private street, parking lot land, access roadway and driveway. 
Section 502.1. 
    Amended Section 502.1 Definitions. 
    Primary fire apparatus access road. A fire apparatus access road that provides the quickest and safest means of access, as determined by the fire code official, between the nearest fire station and the building or facility for which the fire apparatus access road is required. 
    Secondary fire apparatus access road. A fire apparatus access road other than the primary fire apparatus access road. 
    Security gate. A moveable barrier or structure that is or may be used to restrict, limit or prevent fire, uninterrupted and unobstructed vehicle passage on a fire apparatus access road. 
Section 503.6. 
    Amended Section 503.6 Security Gates. 
    503.6.1 Prohibited on Primary Fire Apparatus Access Road. Except for gates or barricades required by the fire code official under section 503.5, and as provided in sections 503.6.2 and 503.6.3, security gates are prohibited on primary fire apparatus roads. 
    503.6.2 Exception for Single Building or Facility Primary Access Roads. A security gate on a primary fire apparatus access road that serves no more than one building or facility may be constructed and maintained with the written approval of the fire code official if: 
(1)	All owners, occupants, insurers and persons with an interest in the building or facility sign an agreement committing to indemnify, defend and hold the fire code official, township and all township employees, agents, inspectors and officers harmless from all claims and damages of any kind that may arise or result from the security gate delaying police, fire, ambulance or other emergency vehicle or personnel response to the building or facility, and; 
(2)	Plans and specifications are submitted to and provided by the fire code official, confirming that the security gate will comply with the standards in section D 103.5 of appendix D, and; 
(3)	The security gate is constructed and maintained at all times in conformity with the plans and specifications approved by the fire code official and any conditions imposed on the approval by the fire code official; 
(4)	All owners of the building or facility sign an agreement, secured by a lien upon the real property upon which the building or facility is located, to reimburse the township for any damage that may be caused to fire apparatus by the security gate. 
    503.6.3 Exception for Multi-Building or Facility Primary Access Road. A security gate on a primary fire apparatus access road that serves more than one building or facility may be constructed and maintained with the written approval of the code official if, in addition to the requirements of section 503.6.2, being satisfied for each building or facility served by the access road, the security gate, will be of a type that is openable by electric or electronic means by siren activation, keypad controls, a (Knox key) or other means that is approved in writing by the fire code official. 
    503.6.4 Secondary Fire Apparatus Access Roads. A security gate on a secondary fire apparatus access road may be constructed and maintained with the written approval of the fire code official if: 
(1)	Plans and specifications are submitted to and approved by the fire code official, confirming that the security gate will comply with the standards in section D 103.5 of appendix D, and; 
(2)	The security gate is constructed and maintained at all times in conformity with the plans and specifications approved by the fire code official and any conditions imposed on the approval by the code official. 
Section 508.5.8 
    Added Section 508.5.8 Blocking Fire Department Connections. It shall be unlawful to obstruct from view, damage, deface, obstruct or restrict the access to any fire department connection for the pressurization of fire suppression systems including fire department connections that are located on public or private property. No obstruction shall be placed or constructed within 15 feet of any connection. 
Section 508.5.9 
    Added Section 508.5.9 Removal of Obstructions and Cost Recovery. Upon the expiration of the time stated in a notice specifying a violation of subsections 508.5.4, 508.5.5 or 508.5.8, if obstructions or encroachments have not been removed, the fire official may proceed to remove the same. The expense incurred shall be debt owed to the township from the responsible person, and if necessary the township may institute appropriate legal action for the recovery of such costs. 
Section 508.6. 
    Added Section 508.6 Connection Use. A person shall not use or operate any fire connection intended for use of the fire department for fire suppression purposes unless such person first obtains permission from the fire official and secures a permit for such use from the department. 
Section 508.7. 
    Added Section 508.7 Protection and Maintenance of Connections and Fire Appliances. A person shall not obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb any fire connection or fire appliance required to be installed or maintained under the provisions of the fire prevention code, except for the purpose of extinguishing fire, training or testing purposes, recharging or making necessary repairs, or when permitted by the fire official. Whenever a fire connection is removed as herein permitted, it shall be replaced or reinstalled as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has been accomplished. Defective and nonapproved fire connections or equipment shall be replaced or repaired as directed by the fire official. 
Section 906.11. 
    Added Section 906.11 Sale of Defective Fire Extinguishers. A person shall not sell, trade, loan or give away any form, type or kind of fire extinguisher which is not approved by the fire official or which is not in proper working order or the contents of which do not meet the requirements of the fire official. The requirements of this section shall not apply to the sale, trade or exchange of obsolete or damaged equipment for junk and the units are permanently disfigured or marked with permanent signs identifying the unit as junk. 
Section 912.7. 
    Added Section 912.7 Fire Department Connections. On any premises or on any building or structure required to be equipped with a fire department connection, the connection shall be located within 100 feet of a water supply and within 50 feet of a minimum 20 feet wide paved driveway or street and in clear view of the fire department. 
(d)	The limits referred to in section 3204.3.1.1 of the International Fire Code and hereby established as being the limits that are permitted by the applicable regulations of the state department of transportation, as they may be amended from time to time. 
(e)	The limits referred to in section 3404.2.9.5.2 of the International Fire Code and NFPA 30 table 2-7, are hereby clarified as being the limits set forth in NFPA 30 Table 2-7 with state amendments Flammable & Combustible Liquids Rules, as amended from time to time. 
(f)	The limits referred to in section 3406.2.4.4 of the International Fire Code are hereby established as being the limits that are set forth in NFPA 30 with Michigan amendments Flammable & Combustible Liquids Rules, as amended from time to time. 
(g)	The limits referred to in section 3804.2 of the International Fire Code are hereby established as being the limits that are set forth in the NFPA/ANSI 58-1993, standards for the storage and handling of liquefied petroleum gases, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2006, art. VII(7.1); Ord. No. 116, art. VII, 7-2-2007)
Sec. 20-25. - Appeals and variances. 
    The board of appeals shall have jurisdiction to hear and decide all appeals and requests for variances arising under this article, and shall serve as the board of appeals referenced in section 108 of the 2003 International Fire Code. 
Sec. 20-26. - Hearings. 
(a)	All hearings shall be conducted at open meetings and an official record of the meeting shall be kept. 
(b)	Notice of the meeting shall be mailed to the applicant seeking the appeal or variance, and general notice of the hearing, including the specific issues in question, shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the township not more than 30 days nor less than four days prior to the hearing. Such notices shall further set forth the date, location and time of the hearing. 
(c)	The applicant shall be entitled to appear at the hearing in person and/or by representative, and present witnesses, evidence and argument before the board of appeals. 
(d)	The board of appeals may request a written recommendation from the fire chief, and also from the building inspector if the issue presented relates to the particular knowledge and expertise of the building inspector. If such recommendations are made, a copy of same shall be provided to the applicant. 
(e)	At the conclusion of the hearing, which may be adjourned from time-to-time, as deemed appropriate by the board of appeals, the board of appeals shall make its determination, which shall, together with the reasons and grounds for the decision, be stated and made part of the record of the hearing. 
(f)	Grounds for authorizing a variance. A variance may be granted only upon a finding that the strict letter of this article shall operate to create a hardship or practical difficulty to the applicant, and, provided that all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)	The variance shall be the minimum deviation from the article which will provide the relief necessary; 
(2)	The variance shall not be granted if the applicant created the circumstances giving rise to the hardship or practical difficulty; 
(3)	The basis for the hardship is unique to the applicant and not shared by other persons similarly situated; 
(4)	The grant of a variance shall not result in an unreasonable endangerment, and the public safety shall be sufficiently secured; 
(5)	The spirit of this article shall be observed notwithstanding a grant of the variance;
(6)	The variance is authorized on any grounds set forth in section 108 of the 2003 International Fire Code. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 22.080; Ord. No. 64, art. VIII, 10-19-1981; Ord. of 8-28-2006, art. VIII; Ord. No. 116, art. VIII, 7-2-2007) 
Sec. 20-27. - Annual report. 
(a)	The fire chief shall make an annual report to the township board.
(b)	The annual report shall include, but shall not be limited to, a summary of the operations of the fire department during the year, including any and all relevant data and/or statistics concerning local fire prevention, and any and all other matters and proceedings of the fire department and/or board of appeals transpiring during the year relevant to local fire prevention and/or otherwise related to this article. In addition, such annual report shall include any recommendations of the fire chief of proposed amendments to this article. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 22.090; Ord. No. 64, art. IX, 10-19-1981)
Secs. 20-28-20-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPEN BURNING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Open burning of leaves and grass clippings, MCL 324.11522.

Sec. 20-58. - Scope and application. 
    The terms and provisions of this article shall be interpreted and applied as minimum standards and regulations for the protection of life and property from exposure to the damages and hazards of fire and quantities of air contaminants in the outdoor atmosphere. The provisions of this article are not exclusive and the enactment of this article does not preclude the enforcement of statutes, codes and ordinances that may also regulate the activities described herein. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.621; Ord. No. 89, § 2.1, 9-19-1991; Ord. No. 115, § 2.1, 7-2-2007) 
Sec. 20-59. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approved means approved by the fire chief or designated fire official applying recognized fire safety standards or principles. 
    Campfire means a fire that is smaller than three feet in diameter, and is no greater than two feet in height, and can be used for cooking, and burning seasoned wood only. 
    Commercial property means any property zoned for commercial purposes under chapter 46, pertaining to zoning. 
    Competent person means a person 18 years of age or older who is physically capable of guarding and controlling a fire, and mentally capable of understanding the procedures and dangers of fire. 
    District court means and refer to the 52nd district court for the state, second division. 
    Fire chief means the chief of the township fire department, and reference to the fire official shall mean and refer to the fire chief. The township board may from time to time designate other fire officials by resolution. 
    Industrial property means any property zoned for industrial purposes under chapter 46, pertaining to zoning. 
    Open burning means any fire upon any ground and/or any woodlands, yards, lots, parcels, grass lands, field or public right-of-way, within the township not wholly contained within an approved outside fireplace, capable of containing all combustible material or approved cooking grill designed to contain a fire source for cooking purposes. 
    Person in possession means the person who has the possessory right of particular property and/or improvements, and shall include the agent of such person, and, also, the person having apparent authority with respect to such possession based upon reasonable inferences and grounds. 
    Recreational fire means the same as bonfire, and must be no larger than six feet in diameter, four feet in height at its highest point. 
    Seasoned means any material that has dried to the point that a substantial amount of moisture contained within has dissipated. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.631; Ord. No. 89, § 3.1, 9-19-1991; Ord. No. 115, § 3.1, 7-2-2007) 
Sec. 20-60. - Permit. 
(a)	Permit criteria. No person shall start or have any open fire without first obtaining a permit from the fire chief and/or the designated and authorized fire official and such permit shall state the address where the fire shall be located. The permit shall further itemize the materials that can be burned and cannot be burned, the size and location of what is to be burned and the general location on the property where burning can occur. The permit shall further state the types of fires and their requirements, a calendar of burning days and who is to follow the calendar. 
(b)	Duration of permit. The maximum duration of the permit is one calendar year and may be revoked by the fire chief or his designee for failure to comply with the permit requirements and is limited to the burning hours as are as designated on the permit. 
(c)	A calendar shall be attached to the permit indicating allowable days to burn. The following exceptions shall apply to this section: 
(1)	Parcels three acres in size or more;
(2)	Campfires less than three feet in diameter, extinguished by midnight; and
(3)	Recreational fire with permit, extinguished by midnight.
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 40.641, 40.642; Ord. No. 89, §§ 4.1, 4.2, 9-19-1991; Ord. No. 115, §§ 4.1-4.3, 7-2-2007) 
Sec. 20-61. - Open burning requirements. 
    Open burning materials shall consist of seasoned dry wood, seasoned dry leaves, and cut seasoned dry grass. Any deviation from these materials shall require an onsite inspection by the fire official, and a written endorsement on the permit. There shall be no burning of any pesticides or other chemicals or their containers. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.651; Ord. No. 89, § 5.1, 9-19-1991; Ord. No. 115, § 5.1, 7-2-2007) 
Sec. 20-62. - Allowable quantity of wood burned. 
    The allowable area of wood or other material to be burned shall be no larger than six feet in diameter and no more than four feet high at the highest point. Any quantity larger than six feet in diameter requires an onsite inspection prior to ignition of the material. Burning is allowed from sunrise to sunset unless otherwise restricted in accordance with the permit. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.652; Ord. No. 89, § 5.2, 9-19-1991; Ord. No. 115, § 5.2, 7-2-2007) 
Sec. 20-63. - Location of open burning. 
    The location of the open fire shall be a minimum of 50 feet from any structure, with a mowed and cleared area with a minimum radius of 25 feet around the fire. Exception: a campfire as defined herein may be located no closer than 25 feet to any structure. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.653; Ord. No. 89, § 5.3, 9-19-1991; Ord. No. 115, § 5.3, 7-2-2007) 
Sec. 20-64. - Permit for recreational fire. 
    A recreational fire as defined herein, requires a permit and notification to the fire department the day of the fire, and must be extinguished by midnight of the approved day, and only dry seasoned wood is allowed. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 5.5, 7-2-2007)
Sec. 20-65. - Attendance at open burning; precautions. 
    The fire shall be constantly attended by a competent person until such fire is completely extinguished. This person shall have fire-extinguishing equipment readily available, garden hose, shovel, rake, extinguisher, a prepared pile of sand or dirt. Any person in attendance shall take all reasonable and necessary steps and precautions to extinguish or otherwise terminate and abate any open burning prior to leaving such burn. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.661; Ord. No. 89, § 6.1, 9-19-1991; Ord. No. 115, § 6.1, 7-2-2007) 
Sec. 20-66. - Prohibitions, regulations and restrictions. 
(a)	Prohibited burning. The fire chief or fire official may prohibit any or all open burning, including a recission of outstanding permits, which are or could be offensive or objectionable due to smoke or odor emissions which unreasonably disturb properties adjacent or when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous to health, safety or property. 
(b)	Open burning restrictions. There shall be no open burning of material other than as authorized in section 20-61. 
(c)	Commercial burning. Any open burning on commercial or industrially zoned property shall be approved materials specified in section 20-61, and shall have an onsite inspection by the fire official prior to issuance of a permit. 
(d)	Prohibited open-air burning items. Open burning materials shall not consist of treated wood, wet or green leaves, paper, cardboard, furniture, rubbish, garbage, trash, construction materials, demolition materials, tires, roofing, any material made of or coated with rubber, plastic, leather, animal waste, or petroleum based materials, and shall not contain any flammable or combustible liquids. 
(e)	Burning of documents. Paper documents burned for security or identity purposes shall be burned in small quantities, upon receipt of a permit. 
(f)	Site restrictions. All materials being burned must be from on site. No materials may be brought to the site for the purpose of disposal. There is no burning allowed on construction sites without a permit, an onsite inspection, and subject to conditions endorsed on the permit. 
(g)	Time limits. Open burning is prohibited after the dates and times as indicated on the permit. Campfires, or recreational fires must be completely extinguished by midnight. 
(h)	Burning on right-of-way prohibited. There is no burning allowed in the road right-of-way. 
(i)	Inclement weather. There shall be no burning allowed during windy days or during drought conditions. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 40.671-40.673, 40.675; Ord. No. 89, §§ 7.1-7.3, 7.5, 9-19-1991; Ord. No. 115, §§ 7.3-7.9, 7-2-2007) 
Sec. 20-67. - Violations as municipal civil infractions. 
    Violation of this article is a municipal civil infraction. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 40.681; Ord. No. 89, § 8.1, 9-19-1991; Ord. No. 115, § 8.1, 7-2-2007; Ord. No. 124, § 2, 7-7-2008) 
Chapter 22 - LAND DIVISION AND SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Land division act, MCL 560.101 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LAND DIVISIONS 

Sec. 22-19. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and cited as the "Brandon Township Land Division Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 128, § I, 3-1-2010)
Sec. 22-20. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to carry out the provisions of the land division act, Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, (MCL 560.101 et seq.), formerly known as the subdivision control act), to prevent the creation of parcels of property which do not comply with applicable ordinances and said Act, to minimize potential boundary disputes, to maintain orderly development of the community, and otherwise provide for the health, safety and welfare of the residents and property owners of the township by establishing reasonable standards for prior review and approval of land divisions within the township. 
(Ord. No. 128, § II, 3-1-2010)
Sec. 22-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means a natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or combination of any of them that holds an ownership interest in land whether recorded or not. 
    Assessor means the person hired to do the township assessing and for purposes of this article shall not mean the township supervisor unless by resolution of the township board the supervisor is actually performing the regular duties of the assessor. 
    Divide or division means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns, for the purpose of sale or lease of more than one year, or of building development that results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and that satisfies the requirements of sections 108 and 109 of the land division act (MCL 560.108 and 560.109). The terms "divide" and "division" does not include a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel; and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of the Land Division Act, or the requirements of other applicable local ordinances. 
    Exempt split or exempt division means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof, or by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns, that does not result in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent. 
    Forty acres or the equivalent means 40 acres, or a quarter-quarter section containing not less than 30 acres, or a government lot containing not less than 30 acres. 
    Parcel or tract of land means any land in the township that is not located in or part of a recorded plat. 
    Parcel split committee means a committee charged with review of all applications for parcel splits, and consisting of at least three members chosen from the assessor, building official, deputy supervisor, deputy clerk or deputy treasurer, as appointed by resolution of the township board. 
(Ord. No. 128, § III, 3-1-2010)
Sec. 22-22. - Prior approval requirement for land divisions. 
    Land in the township shall not be divided without the prior review and approval of the parcel split committee in accordance with this article and the land division act; provided that the following shall be exempted from this requirement: 
(1)	A parcel proposed for subdivision through a recorded plat pursuant to the land division act. 
(2)	A lot in a recorded plat proposed to be divided in accordance with the land division act, and applicable Township Ordinances. 
(3)	An exempt split as defined in this article, or other partitioning or splitting that results in parcels of 20 acres or more and the parcel was in existence on March 31, 1997, or resulted from exempt splitting under the act. 
(Ord. No. 128, § IV, 3-1-2010)
Sec. 22-23. - Application for land approval. 
    An applicant shall file all of the following with the township assessor or other official designated by the township board for review and approval of a proposed land division before making any division either by deed, land contract, lease for more than one year, or otherwise: 
(1)	A completed application form on such form as may be approved by resolution of the township board. 
(2)	Proof of fee ownership of the land proposed to be divided and consent of all paid owners to the application. 
(3)	A tentative parcel map drawn to scale including an accurate legal description of each proposed resulting parcel, and showing the boundary lines, approximate dimensions, and the accessibility of each division for automobile traffic and public utilities. 
(4)	Proof that all standards of the land division act and this article have been met.
(5)	If a transfer of division rights is proposed in the land transfer, detailed information about the terms and availability of the proposed division rights transfer. 
(6)	A fee, the amount to be set periodically by resolution of the township board, to cover the costs of review of the application and administration of this article and the land division act. 
(Ord. No. 128, § V, 3-1-2010)
Sec. 22-24. - Procedure for review of application for land division approval. 
(a)	The split committee shall approve or disapprove the land division applied for within 45 days after receipt of a complete application conforming to this article's requirements and the land division act, and shall promptly notify the applicant of the decision, and if denied, the reasons for denial. The split committee may also approve a division contingent upon the granting of appropriate variances by the township's zoning board of appeals where the proposed division is not incompatible to surrounding properties and the resulting parcel's necessary variances would involve boundary and area variances not exceeding five percent. If the zoning board of appeals denies one or more of the necessary variances the conditional approval of the split committee shall be void and the application for decisions deemed denied. In the event of a conditional approval the applicant will have 30 days in which to apply to the zoning board of appeals for variance. 
(b)	Any person or entity aggrieved by the decision of the split committee may, within 30 days of said decision, appeal the decision to the township board which shall consider and resolve such appeal by a majority vote of said board at its next regular meeting or session affording sufficient time for a 20-day written notice to the applicant (and appellant where other than the applicant) of the time and date of said meeting and appellate hearing. 
(c)	Prior to granting or denying a split, as the case may be, the split committee may request the attendance of the owner at a meeting for discussion and information concerning the split. Should such a meeting be requested, it shall be requested within the period wherein a final determination is required in accordance with this article, but by agreeing to the meeting the applicant also agrees to extend the time for final determination by ten days. 
(d)	Following the above determination, and within five days thereafter, the owner shall be notified of the decision of the split committee, and the notice shall contain the specific basis for the decision contained therein. 
(e)	The assessor or designee shall maintain an official record of all approved and accomplished land divisions or transfers. 
(f)	Approval of a division is not a determination that the resulting parcels comply with other ordinances or regulations. 
(g)	Approval of a division does not mean building permits for construction on the parcels cannot subsequently be denied because of inadequate water supply, sewage disposal facilities or other requirement, and any notice of approval shall include a statement to this effect. 
(h)	Prior to the entry of any split on the township records, where the split has been granted hereunder, the applicant shall provide the assessor with a survey of the property together with legal descriptions of all parcels, as prepared by a registered land surveyor or engineer. 
(i)	In reviewing the application, the split committee or any member thereof, may seek the advice of the township attorney, the township engineers, or any other person whose knowledge or expertise might assist in determining the merits and effects of the proposed division. Any fees incurred by the township for such consultation are chargeable to the applicant as a cost of the application to the extent that such cost increases the costs covered by the original base application fee. 
(Ord. No. 128, § VI, 3-1-2010)
Sec. 22-25. - Standards for approval of land divisions. 
    A proposed land division reviewable by the township shall be approved if the following criteria are met: 
(1)	All parcels created by the proposed division have a minimum width of 165 feet as measured at the road frontage; unless otherwise provided for in an applicable zoning ordinance. 
(2)	All such parcels shall contain the minimum area allowed under the applicable district of the zoning ordinance. 
(3)	The ratio of depth to width of any parcel created by the division does not exceed a 4:1 ratio exclusive of access roads, easements, or non-development sites. The depth of a parcel created by a land division shall be measured within the boundaries of each parcel from the abutting road right-of-way to the most remote boundary line point of the parcel from the point of commencement of the measurement. 
(4)	The proposed land divisions comply with all requirements of this article and the land division act. 
(5)	All parcels created and remaining have existing adequate accessibility, or an area available therefor, for public utilities and emergency and other vehicles. 
(6)	The parcel which is proposed to be split is not smaller than the township's minimum parcel size as set forth in the township's zoning ordinance. 
(7)	As a result of the proposed split no resulting independent parcel will be less than the minimum acreage parcel size and dimension requirements of the zoning district in which the resulting parcels are located under the township's zoning ordinance. 
(8)	Nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting an applicant from seeking a variance from the township zoning board of appeals for any boundary or area dimension. 
(9)	If a parcel is created that will use an easement for ingress and egress, such easement must be restricted to the exclusive use of the parcel served and comply with all applicable ordinances. The survey must be recorded with the county register of deeds with the easement drawn to scale and a notice of restricted use displayed thereon. 
(Ord. No. 128, § VII, 3-1-2010)
Sec. 22-26. - Consequences of noncompliance with land division approval requirement. 
(a)	Any division of land in violation of any provision of this article shall not be recognized as a land division on the township tax roll or assessment roll, and the assessing officer shall refer the suspected violation or potential nonconformity to the county prosecuting attorney and give written notice to the person requesting the division, and the person suspected of the violation or potential nonconformity of such referral to the prosecuting attorney. The township shall further have the authority to initiate injunctive or other relief to prevent any violation or continuance of any violation of this article. Any division of land in violation of this article shall further not be eligible for any zoning or building permit for any construction or improvement thereto. 
(b)	In addition any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction as defined by state statute which shall be punishable by a civil fine of not more than $500.00 along with costs which may include all expenses, direct and indirect, to which the township has been put in connection with the municipal civil infraction. In no case, however, shall costs of less than $10.00 be ordered. A violator of this article shall also be subject to such additional sanctions and judicial orders as are authorized under state law. 
(c)	Pursuant to section 267 of the land division act (MCL 560.267), an unlawful division or split shall also be voidable at the option of the purchaser and shall subject the seller to the forfeiture of all consideration received or pledged therefor, together with any damages sustained by the purchaser, recoverable in an action at law. 
(Ord. No. 128, § VIII, 3-1-2010)
Secs. 22-27-22-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SUBDIVISION CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-40. - Purposes. 
    This article has been enacted for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the township and of insuring the orderly growth and harmonious development of the township by requiring: 
(1)	Proper arrangement of streets in relation to existing or planned streets or to the comprehensive development plan. 
(2)	Adequate and convenient open spaces for traffic, utilities, access of firefighting equipment, recreation, light, air, privacy, and safety from fire hazards. 
(3)	Establishment of standards for the construction of any and all improvements as herein required. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.011; Ord. No. 41, § 1.1, 12-6-1976)
Sec. 22-41. - Authority. 
    This article is made, interpreted and enforced by the township board and township planning commission under authority of the state, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.), and Public Act No. 33 of 2008 (MCL 125.3801 et seq.). 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.012; Ord. No. 41, § 1.2, 12-6-1976)
Sec. 22-42. - Interpretation. 
    The provisions of this article shall be construed to be the minimum requirements necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety, and welfare within the township. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or supersede any existing regulations of the township, or to conflict with any statutes, laws or regulations of the state or county, except that these regulations shall prevail in cases where these regulations impose a lawful restriction or requirement more severe than existing statutes, laws or regulations. If any section or provision of this article shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, this shall not affect the validity of other sections or provisions hereof. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.013; Ord. No. 41, § 1.3, 12-6-1976)
Sec. 22-43. - Scope. 
    Subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, no plat within the township shall be approved by the township planning commission unless it conforms to this article. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.014; Ord. No. 41, § 1.4, 12-6-1976)
Sec. 22-44. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley means a public or private right-of-way shown on a plat which provides secondary access to a lot, block, or parcel of land. 
    Block means an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, highways, or ways, except alleys, and/or the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision. 
    Building line means a line established in a plat or by recorded restrictive covenants for the purpose of prohibiting construction of any portion of a building or structure between such line and any easement, right-of-way, or other public area. 
    Collector road means a street or highway intended primarily for mutual access between major and minor streets, for entrance to residential areas and for circulation within such areas. 
    Comprehensive development plan means the comprehensive development plan for the township, county, and state as adopted by the planning commission. 
    Cul-de-sac means a short minor street with only one end open to vehicular traffic and being permanently terminated at the other end by a vehicle turn-around. 
    Dead end street means a street with only one end open to vehicular traffic and not provided with a vehicle turn-around at the other end. 
    Easement means an irrevocable grant by the property owner of the use of a parcel of land by the public or public utility, a corporation, or private person for a specific purpose. 
    Final plat means a map of all or part of a subdivision prepared and certified as to its accuracy by a land surveyor. Such maps must meet the requirements of this article and Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
    Half-street means one-half of the total right-of-way planned for a street located on the periphery of a subdivision and adjacent to unplatted land. 
    Improvements means any additions to the natural state of the land which increase its value, utility or habitability. Improvements include street pavements, with or without curbs and gutters, sidewalks, grading, water mains, storm and sanitary sewers, street trees and other appropriate and similar items. 
    Land division act means Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
    Local or minor street means a street intended primarily to provide access to abutting property. 
    Lot means a measured portion of a parcel or tract of land, which is described and fixed in a recorded plat. 
    Major thoroughfare means a main traffic artery designated on the township's comprehensive development plan as a major thoroughfare. 
    Master development plan means a sketch plan showing the lot, street, open space and utility arrangements for the overall development of a tract of land, with part of the development not proposed in the present subdivision application. 
    Outlot means, when included within the boundary of a recorded plat, a lot set aside for purposes other than a development site, park, or other land dedicated to public use or reserved to private use. 
    Parcel means a continuous area or acreage of land which can be described as provided for in this article. 
    Performance guarantee means any security including performance bonds, escrow agreements, and other similar collateral or surety agreements, which may be accepted by the township board as a guarantee that required subdivision improvements will be made by the developer. 
    Preliminary plat means a map indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision in sufficient detail to provide adequate basis for review and to meet the requirements and procedures set forth in this article. 
    Pre-preliminary plat means a sketch map of a proposed subdivision of sufficient accuracy and scale to serve the purposes of this article. 
    Proprietor. See Subdivider. 
    Public reservation means a portion of a subdivision which is set aside for public use or made available for public use or made available for public acquisition. 
    Public utility means a firm, corporation, or municipal authority providing gas, electricity, telephone, sewer, water, or other services of a similar nature. 
    Public walkway means a public right-of-way dedicated for the purpose of a pedestrian access, and located so as to connect to two or more streets, or a street and a public land parcel. 
    Reserve strip means a strip of land in a subdivision which extends across the end of a street proposed to be extended by future platting or a strip which extends along the length of a partial width street proposed to be widened by future platting, to the minimum permissible width. 
    Street means a right-of-way dedicated and deeded for public use, other than an alley, which provides for public travel. 
    Subdivide or subdivision means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors, or assigns for the purpose of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building development that results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and that is not exempted from the platting requirements of the land division act by sections 108 and 109 (MCL 560.108, 560.109). The term "subdivide" or "subdivision" does not include a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel; and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of the land division act or the requirements of an applicable local ordinance. 
    Subdivider means any person, firm or corporation, estate, trust or other group or combination acting as a unit, which divides or proposes to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as defined herein. This definition shall be construed to include any agent of the subdivider. 
    Surveyor means a professional surveyor licensed under article 20 of the occupational code, Public Act No. 299 of 1980 (MCL 339.2001 et seq.). 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.020; Ord. No. 41, § 2.1, 12-6-1976)
Sec. 22-45. - Fee schedule. 
    The board shall set such fees as are reasonable to accomplish the administration hereof, and a schedule of such fees shall be maintained at all times in the township offices. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.150; Ord. No. 41, § 7.1, 12-6-1976)
Sec. 22-46. - Violations as municipal civil infractions. 
    Violation of this article is a municipal civil infraction. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.160; Ord. No. 41, § 8.1, 12-6-1976)
Secs. 22-47-22-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SUBDIVISION PLAT SUBMITTAL PROCEDURES 

Sec. 22-66. - Review and approval. 
    The review and approval of subdivision development plats shall follow the steps as listed below: 
(1)	Section 22-67, preapplication review meeting. 
(2)	Section 22-68, tentative plat review. 
(3)	Section 22-69, preliminary approval. 
(4)	Section 22-70, final approval of preliminary plat. 
(5)	Section 22-71, procedures after approval of final plat. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.031; Ord. No. 41, § 3.1, 12-6-1976)
Sec. 22-67. - Preapplication review meeting. 
    The proprietor may request that a preapplication review meeting take place by submitting a written request to the chairperson of the county plat board and submitting copies of a concept plan for the preliminary plat to the township and to each officer or agency entitled to review the preliminary plat under sections 113 to 118 of the land division act (MCL 560.113--560.118). A preapplication review meeting shall take place not later than 30 days after the written request and concept plan are received. The meeting shall be attended by the proprietor, representatives of each officer or agency entitled to review the preliminary plat under sections 113, 114, and 118 of the land division act (MCL 560.113, 560.114, 560.118), and a representative of the township. Representatives of each agency entitled to review the preliminary plat under sections 115 to 117 of the land division act (MCL 560.115--560.117) shall be informed of the meeting and may attend. The purpose of the meeting is to conduct an informal review of the proprietor's concept plan for the preliminary plat. 
Sec. 22-68. - Tentative plat review; requirement for master plan. 
    Whenever a proprietor desires any tentative plat review by township officials he may obtain same by complying with the following: 
(1)	Proprietor's responsibility: The subdivider shall provide sketch plans for lot and street arrangement. He shall also indicate his intentions as to water supply, sewage disposal surface drainage, and other proposals as appropriate. A master development plan shall be prepared and submitted by the developer prior to the preparation and submittal of his pre-preliminary plat whenever: 
a.	The tract proposed is only a portion of a larger land holding of the subdivider, or a larger holding on which the subdivider has an interest; and/or 
b.	The tract is part of a larger land area which would pose complicated development due to unusual topographic conditions, land use, landowners, or other conditions. 
(2)	Township's responsibility: It is then the task of the township, through its appropriate officials and agents, to inspect the site, noting the following: 
a.	Major thoroughfares in the area.
b.	Utility systems available to service the platted area.
c.	Adjacent land uses.
d.	Unusual development problems.
e.	Topography.
f.	Drainage.
g.	Existing zoning.
h.	Adequacy of existing schools and public open space.
i.	Availability and feasibility of providing township services.
j.	Determine need for a master development plan if one hasn't been requested or supplied.
k.	At the time that a proprietor requests a pre-preliminary review, he shall deposit with the township treasurer the fee as provided for below. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.032; Ord. No. 41, § 3.2, 12-6-1976)
Sec. 22-69. - Preliminary plat application, review and approval. 
(a)	Plat preparation. The preliminary plat shall be designed and drawn by a surveyor. 
(b)	Submittal of data. At least 30 days prior to the regular meeting of the planning commission, the subdivider shall submit ten copies of a letter of intent and the preliminary plat which shall contain and clearly indicate the following information: 
(1)	Key map showing integration of proposed subdivision with surrounding area.
(2)	Owners of adjacent parcels.
(3)	Adjacent development names.
(4)	Tract boundary.
(5)	Title of subdivision.
(6)	North arrow and date of preparation.
(7)	Site data:
a.	Total acreage:
1.	Gross.
2.	Net (residential use only).
3.	Any other uses, i.e., golf courses, marinas, etc.
b.	Number of lots and outlots, indicating type of use in each outlot.
c.	Typical building arrangement, setbacks, etc.
1.	Setback lines must be shown on all corner lots, cul-de-sac lots, and other lots having unusual shape or configuration. 
2.	Proposed location of houses must be shown on all waterfront lots.
(8)	Streets:
a.	Right-of-way (widths).
b.	Pavement lines where necessary to illustrate design (e.g., intersections, culs-de-sac, etc.). 
c.	Names.
(9)	Lot lines and numbers.
(10)	Easements lines, use of easement.
(11)	Prominent natural and manmade features.
(12)	Notation of reserved and dedicated parcels, specifying intended use, and deed conveyances, if any. 
(13)	Development drawn over two-foot contour interval map using United States Geological Survey datum. 
(14)	Letter of intent, containing:
a.	Type of street and lot grading.
b.	Intentions of provision of potable water.
c.	Intentions on provision of sanitary and storm sewers.
d.	Pumping stations.
e.	Sewage treatment plants.
f.	FHA or VA approval, if any.
g.	Restrictive covenants and other proposals referred to in section 258 of the land division act (MCL 560.258). 
h.	The proposed development stages of the entire project, including the stages in which final plat approval will be sought. 
(15)	Preliminary plat shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet (or less) or one inch equals 200 feet if the parcel included exceeds 80 acres in area. 
(16)	In accordance with the sanitary code of county department of health, if individual septic tanks are proposed, all proposed subdivision plans shall be accompanied by a letter from the health department stating that soil conditions in the subdivision area are suitable for septic tank operations. 
(17)	The township clerk shall make copies of the proposed plat and letter of intent available to the township planner, superintendent of schools, and the township engineer and request their comments on said plat be returned within 15 days in order to provide the township planning commission the opportunity to benefit by these reviews during its examination of the plat. 
(c)	Deposit of fees. The proprietor shall deposit with the township treasurer all fees as provided for below. 
(d)	Township planning commission action. Upon completion of their review and within 45 days of submittal by the proprietor, the planning commission will: 
(1)	Recommend complete denial by the township board for specific reasons.
(2)	Recommend approval by the township board of the preliminary plat as submitted.
(3)	Recommend approval by the township board after receipt of plans containing specified revisions. 
(e)	Township board review. Upon notification by the planning commission, the township clerk then places the review of the preliminary plat on the agenda of the township board: 
(1)	Within 60 days after it was submitted to the clerk, if a preapplication review meeting was conducted. 
(2)	Within 90 days after it was submitted to the clerk, if a preapplication review meeting was not conducted. 
(f)	Township board action. Upon review of the planning commission's recommendation, the township board shall grant tentative approval or reject the preliminary plat, and if rejected, the board shall set forth specific reasons for said rejection. 
(g)	Approval period. Tentative approval of a preliminary plat shall become void after the expiration of one year from the date of such approval unless the subdivider shall have submitted a preliminary plat for final approval or a final plat for approval or unless the township board, in its discretion, grants an extension to the one-year period upon the written application of the subdivider. Said tentative approval shall confer only the rights afforded to the proprietor under the provisions of section 112(4) of said Act 288, P.A. 1967. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.033; Ord. No. 41, § 3.3, 12-6-1976)
Sec. 22-70. - Final approval of preliminary plat. 
(a)	Submission to all authorities. After the proprietor has obtained the tentative approval of the township board for the preliminary plat, the proprietor shall submit his preliminary plat to all authorities as required by the land division act. 
(b)	Final approval. A proprietor desiring final approval of a preliminary plat shall submit the following items to the township clerk: 
(1)	A list of all authorities required by law to check the preliminary plat. Said list shall be certified as correct by the proprietor before a notary public. 
(2)	Copies of the preliminary plat as approved (having the approval noted thereon) by all authorities as required by sections 113 thru 118, inclusive of the land division act (MCL 560.113--560.118). 
(3)	Copy of receipt from township treasurer that all fees as provided for below have been paid. 
(c)	Approval or rejection. Within 20 days of the submission of the foregoing the township board shall grant final approval of the preliminary plat if the proprietor has met all conditions laid down for approval of said plat or reject said plat and advise the proprietor of the reason for said rejection. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.034; Ord. No. 41, § 3.4, 12-6-1976)
Sec. 22-71. - Final plat approval. 
(a)	Contents. The final plat shall conform to the approved preliminary plat, shall constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop at the time, and shall conform in all respects to the requirements of the land division act. 
(b)	Submittal. The developer submits five copies of the final plat, five copies of construction plans for improvements in the subdivision, and all restrictive covenants for the subdivision, together with copies of the design engineer's detailed estimate of construction costs, to the township clerk. The proprietor shall pay all fees for final plat approval at the time of submission to the township clerk, in accordance with the fee schedule below. 
(c)	Township board action on final plat. If the county road commission and county drain commission have approved the plat, the township clerk, within 20 days after receipt of the final plat, shall place the review of the final plat on the agenda of the township board. The township board shall review said plat and render an opinion thereon within 90 days of submission. The subdivider shall be notified officially, by mail by the township clerk, of the decision of the township board. 
(d)	Evidence of title. The proprietor shall furnish to the township clerk an abstract of title or a policy of title insurance, certified to date of submission of the final plat, covering all of the land included within the boundaries of the final plat. 
(e)	Conditions for approval. Approval of a final plat by the township board shall not in any way constitute legal acceptance of dedicated streets, alleys or other public areas indicated on such plat. The subdivider shall be responsible for obtaining all required approvals of the final plat and/or construction plans from the county road commission and other public bodies having jurisdiction over any aspect of the proposed development. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.035; Ord. No. 41, § 3.5, 12-6-1976)
Secs. 22-72-22-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LOT SPLITTING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Further division of lots, MCL 560.263.

Sec. 22-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Assessor shall refer to the person hired to do the township assessing, and in charge of the assessing department and shall not refer to the township supervisor, even though the township supervisor may be legally charged with township assessments. 
    Inspector means the director of the township building department. 
    Lot means any lot, outlot or other parcel of land in a recorded plat where such parcel is part of and included in the plat. 
    Lot split committee means the township supervisor or designate, the assessor and the inspector, acting together, and shall also include the township clerk and/or township treasurer, respectively, if acting in the event of vacancy or absence of the supervisor, assessor or inspector. 
    Owner means any person who holds the legal title, or the equitable title, the equitable title being evidenced by a duly executed land contract signed by the owners of legal title, or by a duly executed purchase agreement signed by the owners of legal title, and if there are holders of both legal and equitable title, the term "owner" shall be construed to mean all of such persons. Wherever the term "owner" appears herein, all persons holding any legal or equitable interest shall be deemed referred to, and if signatures are required, all of such persons shall be deemed as required to sign. 
    Registered land surveyor or civil engineer means a person so licensed by the state. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.311; Ord. No. 82, § 1.1, 8-6-1990)
Sec. 22-102. - Application. 
(a)	The owner of any lot who desires to partition the lot may make application for the partition, so long as the partition is into not more than four parts, to the township assessing department. 
(b)	The application shall be in a form developed by the supervisor, assessor and inspector, but shall contain at least the following information: 
(1)	The name of all owners of any legal or equitable interest, and their signatures;
(2)	The name of the subdivision in which the lot is located;
(3)	A copy of the most recent paid tax bill pertaining to the lot;
(4)	A drawing of the lot as it exists prior to the proposed split, which may be incorporated in subsection (b)(5) of this section; 
(5)	A survey and drawing of the lot as it will appear following the proposed split, including the square footage of each parcel, as prepared by a registered land surveyor or civil engineer; 
(6)	A description of each of the parcels that will result from the proposed split, as prepared by a registered land surveyor or civil engineer; 
(7)	The use to which the owners intend placing the split property;
(8)	A copy of all restrictions and covenants which apply to or run with the land, whether recorded or not; 
(9)	The date of any previous applications for splits, and whether or not any previous splits have or have not been granted, whether or not said previous applications or splits applied to all or part of the lot; 
(10)	Any restrictions or covenant which the owner intends placing on the land after the proposed split, should the split be granted; 
(11)	The person to whom all correspondence concerning said split is to be directed, with specific appointment of said person as the agent for all other owners, both legal and equitable. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 17.321, 17.322; Ord. No. 82, §§ 2.1, 2.2, 8-6-1990)
Sec. 22-103. - Fees. 
    Each application under this article shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the township board from time to time. This fee schedule shall not include any fees required for hearings before the zoning board of appeals, which fee shall be paid independently. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.330; Ord. No. 82, art. III, 8-6-1990)
Sec. 22-104. - Review of application. 
(a)	Within seven days following the receipt of the application, the assessing department shall cause copies thereof, together with copies of all attachments, to be distributed to the supervisor and building department. 
(b)	Within 14 days following the application, the applicant shall be advised of any and all additional documents or information which may be required. 
(c)	In reviewing the application, the supervisor, assessor and inspector may seek the advice of the township attorney, the township engineers, or any township administrative official, or any other person whose knowledge or understanding might assist in determining the merits and effects of the proposed lot split. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 17.341-17.343; Ord. No. 82, §§ 4.1-4.3, 8-6-1990)
Sec. 22-105. - Standards. 
(a)	Except as provided in division 6 of this article, lot splits shall be granted if, prior to the split, the lot which is to be split equals or exceeds the township minimum lot size as set forth in the zoning ordinance or the subdivision control ordinance, and further, if following the split any of the resultant parcels will be less than the minimum lot size as set forth in the zoning ordinance or subdivision control ordinance, unless the resultant parcels are to be joined with adjoining parcels, which final resultant parcels after the joinder will result in final parcels equal to or larger than the township minimum lot size as set forth in chapter 46, pertaining to zoning or article III of this chapter, pertaining to subdivision control. 
(b)	Lots which are smaller than the township minimum lot size as set forth in chapter 46, pertaining to zoning or article III of this chapter, pertaining to subdivision control may be further split provided that the subsequent resultant parcels will be larger than either the original lot to be split or the lot to which it is to be joined, whether or not the final resultant parcels are equal to or in excess of the township minimum lot size as set forth in chapter 46, pertaining to zoning or article III of this chapter, pertaining to subdivision control. 
(c)	In considering a lot split, the committee shall not include easements in the overall dimensions of the lot. Such easements shall likewise not be included in the measured frontage of the lot. All such lots, following division, shall have the minimum roadway frontage and width to depth ratios as required by chapter 46, pertaining to zoning. 
(d)	In no instance shall a split be permitted when the resulting parcel or parcels would be divided in any part or in any way be a roadway or an easement or right-of-way. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 17.351-17.354; Ord. No. 82, §§ 5.1-5.4, 8-6-1990)
Sec. 22-106. - Restrictions to be placed upon split parcels. 
    In every instance where the parcel so split is to be joined with a neighboring parcel for the purpose of accomplishing a larger building site, the owner of both the parcel to be split and the adjoining parcel shall join in a restrictive covenant with the township agreeing to the joinder, and restricting the property to a single parcel, and providing such other restrictions or limitations as the supervisor, assessor and inspector may determine. Such restriction or covenant shall be in recordable form and shall be recorded at the applicant's expense. The split shall not be placed on the township rolls until evidence of recordation is provided the township. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.360; Ord. No. 82, art. VI, 8-6-1990)
Sec. 22-107. - Zoning board of appeals variance approval. 
    In cases where the owner has made application for a split which would create one or more lots not in conformity with the minimum requirements of chapter 46, pertaining to zoning, the lot split committee may, upon request of the applicant, and provided the resultant parcels would not be clearly incompatible and/or inharmonious with, and/or result in material diminution in value to, surrounding property, and would not create an unreasonable burden upon the capacity for public services and/or facilities, and assuming all other requirements of applicable ordinances and law are met, conditionally approve the split, subject to the following: 
(1)	The applicant shall have 30 days following the date of conditional approval by the lot split committee to make application to the zoning board of appeals for all variances necessary to render the conditionally split resultant lots in conformity with the zoning ordinance. If the applicant fails to make application with the zoning board of appeals within such 30-day period, the lot split shall be deemed denied. 
(2)	If the zoning board of appeals grants the approval for the variances necessary to render the resultant lots conforming under chapter 46, pertaining to zoning, the conditional approval shall thereupon ripen into and become a finally approved split. 
(3)	If the zoning board of appeals denies the approval for any one or more variances necessary to render the resultant lots conforming under chapter 46, pertaining to zoning, the conditional approval of the split shall thereupon be avoided and the lot split application deemed denied. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.371; Ord. No. 82, § 7.1, 8-6-1990)
Sec. 22-108. - Granting or denying of the split. 
    Within 30 days of the receipt of the application under this article, or within 20 days of the receipt of any information requested in addition to the application, the supervisor, assessor and inspector shall meet and determine whether or not to grant the split. Any determination to grant any split shall require unanimous consent of the supervisor, assessor and inspector. If the office of the supervisor, assessor or inspector should be vacant at the time of application hereunder, or if the persons serving in the above capacities are to be absent or are in fact absent for ten or more days during the 30-day period, the township clerk shall serve to fill the vacancy or shall serve in lieu of the absent person, and the clerk's authority shall in all respects be the same as that of the person whose stead he serves. In the event of the clerk's inability to serve or a second such vacancy or absence, the township treasurer shall so serve. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.381; Ord. No. 82, § 8.1, 8-6-1990)
Sec. 22-109. - Owner attendance. 
    Prior to granting or denying the split, as the case may be, the supervisor, assessor and inspector may request the attendance of the owner at a meeting for discussion and information concerning the split. Should such a meeting be requested, it shall be requested within the period wherein a final determination is required in accordance with this article, but the meeting shall extend the time for final determination by ten days. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.382; Ord. No. 82, § 8.2, 8-6-1990)
Sec. 22-110. - Notification of decision. 
    Following the determination, and within five days thereof, the owner shall be notified of the decision of the supervisor, assessor and inspector, and the notice shall contain the specific basis for the decision contained therein. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.383; Ord. No. 82, § 8.3, 8-6-1990)
Sec. 22-111. - Hearing request. 
    If the decision should be a denial of the split, the owner may request a hearing before the supervisor, assessor and inspector for the purpose of reviewing the decision. The request must be made within 15 days of mailing of the notice under section 22-110. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.384; Ord. No. 82, § 8.4, 8-6-1990)
Sec. 22-112. - Time limitation. 
    If a hearing is requested as set forth in section 22-111, that hearing shall be held within 15 days of the request and the hearing shall be open to the public. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.385; Ord. No. 82, § 8.5, 8-6-1990)
Sec. 22-113. - Review of determination. 
    At the hearing, the determination by the supervisor, assessor and inspector shall be reviewed and may be subject to change in the discretion of the supervisor, assessor and inspector, any change requiring unanimous consent. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.386; Ord. No. 82, § 8.6, 8-6-1990)
Sec. 22-114. - Post hearing notification. 
    Following the hearing and within ten days thereof, the owner shall be notified of the decision of the supervisor, assessor and inspector. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.387; Ord. No. 82, § 8.7, 8-6-1990)
Sec. 22-115. - Appeal. 
    Any appeal to the zoning board of appeals must be preceded by a hearing in accordance with section 22-11. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.388; Ord. No. 82, § 8.8, 8-6-1990)
Sec. 22-116. - Variations from application. 
    The supervisor assessor and inspector shall make no variations from the requested split unless the variations are requested in an amended application, which amended application shall be filed in the same manner as a new application hereunder, and which amended application shall extend the times as though it were a new application hereunder, and in the event there is no such amended application, the supervisor, assessor and inspector may either grant or deny the request as presented, but they may not vary or modify the terms thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.390; Ord. No. 82, art. IX, 8-6-1990)
Sec. 22-117. - Appeal. 
    In the event an interested person is aggrieved by the decision of the lot split committee, an appeal may be filed with the zoning board of appeals. In such instance, the rules and fees applicable to appeals of administrative decisions to the zoning board of appeals shall apply. Any appeal from the zoning board of appeals shall be filed with the circuit court. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.400; Ord. No. 82, art. X, 8-6-1990)
Sec. 22-118. - Exclusivity. 
    No lot may be split in the township except in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.410; Ord. No. 82, art. XI, 8-6-1990)
Secs. 22-119-22-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PRIVATE ROADS AND DRIVEWAYS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-150. - Purpose and intent. 
    This article is intended to provide minimum standards and specifications for private roads and driveways constructed in the township, county, and state. It is recognized that such standards are necessary because of the need for road and driveway surfaces adequate to provide year around access by fire, police, and like emergency vehicles. It is further recognized that if roads and driveways are not constructed in accordance with certain minimum standards, such roads and driveways frequently become impassable, and vehicles which do try to use them during such periods of impassability are likely to become stuck, find it impossible to gain access to the persons or structures located on the road or driveway, block the road and driveway and otherwise pose a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the residents located along the road or driveway, as well as those other persons who would find use of the road or driveway essential including, but not limited to use by emergency vehicles. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.801; Ord. No. 97, [preamble], 6-17-2002)
Sec. 22-151. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    AASHTO guidelines shall refer to "A policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets 2001"; published by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
    Director means the director of building and planning or his designee. 
    Private driveway means any piece of privately owned and maintained 12-foot or more wide clear improved driveable path which is used for the purpose of providing vehicular access on private property to and from the principal structure, whether it be a single residence, or a single other use, but which is not open to nor normally used by the public except during emergencies, deliveries, or by invited guests. 
    Private road means a privately owned and maintained road, allowing access to more than one use. The erection of signs such as, "Residents Only," or the like shall not be otherwise exempt such road from the provisions of this article. 
    Road means a thoroughfare which affords vehicular traffic circulation and the principal means of access to abutting property, including avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, street and other similar designations for a thoroughfare, except an alley or private driveway. 
    Road commission for county or RCOC refers to the road commission for the county. 
    Structure means any assembly of materials constructed or erected for occupancy or use, which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having such a permanent location. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 17.821, 17.823, 17.825-17.829; Ord. No. 97, §§ 2.1, 2.3, 2.5-2.9, 6-17-2002) 
Sec. 22-152. - Approval of name; name signs and posts. 
    All private roads created hereunder shall be named, with said name to be approved by the township fire chief, and road commission for the county. All required name signs and signposts shall be erected by the applicant and match the requirements of the road commission for the county at the expense of the applicant. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.881; Ord. No. 97, § 8.1, 6-17-2002)
Sec. 22-153. - Violations as municipal civil infractions. 
    Violation of this article is a municipal civil infraction. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.902; Ord. No. 97, § 10.2, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 124, § 2, 7-7-2008) 
Secs. 22-154-22-174. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROHIBITIONS; LIMITATIONS 

Sec. 22-175. - Construction of private roads. 
    No person shall construct a private road within the township except in accordance with the standards as herein set forth or as otherwise required by township ordinances. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.831; Ord. No. 97, § 3.1, 6-17-2002)
Sec. 22-176. - Construction of private driveways. 
    No person shall construct a private driveway as the main point of access to a site within the township except in accordance with the standards as herein set forth or as otherwise required by township ordinances. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.832; Ord. No. 97, § 3.2, 6-17-2002)
Sec. 22-177. - Sale of parcels of land. 
(a)	No person shall split or sell any parcel of land within the township unless such parcel of land or all resulting parcels front a street which is dedicated to the public or unless the parcels front on a private road which meets the standards of this division and all other applicable township ordinances, or unless said contract, deed or other form of conveyance contains the following language: This parcel is not a buildable site for the reason that it is not served by an acceptable ingress and egress route in accordance with standards as set forth by the ordinances of the township. 
(b)	This section shall not apply to a home or other use without frontage where such home or other use is served by a private driveway in good condition and serving only such home or other use and connecting to a public street or highway, and where such home or other use is otherwise not prohibited by the ordinances of the township. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to waive any frontage, depth or like requirements as set forth in any township ordinance. 
(c)	In those instances where an application is being sought for the splitting of acreage or the subdivision of a preexisting parcel on an existing private road, which private road does not meet the applicable private road standards, the director of building and planning for the township shall require that said private road be brought up to said standards. In instances of practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, the applicant may petition the zoning board of appeals for consideration for relief from these requirements. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.833; Ord. No. 97, § 3.3, 6-17-2002)
Sec. 22-178. - Building permits. 
    No building permit shall be issued for any structure unless said structure fronts on a street or highway, which is dedicated to the public, or unless said structure fronts on a private road, which road meets the standards as herein set forth. This section shall not apply to a home or other use without frontage where such home or other use is served by a private driveway serving only such home or other use and connecting to a public street or highway, and where such home or other use is otherwise not prohibited by the ordinances of the township. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to waive any of the frontage, depth, or like requirements as set forth in any township. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.834; Ord. No. 97, § 3.4, 6-17-2002)
Secs. 22-179-22-209. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - NOTICE 

Sec. 22-210. - Maintenance agreements. 
    In all cases where a new private road is being created pursuant to this division, the director shall require a maintenance agreement prior to issuance of a permit pursuant to section 22-235. The road maintenance agreement shall run in the chain of title on all parcels serviced by a private road and shall be recorded with the county register of deeds and meet the standards as outlined in section 22-266(17)(c)4. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.841; Ord. No. 97, § 4.1, 6-17-2002)
Sec. 22-211. - Existing private roads. 
    In those instances where the applicant is extending an existing private road, the director of building and planning shall require a maintenance agreement for the extended portion. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.842; Ord. No. 97, § 4.2, 6-17-2002)
Sec. 22-212. - Existing private roads, acknowledgment. 
    In those instances where the applicant seeks to construct a home on an preexisting private road where residential parcels have been constructed and occupied prior to the adoption of this division and no private road maintenance agreement exists, the applicant shall obtain such an agreement with all parcel owners with use rights in the private road and submit such agreement to the director prior to being eligible for a building permit. In the event the applicant cannot obtain the agreement of all the affected parcel owners, then such applicant shall file an affidavit of service by certified mail of notice on each parcel owner of the need for such agreement, and execute a statement acknowledging that his parcel located on a private road, and that no road maintenance agreement exists and that the road is not otherwise maintained or repaired by the township, the RCOC or the state, and that the road may not be passable for emergency vehicles. Upon receipt of such documentation the director shall issue a building permit subject to the provision of this division and all other applicable ordinances. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.843; Ord. No. 97, § 4.3, 6-17-2002)
Sec. 22-213. - Conveyance on private roads. 
    In all instances of conveyance of property on private roads, the grantor of any interest in such parcels shall advise the grantee that said parcel abuts a private road, and that the maintenance, care and other responsibilities concerning such road rest with the abutting landowners and are not the responsibility of the township, the county, or the state. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.844; Ord. No. 97, § 4.4, 6-17-2002)
Secs. 22-214-22-234. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PERMITS 

Sec. 22-235. - Permit required. 
    No construction shall begin on any private road until a permit has been issued on forms provided by the township building department on proper application therefore and following compliance with such requirements as are set forth in the application and this division. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.851; Ord. No. 97, § 5.1, 6-17-2002)
Sec. 22-236. - Application; fee. 
    The director may establish such requirements as he deems necessary in the application for permits to meet the standards of this division. 
(1)	Each application shall require as a minimum the following:
a.	Drawings to a scale of no less than one inch equals fifty feet. Such drawings shall be on material no less than 24 inches by 36 inches. Such plans shall be in standard blue print form with either blue or black line on white background. The plans shall include a location map at a minimum scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet showing the section of government subdivision in which the development lies, the development access roads, road names and an arrow indication north. All submitted plans shall be sealed by a registered professional engineer licensed by the state. 
b.	The plans shall show elevations with a minimum of two benchmarks on U.S.G.S. datum. Contours at two-foot intervals shall be provided across the entire site and extend 100 feet beyond all subject site property lines when a site plan or construction plan approval is required by the township; otherwise, for large acreage parcels requirements shall include a 100-foot wide strip along road, all drainage courses, and detention or retention basins. 
c.	The plans shall provide the legal descriptions for the ingress and egress easement for the private road, and any drainage or utility easements required. The proposed improvements (e.g., roads, culverts, ditches, etc.) shall be shown on the plans in both plan and profile views. The profile shall indicate as a minimum the existing ground at the centerline, ditch line on either side, and any other utility crossings. The plan view shall show the proposed roadway, drainage facilities and structures, and any other structures or physical conditions existing adjacent to the planned private road. Proposed contours as well as spot grade elevations shall be provided for both road surface and ditch line in the plan view. 
d.	A drainage area map and drainage calculations shall be provided on the plans. The drainage calculations for both storm sewer sizing and detention and/or retention facilities must be in accordance with chapter 14, pertaining to development design standards. 
e.	A cross section of the roadway showing the proposed pavement and curbing (if any), aggregate surfacing, granular subbase, and a shoulder and ditch profile in conformance with the private road cross section standards as specified in division 3 of this article shall be provided on the plan. 
f.	The plan shall contain location and detail for erosion and sediment control measures to be used during the entire length of construction. 
g.	Such plan shall also contain an overall development plan for all contiguous land in which the developer, or any person having an interest in the parcel being served by the private road, has an interest of any nature whatsoever. 
(2)	All new private roads being constructed in accordance with this division shall be maintained pursuant to a road maintenance agreement as outlined in section 22-266(17)c, which road maintenance agreement shall encumber all properties served by the private road. Such road maintenance agreement shall be in a form approved by the director of building and planning or his designee. In the case of private roads that predate this article which are being built upon, enlarged or improved, all property owners with interest in the private road shall be served with a notice pursuant to section 22-210. Such road maintenance agreement shall be recorded with the county register of deeds. 
(3)	Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall provide the township with a performance bond, which bond may be in cash or surety, in an amount equal to one and one-half times the estimated construction cost for the private road. Such estimate shall be as approved by the township engineer. Such performance bond shall run to the township and shall be without term until released by the director of building and planning or his designee. 
(4)	The payment of a permit fee as approved by the township board.
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.852; Ord. No. 97, § 5.2, 6-17-2002)
Secs. 22-237-22-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - STANDARDS 

Sec. 22-266. - Minimum design standards for road construction. 
    All new or extended private roads easements shall be designed and constructed to the following minimum standards: 
(1)	Private road right-of-way easements shall be a minimum of 50 feet wide and a maximum of 900 feet long. If any road is proposed to be created that exceeds 900 feet in length without an intersection with another road that has another point of access to a major county road or thoroughfare or an alternative approved means of emergency access, then it shall provide an onsite fire suppressant system which will meet the standards as outlined in the National Fire Protection Association Publication NFPA-1231. All existing parcels of record located with frontage onto an existing unimproved road may be exempted from this section based upon approval of the director and township fire chief. 
a.	The easement shall provide that the servient owners shall not place fences, shrubbery, planting, or other materials (other than grass or the like) within the easement. 
b.	The easement shall provide that it is to be used exclusively for a roadway, that it shall not be used until improved in accordance with this division, and it shall contain language satisfactory to the director of building and planning permitting access to all township, police and emergency vehicles. 
(2)	Public utilities such as sewer, water, electrical and telephone shall be constructed within a recorded easement either within or immediately adjacent to the access easement (roadway) unless an alternate location is approved by the director of building and planning and the township engineer. 
(3)	The minimum traveled road width as constructed shall be 18 feet wide for residential use with two-foot shoulders, (or two-foot wide concrete curb and gutter where paved surface), and open (or enclosed as approved by the director of building and planning and the township engineer) ditch drainage on both sides of the road. Roads serving other uses shall be as determined by the director of building and planning with input from township engineer, where deemed necessary. 
(4)	The intersection of roads shall be as near perpendicular (90 degrees) as practical. A ten-degree tolerance will be allowed. At all times, a clearance for a 40-foot outside turning radius shall be maintained at all intersections or turns in the road and a 47-foot wide outside radius shall be designed at culs-de-sac. 
(5)	The maximum road grade shall be eight percent or ten percent where warranted by existing topography and it can be demonstrated that vertical curves and sight distance requirements from AASHTO guidelines can be met. The minimum grade shall be 0.4 percent. Vertical curves shall be used at all changes in grade, which exceed 1.00 percent. Roads and shoulders shall have transverse crown grades of 4.00 percent and 5.00 percent, respectively. 
(6)	The grade of the private road shall not exceed 3.00 percent for a minimum distance of 100 feet from the edge of all existing road rights-of-way. 
(7)	Proper road drainage shall be provided whether by open ditch, or enclosed conduit. Onsite stormwater detention or retention for the roadway and any other site improvements must be provided in accordance with chapter 14, pertaining to development design standards. 
(8)	An aggregate surface shall be constructed upon a prepared subgrade. Existing surface materials shall be removed and excavated for the entire width of the roadway and adjacent drainage ditch facilities for the full length of said private road. 
(9)	The applicant shall remove all unsuitable soil including muck, peat and marl, as well as brush, trees, tree stumps and similar materials from the full width of the roadway, including the shoulders. These areas shall then be backfilled with engineered fill such as one inch by three inch crushed concrete, geotextile fabric/mat, MDOT Class II granular subbase material, etc. The minimum subbase provided shall depend on the type of native soils occurring in the roadway area in accordance with the following schedule: 
Type of Native SoilsMinimum SubbaseSandNative soilClay6" subbase material*Silt8" subbase material**MDOT Class II granular subbase material 
Where private road is proposed to cross a state-regulated wetland, applicant is fully responsible for securing required wetland permit from the state department of environmental quality (MDEQ) or its successor prior to grading and/or removal of any soils associated with road construction. 
(10)	Private roads shall be developed as follows:
a.	For roads or a series of roads that will provide access to a maximum of 12 homesites, may be developed with a hard surface material as listed in section 22-266(10)(b); or at a minimum, the road must be constructed with the following material for an unpaved surface: 
1.	The road surfacing material shall be compacted in the excavated area for the full length and width so that a uniform surface results. 
2.	The required eight inch surface material shall be laid and compacted in two four-inch courses, each compacted separately. 
3.	Any stones larger than 11/2 inches shall be removed before placing the top four-inch course. 
4.	All trees, stumps, brush, and the roots thereof shall be entirely removed from within the grading limits of all private roads and shall be disposed of outside of roadway clearance area. 
5.	Road surfacing material shall be 22A aggregate or 21AA crushed stone or slag.
b.	For roads, or a series of roads, that will provide access to 13 homesites or potential homesites or greater within the applicable zoning districts must provide for a hard surface pavement. All hard surface roads shall be developed to the current cross section standards that are required by the road commission for county. Any reduction in road development standards from those provided by the RCOC such as width, shoulder, etc., similar to the standards found in section 22-266(10)(a), must be approved by the township engineer and the director. 
c.	Any exceptions to the road construction requirements of the private road standards shall be appealed to the zoning board of appeals as described in division 7 of this article, pertaining to appeals. 
(11)	The required size for cross road culverts and all other drainage improvements shall be as determined through submittal of drainage calculations including all onsite and any offsite contributory. The design for cross road culverts shall include headwalls, end sections or rip-rap in accordance with township standards and specifications. All culvert pipe shall be designed for an H-2 loading with a minimum cover depth of 18 inches. 
(12)	Culs-de-sac and emergency turnarounds.
a.	Dead-end roads are not permitted. However, in case where topographical or other conditions preclude the continuation of existing roads, culs-de-sac will be required. Culs-de-sac shall have an adequate turnaround with a minimum radius of 60 feet for easement and 47 feet for the roadway driveable surface. 
b.	The standards of section 22-266 also apply. 
c.	The length of a road is to be measured along the centerline of the private from the existing road or cul-de-sac when installed. 
(13)	Roadside ditches shall have a normal minimum depth of 2.0 feet below the shoulder point and the ditch shall have one-on-three (1:3) front and back slopes. Roadside ditches shall have an established growth of vegetation or other ground treatment such that the roadside ditches shall be stabilized and free of sedimentation or erosion at the time of construction approval. 
(14)	Design, construction, and materials standards other than those stated in this section shall conform to RCOC standards. 
(15)	Private road connections to public roadways shall be designed and constructed, with applicable permit, to the requirements of the authority with jurisdiction for the public roadway. 
(16)	Roadways that are part of a platted subdivision or condominium development are subject to site plan review. 
(17)	When a private road is proposed to be developed; or at the time of a acreage split, provisions for a private road easement shall be considered for future road development to any potential future splits within the parent parcel, or neighboring parcels based on the minimum lot size standards that are identified in chapter 46, pertaining to zoning for the zoning district in which the property is located. Private road easements must meet the minimum standards as outlined in this division. The following conditions apply to the development of a private road easement: 
a.	The standards of section 22-266 shall apply. 
b.	If a road easement through a parent parcel is established, the access to and from the existing use on the parent parcel must be relocated to have its point of access (drive-way) onto the newly created road easement. All existing driveways leading to a major thoroughfare must be closed and landscaped in areas that have been disturbed. 
c.	When road easements are placed within a parent parcel, they will be established in the best location for any potential future splits within the parent parcel as well as in relationship to the neighboring parcels that are subject to future splits. The following standards shall be established to provide the optimal location of the road easements: 
1.	Minimum road easement widths shall be 50 feet.
2.	In no case shall a road easement be located less than 165 feet from the centerline of an existing point of access (road or driveway on the same side of the thoroughfare) or parent parcel side property line. 
3.	In the event that the road easement would cross a regulated wetland as defined in section 14-2, the location of the roadway easement may be placed directly adjacent to the regulated wetland, but must not divide any parcel into two parcels where either parcel or both parcels would not meet the minimal lot standards as outlined in chapter 46, pertaining to zoning (or the road easement width may be increased to a width that can incorporate the regulated wetland in order to provide access around the wetland). Any necessary road crossing of a regulated wetland requires issuance of a permit by the MDEQ or its successor prior to any construction activities. 
4.	A maintenance agreement must be established for newly created roadway easements and it shall meet the minimum criteria as provided by the director. 
(i)	The division of the land must be described in detail along with all easements in a manner that obligates all property owners to the construction and maintenance of the easements. 
(ii)	A sample of maintenance agreement commitment is on file in the township building department.
(18)	Private road developments must meet the standards for water supply for fire protection as provided in chapter 46, pertaining to zoning. 
(19)	The director and/or township fire chief shall inspect any private roads that are suspected of being in disrepair and/or impassable for emergency access purposes. 
a.	The director and/or township fire chief may notify property owners of the private road of an unsafe or poorly maintained condition and in those cases where a road maintenance agreement exists would require that the road be reconstructed to meet the private road requirements of this division. 
b.	If a majority of the property owners disagree with the determination of the initial inspection, they may request a by the private road review committee, which shall be comprised of the township supervisor, township fire chief, and either the township clerk or township treasurer for a total of three members. A simple majority shall provide for a decision by the committee. The township engineering consultant may be called upon by the committee to advise them of the condition of the private road. 
c.	Based upon the season, the condition of the private road, or the nature of the impassability, the director may require the repair of the private road within five days, or within as many as 60 days to a safe and passable condition. 
d.	If action is not taken within the allowed time-frame, the township may conduct any necessary maintenance, or repair to a private road in order to bring it into acceptable standards. The necessary maintenance or repair costs to the road will then be assessed to each of the responsible parties according to their number of parcels accessing the private road or pursuant to cost allocations set forth in the road maintenance agreement if available. The total costs to properly maintain, or repair the road to acceptable standards, plus a 20 percent administrative fee will be assessed accordingly. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.861; Ord. No. 97, § 6.1, 6-17-2002)
Sec. 22-267. - Extending existing private roads. 
    In those cases where the applicant seeks to extend an existing private road, the current landowners as identified on township tax records and/or those who access the road shall be notified by the township of such application. The cost of providing notification to the appropriate effected parties shall be borne by the applicant. Any landowner and/or those who have legal access to the road may provide documentation that determines that the extension is in conflict with a standing deed restriction or other means of legal restrictions within 28 days of the issuance of the notification letter. Further, the applicant shall hold the township harmless from any and all claims concerning such extension. If an existing maintenance agreement is in place, the extended portion shall be included at the expense of the owner that will directly access the extended portion of roadway. The director shall determine whether adding the extended portion of the roadway to the existing maintenance agreement is satisfactory to the standards as set forth within the township, or whether, any additional items shall be included that apply to the extended portion of any said road. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.862; Ord. No. 97, § 6.2, 6-17-2002)
Sec. 22-268. - Minimum design standards for driveway construction. 
    All new and extended driveways shall be designed and constructed to the following minimum standards: 
(1)	Private driveways shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide of driveable surface and, a maximum of 900 feet long unless it has another means for emergency access as approved by the township fire chief. Otherwise, onsite fire suppressant techniques, which meet the standards as outlined in the National Fire Protection Association Publication NFPA-1231 shall be provided onsite. A driveway easement over a servient parcel must have a minimum width of 20 feet and be dedicated to the exclusive use of the dominant parcel. 
(2)	The driveway surfacing material shall be constructed and maintained with a substantial base to allow for emergency vehicle transport. Driveway surfacing material shall be designed with the minimum standards: 22A aggregate or 21AA crushed stone or slag, or the equivalent. 
(3)	Minimal curb cuts shall be established at points along major thoroughfares.
(4)	At all times, a clearance shall be maintained for emergency vehicle access to a height of 14 feet and a width of 14 feet. 
(5)	Driveways should be maintained at all times and during all seasons.
(6)	The primary point of access for any improved site must clearly post the site address at the road, which is visible during the day or at night. 
(7)	In situations where a driveway is within 30 feet of another driveway, road easement, or road right-of-way, the subject driveway easement must be increased to a 30-foot wide exclusive use easement with a minimum ten-foot wide maintained greenbelt adjacent to the existing driveway or road. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.863; Ord. No. 97, § 6.3, 6-17-2002)
Secs. 22-269-22-299. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - ROAD EASEMENTS 

Sec. 22-300. - Dedication. 
    Private road easements shall provide that such easement may be extended, looped with or connected to other roads or easements within the township in the discretion of the township building and planning department. If the road is to be accessed by any more than one lot of record, an acceptable maintenance agreement that provides for the general maintenance and/or repair of the road among all parties must be included in the easement recordation for each of the subject properties. If a parcel adjoining said private road easement is not to be served by said private road easement, then the grant of easement shall specifically provide for that exclusion. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.871; Ord. No. 97, § 7.1, 6-17-2002)
Sec. 22-301. - Emergency vehicle access. 
    The easement shall further provide that the township, or any emergency service agency, shall have an easement over such road access for the purpose of ingress and egress to provide without limitation, access for fire and police vehicles, ambulances, and rescue services, and other lawful governmental or private emergency services. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.872; Ord. No. 97, § 7.2, 6-17-2002)
Sec. 22-302. - Recordation. 
    All road easements created hereunder shall be recorded as such with the county register of deeds. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.873; Ord. No. 97, § 7.3, 6-17-2002)
Secs. 22-303-22-322. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - APPEALS 

Sec. 22-323. - Appeal to board of zoning appeals. 
(a)	An applicant may appeal any denial of permit for any alterations of the standards for private roads and driveways ordinance which may be appealed to the township board of zoning appeals. Variances may be granted if there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships related to the land. The board of zoning appeals shall not grant any variance with regard to the design or construction standards except upon evidence provided it by a registered engineer and/or a licensed land surveyor which evidence is clearly convincing that such variance is necessary to the development of the parcel, and that such variance will not materially affect access to the uses to be placed on the parcel, nor shall such variance materially affect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens who will be using, living or working on such access. 
(b)	In the process of their review, the board of zoning appeals shall consider the following items in determining the optimal development and placement of a private road for the purpose of providing public safety for township citizens: 
(1)	Parallel road easements along common parcel property lines are prohibited unless a 30 foot wide landscaped greenbelt is maintained between the two parallel road easements. 
(2)	If the width of the parent parcel will yield only one lot that has frontage along a major thoroughfare, it is encouraged that the applicant work with neighboring parcel owners to work out a shared easement located along adjoining parcels. All costs may be shared by all property owners based on a potential per lot formula or as agreed upon in writing among all property owners. 
(3)	If the width of the parent parcel will yield at least two lots along the frontage of the major thoroughfare, the road easement should be located at a point that would provide access to both future parcel splits, and accommodate any potentially planned or future parcels that may be and/or located deeper within the parent parcel splits. 
(4)	In the event that a road easement is located along a shared property line, it should be established with the understanding that the immediately adjacent parcel shall be permitted to have access to the road easements and such permissibility be recorded in each resultant deed of the subject parcel so as to share in the established road easement in one of the three ways: 
a.	The entire road easement may be established along the side property line of the parent parcel and will allow access to future splits on the parent parcel and the lots that may be split on the immediately adjacent parent parcel. 
b.	A joint road easement may be established that would be centered along the parent parcel lines with portions of the road easement shared by the parcels contributing to the road easement. 
c.	A boulevard may be established so that half of the road improvement is in each adjacent road easement. Any existing road names shall be applied to the entire boulevard and all of the splits on each parcel would be subject to the addressing scheme as provided by the township. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.891; Ord. No. 97, § 9.1, 6-17-2002)
Sec. 22-324. - Increasing the use of existing road not meeting the standards of this article, appeal to zoning board of appeals. 
    In those instances where a permit is being sought for the construction of a structure, the splitting of acreage or the subdivision of an existing parcel on an existing private road, which private roadway does not meet the standards as herein set forth, the director shall require that said private road be brought up to said standards. The applicant may petition the zoning board of appeals for relief from this requirement. Upon such petition, the board shall order the applicant to establish an engineering escrow of $1,000.00 with the director to prepare a study of the private road in question and report to the board with recommendations as to remedial action that may be taken. In making the recommendation, the township engineer shall consider the following: 
(1)	Cost of bringing the private road up to the ordinance standards.
(2)	Effect on neighboring parcels, both those served by the private road and those not so served, of bringing the private road up to the required standard. 
(3)	The effect on the existing road of the increased use.
(4)	Any future probability of increased use of the private road and its effect.
(5)	Quality of access by emergency vehicles such as fire, police, etc.
(6)	Quality of access by utilities.
(7)	Alternate access routes.
(8)	Existing and expected effect on groundwater and other natural conditions of the area by the road as it then exists and the road in an improved condition. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.892; Ord. No. 97, § 9.2, 6-17-2002)
Sec. 22-325. - Registered professional engineer plan submission. 
    All required plans for the approval of a private road or driveway, or those requesting a variance, will not be granted until the applicant submits acceptable engineered drawings by a registered professional engineer in the state. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.893; Ord. No. 97, § 9.3, 6-17-2002)
Sec. 22-326. - Security bonding requirement. 
    The costs of the study shall be deducted from the escrow deposit and the balance refunded to the applicant. If the costs exceed the deposit, the balance shall be paid by the applicant prior to issuance of any permit. If the balance due is not paid within 30 days it shall be assessed against the parcel involved in the application and collected in the same manner as taxes. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.894; Ord. No. 97, § 9.4, 6-17-2002)
Sec. 22-327. - Appeals to county circuit court. 
    Appeals from decisions of the township board of zoning appeals shall be made to the county circuit court. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 17.895; Ord. No. 97, § 9.5, 6-17-2002)
Chapter 24 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Mutual assistance agreements, MCL 123.811 et seq.; uniform crime reports, MCL 28.251 et seq.; commission on law enforcement standards act, MCL 28.601 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1-24-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER 

Sec. 24-19. - Ordinance enforcement officer. 
    There is hereby established the office of ordinance enforcement officer within the township. 
(Ord. No. 123, § 5.1, 7-7-2008)
Sec. 24-20. - Appointment. 
    The township board is hereby authorized, by resolution, at any regular meeting of said board, to appoint any person to the office of ordinance enforcement officer for such term as may be designated in said resolution. Said board may further, by resolution, remove any person from said office, in the discretion of said board. 
(Ord. No. 123, § 5.2, 7-7-2008)
Sec. 24-21. - Authorization. 
    The ordinance enforcement officer is hereby authorized to enforce all ordinances of the township, whether currently or hereafter enacted, and whether such ordinances specifically designate a different official to enforce the same or do not designate any particular enforcing officer. Where a particular officer is so designated in any such ordinance, the authority of the ordinance enforcement officer to enforce the same shall be in addition and supplementary to the authority granted to such other specific officer. Any ordinance-enforcing authority of the township supervisor/superintendent and any other officers specifically designated in any township ordinance or the Charter township Act, Public Act No. 359 of 1947 (MCL 42.10) shall continue in full force and effect and shall in no way be diminished or impaired by the terms of the within ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 123, § 5.3, 7-7-2008)
Sec. 24-22. - Duties. 
    The ordinance enforcement duties herein authorized shall include, among others, the following: 
(1)	Investigating ordinance violations;
(2)	Serving notice of violations;
(3)	Serving appearance tickets as authorized under Chapter 4 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, Public Act No. 175 of 1927 (MCL 764.9c); 
(4)	Appearing in court or other judicial proceedings to assist in the prosecution of ordinance violators; and 
(5)	Such other ordinance enforcement duties as may be designated by the township supervisor/superintendent or assigned by the township attorney. 
(Ord. No. 123, § 5.4, 7-7-2008)
Secs. 24-23-24-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - APPEARANCE TICKETS 

Sec. 24-48. - Persons authorized to issue and serve tickets. 
(a)	The following persons, being public servants of the township, shall be, and they are hereby, authorized to issue and serve upon persons appearance tickets with respect to alleged violations of ordinances and codes of the township in such cases as such public servants have reasonable cause to believe that such persons have committed violations of an ordinance or code of the township. 
(b)	The names of the authorized public servants are as follows:
(1)	Supervisor.
(2)	Director of planning and building.
(3)	Fire chief or designated fire marshal.
(4)	Law enforcement personnel (police or sheriff).
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 12.131; Ord. No. 76, § 1, 2-4-1985; Ord. No. 152-13, 10-7-2013)
Sec. 24-49. - Appearance ticket defined. 
(a)	For purposes of this article, the term "appearance ticket" means a complaint or written notice issued and subscribed by a public servant, authorized in section 24-48, directing a designated person to appear in a designated local criminal court at a designated future time in connection with his alleged commission of a specified violation or violations of township ordinance or code. The appearance tickets shall be numbered consecutively, be in such form as determined by the attorney general, the state court administrator, and the director of the department of state police and shall consist of the following parts: 
(1)	The original which shall be a complaint or notice to appear, filed with the court.
(2)	A copy which shall be the abstract of court record.
(3)	A copy which shall be retained by the township and/or its attorney.
(4)	A copy which shall be delivered to the alleged violator.
(b)	With prior approval of the attorney general, the state court administrator and the director of the department of state police, the appearance ticket may be appropriately modified as to content or number of copies to accommodate enforcement and local court procedures and practices. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 12.132; Ord. No. 76, § 2, 2-4-1985)
Secs. 24-50-24-71. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal civil infractions, MCL 600.8701 et seq.

Sec. 24-72. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bureau means the municipal ordinance violations bureau established in section 24-74. 
    Municipal civil infraction means a violation of a provision of this Code for which the remedy and/or penalty is prescribed to be a civil fine, or other sanction other than a criminal penalty. A municipal civil infraction is not a lesser included offense of a criminal offense or of a ordinance violation that is not a civil infraction. 
    Municipal civil infraction determination means a determination that a defendant is responsible for a municipal civil infraction by one of the following: 
(1)	An admission of responsibility for the municipal civil infraction.
(2)	An admission of responsibility for the municipal civil infraction, with explanation.
(3)	A preponderance of the evidence at an informal hearing or formal hearing.
(4)	A default judgment for failing to appear at a scheduled appearance.
    Municipal ordinance violations notice means a written notice prepared by an authorized official, directing a person to appear at the township ordinance violations bureau for the purpose of paying a civil fine and/or costs for a violation which is prescribed to be a civil infraction. 
    Repeat offense means a determination of responsibility for a second or any subsequent municipal civil infraction with regard to the same ordinance provisions, committed by the same person within any three-year period, unless some other period is specifically provided with regard to a specific ordinance provision. 
    Responsible or responsibility means a determination entered by a court or magistrate that a person is in violation of a provision of these ordinances prescribed to be a municipal civil infraction. 
    Violation means any act which is provided, made or declared to be unlawful or any offense under this article, including affirmative acts as well as omissions and/or failures to act where the act is required by these ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 123, § 2.1, 7-7-2008)
Sec. 24-73. - Commencement of municipal civil infraction action. 
(a)	A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by an authorized official of either of the following: 
(1)	A municipal civil infraction citation directing the person alleged to be responsible to appear in court; or 
(2)	A municipal civil infraction violation notice directing the person alleged to be responsible to appear at the township ordinance violation bureau. 
(b)	The form of citations used to charge municipal civil infraction violations shall be in accordance with state law, being MCL 600.8709. 
(c)	The basis for issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation shall be as set forth below: 
(1)	An authorized official who witnesses a person violate an ordinance, the violation of which is a municipal civil infraction, shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and as completely as possible, an original and three copies of a citation, unless such official issues a municipal civil infraction violation notice. 
(2)	An authorized official may issue a citation to a person if, based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to believe that a person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 123, §§ 3.1-3.3, 7-7-2008)
Sec. 24-74. - Establishment, location and personnel of municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(a)	Establishment. The township municipal ordinance violations bureau (hereafter "Bureau") is hereby established pursuant to Public Act No. 12 of 1994 ( MCL 600.8396), for the purpose of accepting admissions of responsibility for ordinance violations designated as municipal civil infractions, and to collect and retain civil fines/costs for such violations as prescribed herein. 
(b)	Location. The bureau shall be located at 395 Mill Street, Ortonville, Michigan 48462 (mailing address: 395 Mill Street, P.O. Box 929, Ortonville, Michigan 48462), or such other location as may be designated by resolution of the township board. 
(c)	Bureau authority. The bureau shall only have authority to accept admissions of responsibility, without explanation, for municipal civil infractions for which a municipal ordinance violations notice, as compared to a citation, has been issued and served, and to collect and retain the scheduled civil fines/costs for such violations specified pursuant to this article or other applicable ordinance. The bureau shall not accept payment of fines/costs from any person who denies having committed the alleged violation or who admits responsibility only with explanation. The bureau shall not determine or attempt to determine the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to an alleged ordinance violation. 
(Ord. No. 123, §§ 4.1-4.3, 7-7-2008; Ord. No. 130, § I(4.2), 4-5-2010)
Sec. 24-75. - Ordinance violation notice requirements, admission/denial of responsibility. 
(a)	Ordinance violation notice requirements. Municipal civil infraction violation notices shall be issued and served by authorized township officials as provided by law. A municipal ordinance violation notice shall include, at a minimum, all of the following: 
(1)	The violation;
(2)	The time within which the person must contact the bureau for purposes of admitting or denying responsibility for the violation; 
(3)	The amount of the scheduled fines/costs for the violation;
(4)	The methods by which the violation may be admitted or denied;
(5)	The consequences of failing to pay the required fines/costs or contact the bureau within the required time; 
(6)	The address and telephone number of the bureau;
(7)	The days and hours that the bureau is open.
(b)	Denial of responsibility. Where a person fails to admit responsibility (without explanation) for a violation within the jurisdiction of the bureau and pay the required civil fines/costs within the designated time period, the bureau shall advise the complainant to issue and file a municipal civil infraction citation for such violation with the 52/2 Judicial District Court. 
(c)	The citation filed with the court shall consist of a sworn complaint containing, at a minimum, the allegations stated in the municipal ordinance violation notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond to the citation. A copy of the citation may be served by firs class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged violator's last known address. The citation shall thereafter be processed in the manner required by law. 
(Ord. No. 123, § 4.4, 7-7-2008)
Sec. 24-76. - Schedule of civil fines/costs. 
(a)	Unless a different schedule of civil fines is provided for by an applicable ordinance, the civil fines payable to the bureau upon admissions of responsibility by persons served with municipal ordinance violation notices shall be determined pursuant to the schedule in section 1-12. 
(b)	In addition to the above-prescribed civil fines, costs in the amount of $10.00 shall be assessed by the bureau if the fine and costs are paid within ten days of the date of service of the municipal ordinance violation notice. Otherwise, costs of $20.00 shall be assessed by the bureau. 
(Ord. No. 123, § 4.5, 7-7-2008; Ord. No. 130, § I(4.5), 4-5-2010)
Sec. 24-77. - Records and accounting. 
(a)	The bureau or designated township official/employee shall retain a copy of all municipal ordinance violation notices, and shall account to the township board once a month or at such other intervals as the township board may require concerning the number of admissions and denials of responsibility for ordinance violations within the jurisdiction of the bureau and the amount of fines/costs collected with respect to such violations. 
(b)	The civil fines/costs collected shall be delivered to the township treasurer at such intervals as the township board shall approve, and shall be deposited in the general fund of the township. 
(Ord. No. 123, § 4.6, 7-7-2008)
Sec. 24-78. - Availability of other enforcement options. 
    Nothing in this article shall be deemed to require the township to initiate its municipal civil infraction ordinance enforcement activity through the issuance of an ordinance violation notice. As to each ordinance violation designated as a municipal civil infraction the township may, at its sole discretion, proceed directly as a municipal civil infraction citation or take such other enforcement action as is authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 123, § 4.7, 7-7-2008)
Chapter 26 - MASSAGE 

Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means and includes in the case of a business, all officers, owners, directors, shareholders, partners, members and managers. In the case of a massagist, the term "applicant" shall be defined as the individual person. 
    Bodywork means the treating of external parts of the body for remedial purposes, consisting of stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, stimulating or pressing with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances, under such circumstances that is reasonably expected that the person to whom the treatment is provided will pay money therefore. 
    Employee means any person who renders any service in connection with the operation of a massage business and receives compensation from the operator of the business or patrons. 
    Licensee means the person or business entity to whom a license has been issued to conduct massage or own or operate a massage establishment as defined herein. 
    Massage means the treating of external parts of the body for remedial or hygienic purposes, consisting of stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointment or other such similar preparations commonly used in the practice of massage, under such circumstances that is reasonably expected that the person to whom the treatment is provided will pay money therefore. 
    Massage establishment or massage parlor means any business establishment which engages in the practice of massage as defined in this section, either at that location or at another location. Massage establishment includes, but is not limited to, a health club, health spa, or any physical fitness club or business that offers massage on occasion or incidental to its principal operation. 
    Massage school means a school which is licensed by the United States with a class hour requirement of at least 500 hours and which requires for admission students with at least a high school education or its equivalent, which employs one or more competent massage therapists as instructors, and which has minimum requirements of a continuous course of study and training consisting of a study in physiology, anatomy, massage theory, hydrotherapy, hygiene, ethics and practical massage. A massage instructor must meet the following criteria: 
(1)	Graduate of a state licensed school with a minimum of 500 hours of education.
(2)	Professional certification by the American Massage Therapy Association, International Myomassethics Federation or Associated Bodywork and Massage Professionals, or other national massage therapy organization with comparable prerequisites for certification. For the purposes of this chapter, a correspondence school or a school outside of the United States shall not be construed to be a recognized school. 
    Massagist or masseur or masseuse means any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage as defined in this section. 
    Of suitable character means the propensity on the part of the person to serve the public in the licensed area in a fair, lawful, honest and open manner. 
    Patron means any person who receives a massage under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he or she will pay money or give any other consideration therefore. 
    Sexual or genital area means genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.1002; Ord. No. 96, § 2, 1-25-2001)
Sec. 26-2. - License required. 
(a)	Business license required. No person shall engage in or carry out the business of massage in township unless he or she has a valid massage business license issued by the township, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for each and every separate office or place of business conducted by such person. 
(b)	Massagist's license required. No person shall practice massage in township as a massagist, employee or otherwise, unless he or she has a valid and subsisting massagist's license issued to him by the township, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)	It shall be the responsibility of an owner, operator, manager or licensee hereunder to insure that each person employed or engaged by him in said business as a massagist license pursuant to this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.1003; Ord. No. 96, § 3, 1-25-2001)
Sec. 26-3. - Exemptions. 
(a)	This chapter shall not apply to the following licensed professions or occupations while in the practice of such professions or occupations, to-wit: 
(1)	Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths or physical therapists who are fully licensed to practice their respective professions in the state. 
(2)	Nurses who are registered and/or licensed under the laws of the state (RN or LPN).
(3)	Barbers and cosmetologists who are duly licensed under the laws of the state, except that this exemption shall apply solely to the massaging of the neck, face, scalp and/or hair of the customer for cosmetic or beautifying purposes. 
(4)	A trainer of any duly constituted athletic team who administers a massage in the normal course of training duties. 
(5)	Any certified practitioner recognized and listed as exempt by resolution of the township board. 
(b)	In any prosecution for violation of this chapter, the foregoing exemptions shall constitute affirmative defenses and it shall be incumbent upon the defendant to show that he or the place involved are not subject to the provisions of this chapter. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to shift the burden of the violation to the defendant. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.1004; Ord. No. 96, § 4, 1-25-2001)
Sec. 26-4. - Application for massage establishment license. 
    Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate or conduct a massage establishment shall file a completed application under oath with the township clerk's office upon a form provided by the township and pay a nonrefundable application investigation fee. Such fee shall be set by resolution of the township board. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)	A definition and description of all services to be provided, including any other businesses conducted on the premises. 
(2)	All locations, mailing addresses and telephone numbers utilized by the business.
(3)	The name and address of each applicant and manager of the applicant.
a.	If the applicant is a corporation, or a limited liability company, the names and residence addresses of each of the officers, directors or members of said corporation or limited liability company, and each stockholder or member owning more than ten percent of the stock or capital interest of the corporation or limited liability company, the address of the corporation or limited liability company itself, if different from the address of the massage establishment, and the name and address of a resident agent of the company. The applicant shall also provide documentation that the corporation or limited liability company is in good standing in the state of organization, 
b.	If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability partnership or limited partnership, if different from the address of the massage establishment, and the name and address of a resident agent in the state. 
(4)	For all persons identified in subsection (3) of this section:
a.	Previous addresses for the last ten years.
b.	Height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and sex.
c.	Social security number, driver's license number, if any, and date of birth.
d.	One portrait photograph at least two inches by two inches.
e.	Business, occupation or employment for the ten years immediately preceding the date of application, including the name, address and telephone number of any and all employees. 
f.	The massage or similar business history; whether such person, in previously operating in this township or another city or state has had a business license revoked or suspended or denied, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation prior to and subsequent to such action of suspension, revocation or denial. 
g.	The name and address of any other massage business or establishment in which the person owns stock or has any financial interest. 
h.	All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations, including the dates of convictions, nature of the crime and place convicted. 
i.	The name and address of any massage business or other establishment owned, managed or operated wherein the business or profession of massage is carried on. 
j.	Authorization for the township, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant. 
(5)	The name and address of each massagist who is or will be employed in said establishment, and a copy of their school diploma and professional certification. 
(6)	A description of any other business to be operated on the same premises or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the applicant. 
(7)	All information required by this section shall be provided at the applicant's expense. Upon completion of the provided form and the furnishing of all the foregoing information, the township shall accept the application for the necessary investigations. 
(8)	Massage establishment licenses shall be renewed annually. The holder of a massage establishment license shall notify the township of each change in any of the data required to be furnished by the section within ten days after such change occurs. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.1005; Ord. No. 96, § 5, 1-25-2001)
Sec. 26-5. - Application for massagist license. 
    Every applicant for a license as a massagist or masseur shall file an application under oath with the township clerk's office upon a form provided by the township, and pay a nonrefundable application investigation fee to be set by resolution of the township board. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)	The business name, address and all telephone numbers where the massage is to be practiced.
(2)	Name and residence address, and all names, nicknames and aliases by which the applicant has been known. 
(3)	Previous residence addresses for the last ten years.
(4)	Present identification at time of filing of the application as follows:
a.	United States Passport; Certificate of United States Citizenship; Certificate of Naturalization; unexpired foreign passport with attached employment authorization; or Alien Registration Card with photograph; or 
b.	A state-issued driver's license or a state issued I.D. card with a photograph, information including name, sex, date of birth, height, weight and color of eyes; or U.S. Military card and original Social Security Number Card; a certified birth certificate issued by a state, county or municipal authority; or unexpired INS Employment Authorization. 
(5)	Applicant's weight, height, color of hair and eyes, and sex.
(6)	A complete statement of all convictions of the applicant for any felony or misdemeanor or violation of a local ordinance, except misdemeanor traffic violations. 
(7)	Two front-face photographs taken within 30 days of the date of application and at least two inches by two inches in size. 
(8)	Occupation and employment for ten years immediately preceding the date of application, including the name, address and telephone number of any and all employers. 
(9)	Professional certification.
a.	Education and training.
1.	Proof of graduation from a massage school licensed by the state;
2.	Current licensure by another state with equivalent standards of education from a state licensed school in the United States; or 
3.	Proof of comparable education, training and/or experience in massage and/or bodywork.
b.	Certification by or membership to one of the following:
1.	Current basic certification by the International Myomassethics Federation (IMF);
2.	Proof of current professional membership in the Associated Bodywork and Massage Professionals (ABMP), American Massage Therapy Association (AMTA), American Oriental Bodywork Therapy Association (AOBTA), American Polarity Therapy Association (APTA), or other national massage and/or bodywork organization with comparable membership requirements; 
3.	Certification and/or membership must include liability insurance.
Individuals who are currently licensed but can not satisfy the requirements of this subsection shall be issued a temporary license if all other requirements of this chapter are met. Within 60 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the applicant must establish active engagement, enrollment or participation in a course of study at an approved massage school designed to fulfill the requirements of this section within one year of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, as certified by an official of the school. The burden of establishing active engagement, enrollment or participation shall be upon the applicant. Failure to establish and maintain active engagement, enrollment or participation or to complete the course of study within the times provided shall terminate a temporary license. 
(10)	The massage or similar business history and experience ten years' prior to the date of the application, including but not limited to whether or not such person was previously operating in this township or another city or state under license, has had such license denied, revoked or suspended and the reasons therefor, and the business activities or occupations subsequent to such action of denial, suspension or revocation. 
(11)	Authorization for the township, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the license. 
(12)	Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct, said declaration being duly dated and signed in the presence of the township clerk, or his deputy. 
a.	All information required by this section shall be provided at the applicant's expense.
b.	Massagists licenses shall be renewed annually.
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.1006; Ord. No. 96, § 6, 1-25-2001)
Sec. 26-6. - License procedures. 
(a)	Any applicant for a massage establishment or massagists license pursuant to this chapter shall present to the township clerk's office the application in duplicate containing the information described in section 26-5. 
(b)	Investigation. Upon receipt of such application, the township clerk shall retain one copy and refer one copy as follows: 
(1)	To the police agency serving the township who shall investigate and determine whether the person making application for such license is of suitable character to conduct or maintain such a business in the township. The police agency shall forward to the township clerk the results of such investigation along with a recommendation concerning whether or not the license should be granted. 
(2)	In making its determination, the police agency shall consider:
a.	Penal history. All applicant's convictions in the preceding ten years, other than traffic violations, the reasons therefore, and the demeanor of the applicant subsequent to his or her release. 
b.	License history. The license history of the applicant and his or her employees; whether such person while previously operating in this township or state, or in another state under a license, has had such license denied, revoked or suspended, the reasons therefore, and the demeanor of the applicant subsequent to such action. 
c.	Business history. In the case of a massage establishment license, the history of the business, the manner in which the business is conducted, and the conduct of all employees in providing services to the public. 
d.	Other information. The police agency may consider any other information and documentation which it considers relevant to make a determination as to whether the applicant is of suitable character. 
(3)	The police agency shall complete its investigation and determination within 45 days of being provided with a completed application. 
(4)	If an applicant is found to be unqualified for a license because of lack of suitable character, or similar criteria, the applicant shall be furnished by the township clerk with a statement containing information as to the basis for this determination. 
(c)	In the case of a massage establishment license application, if the investigation by the police agency does not evidence a lack of suitable character, the township clerk shall refer the application to the director of building and planning, fire chief, or their designated representatives, who shall cause a thorough inspection of the premises to be made, if applicable, to ensure that all pertinent provisions of state law and local ordinances, including the applicable plumbing, heating, electrical and zoning codes, are being complied with. The results of such inspections shall be returned to the township clerk within 30 days of the date the application was referred. If the premises are found to be unqualified for a license under township codes, regulations or other provisions of this chapter, the applicant shall be furnished by the township clerk with a statement containing information as to the basis for this determination. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.1007; Ord. No. 96, § 7, 1-25-2001)
Sec. 26-7. - Renewal of license. 
    Application to renew a license to operate a massage establishment or a massagist's license shall be filed at least 45 days prior to the date of expiration. Such renewal shall be annual and shall be accompanied by the annual fee to be set by resolution of the township board. Procedures for review of a renewal application shall be in accordance with this chapter. The township board may waive one or more application requirements for renewals, by resolution, as it deems appropriate. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.1008; Ord. No. 96, § 8, 1-25-2001)
Sec. 26-8. - License refusal, suspension, revocation or nonrenewal. 
    A license requested may be refused and any license issued may be suspended, revoke, or not renewed for cause. The term "cause" as used in this chapter shall include the doing or omitting of any act, or permitting any condition to exist for which a license is issued, or upon any premise used in connection therewith, which act, omission or condition is contrary to the health, safety and welfare of the public, is unlawful, irregular or fraudulent in nature, is unauthorized or beyond the scope of the license issued, or is forbidden by this chapter or any applicable law. The term "cause" shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)	A determination of lack of suitable character, or a failure of the purposed licensed premises to meet applicable codes and ordinances. 
(2)	Fraud or material misrepresentation in the application for a license.
(3)	Fraud or material misrepresentation in the operation of the licensed business.
(4)	Any material violation of this chapter or of the regulations authorized herein.
(5)	Any violation of federal or state law, or local ordinance which creates a risk to the health, safety or welfare of the community, or brings into question whether the licensee is of suitable character to operate the business. 
(6)	Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute the maintenance of a nuisance upon or in connection with the licensed premises. For purposes of this chapter, the term "nuisance" shall be given the normal and customary meaning, and shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.	Existing violations of building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, zoning, health, fire or other applicable regulatory codes. 
b.	A pattern or practice of patron conduct which is in violation of the law and/or interferes with the health, safety and welfare of the residential or commercial properties in the area. 
c.	A pattern or practice of employee conduct which is in violation of any state or federal law, local ordinance, or this chapter. 
d.	Failure to maintain the grounds and exterior of the licensed premises, including litter, debris or refuse blowing or being deposited upon adjoining properties. 
(7)	Failure of the licensee to pay personal property taxes, other township obligations, and real property taxes by February 14 of each year arising from their use and occupancy of the property. A licensee who does not own the real property is not responsible for the payment of the real property taxes unless the lease requires such payment. 
(8)	Any violation of this chapter.
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.1009; Ord. No. 96, § 9, 1-25-2001)
Sec. 26-9. - Revocation or suspension of license. 
(a)	Each establishment licensed pursuant to this chapter shall be operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations of the township and the state. Upon any violation of this chapter or the violation of any other applicable ordinance, after notice and hearing, the township board may revoke or suspend such license. 
(b)	The township board shall revoke a massage establishment license if three or more massagist licenses are suspended or revoked within a 12-month period. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.1010; Ord. No. 96, § 10, 1-25-2001)
Sec. 26-10. - Procedures for recommendation of refusal nonrenewal, revocation or suspension. 
    Procedures for recommendation of refusal, nonrenewal, revocation or suspension shall be in accordance with this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.1011; Ord. No. 96, § 11, 1-25-2001)
Sec. 26-11. - Posting of license. 
(a)	Every massagist shall post the license required by this chapter in a clearly visible area in his or her work area. 
(b)	Every individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, limited liability partnership, limited partnership or association licensed under this chapter shall display such license in a prominent place on the premises of the licensed massage establishment. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.1012; Ord. No. 96, § 12, 1-25-2001)
Sec. 26-12. - Records of employees. 
    The licensee or the person designated by the licensee of a massage establishment shall maintain a register of all persons employed or engaged as massagists. Included in the register will be a copy of each massagist license. Such register shall be available at the massage establishment for inspection by representative of the township and/or county or state health departments during regular business hours. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.1013; Ord. No. 96, § 13, 1-25-2001)
Sec. 26-13. - Facilities necessary. 
    No license to operate a massage establishment shall be issued unless inspectors of the township reveal that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
(1)	All provisions of all applicable state construction, plumbing, fire, electrical and health codes have been fulfilled. 
(2)	A recognizable and readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage establishment; all signs shall comply with the sign requirements of the township. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.1014; Ord. No. 96, § 14, 1-25-2001)
Sec. 26-14. - Operating requirements. 
(a)	Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition. 
(b)	Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception area in a location available to all prospective customers. 
(c)	No massage shall be performed in a private room which is fitted with a door capable of being locked or barred. Reasonable measures may be used to offer privacy to patrons such as partitions, walls, curtains and the like. 
(d)	All employees, including massagists and other employees attending the patrons, shall be clean and wear clean uniforms covering the torso. Such uniforms shall be nontransparent and of washable material and shall be kept in a clean condition. Such clothing shall cover the person's pubic area, perineum, buttocks, natal cleft and the entire chest to four inches below the collarbone, and legs not exposed more than two inches above the knees. 
(e)	All massage establishments shall be provided with clean laundered sheet and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in a sanitary manner. 
(f)	No massage establishment granted a license under the provisions of this chapter shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or distributed any advertisement, picture or statement which is known or through the exercise of reasonable care should be known to be false, deceptive or misleading in order to induce any person to purchase or utilize any professional massage services. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.1015; Ord. No. 96, § 15, 1-25-2001)
Sec. 26-15. - Alcoholic liquor prohibited. 
    No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep, or cause to be sold, given, dispensed, provided or kept, any alcoholic liquor on the premises of any massage business. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.1016; Ord. No. 96, § 16, 1-25-2001)
Sec. 26-16. - Hours. 
    No massage business shall be kept open between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.1017; Ord. No. 96, § 17, 1-25-2001)
Sec. 26-17. - Employment of massagist. 
    No person shall employ as a massagist any person unless said employee has obtained and has in effect a license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.1018; Ord. No. 96, § 18, 1-25-2001)
Sec. 26-18. - Inspection required. 
    The police agency from the township shall at reasonable times during business hours make inspection of each massage business establishment for the purposes of determining that the provisions of this chapter are fully complied with. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.1019; Ord. No. 96, § 19, 1-25-2001)
Sec. 26-19. - Unlawful acts. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage establishment to touch, fondle or massage the sexual or genital parts of another person, or any portion thereof, for purposes of sexual arousal or gratification. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage establishment to touch, fondle or massage his sexual or genital parts, or any portion thereof, for purposes of his sexual arousal or gratification. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage establishment to touch, fondle or massage his sexual or genital parts, or any portion thereof, for purposes of sexual arousal or gratification of any other person. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage establishment to expose his sexual or genital parts, or any portion thereof, to any other person for purposes of his own sexual gratification. 
(e)	It shall be unlawful for any employee, while in the presence of any other person in a massage establishment, to fail to conceal the sexual or genital parts of his body with a fully opaque covering. 
(f)	It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing a massage establishment to permit any agent, employee, or any other person under his control or supervision to perform such acts prohibited in this section. 
(g)	It shall be unlawful for any massage service to be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth, or any area within a massage establishment which is fitted with a door capable of being locked. 
(h)	It shall be unlawful for any massage service to be carried on the same premises with any sales or display of sexually oriented materials, or any material containing depictions of human genitals and female breasts that are not concealed or acts of human sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, oral sexual activity, fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts, human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.1020; Ord. No. 96, § 20, 1-25-2001)
Sec. 26-20. - Location. 
    A massage establishment shall be located as provided by the zoning ordinance of the township. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.1021; Ord. No. 96, § 21, 1-25-2001)
Sec. 26-21. - Sale, transfer or change of location. 
    Upon sale, transfer or relocation of a massage establishment, the license therefore shall be null and void unless approved as provided by this chapter. It shall be the duty of all owners or licensees having knowledge of the sale, transfer or relocation of a massage establishment, to immediately report such sale, transfer or relocation to the township clerk's office. The failure to do so shall result in an immediate suspension of all license to operate. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.1022; Ord. No. 96, § 22, 1-25-2001)
Sec. 26-22. - Name and place. 
    No person granted a license pursuant to this chapter shall operate the massage establishment under a name not specified in their license, nor shall they conduct business under any designation or location not specified in their license. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.1023; Ord. No. 96, § 23, 1-25-2001)
Sec. 26-23. - Transfer of license. 
    No license shall be transferable except with the consent of the clerk of the township, and ratified by the township board. An application for such transfer shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by fees provided by resolution of the township board. The written application for such transfer shall contain the same information as requested herein for application for the license. Transfer shall include the sale, or other transfer of more than ten percent of the stock of a corporation, or ten percent interest in any other business entity. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.1024; Ord. No. 96, § 24, 1-25-2001)
Sec. 26-24. - Violations. 
(a)	Violation of section 26-19 is a misdemeanor. 
(b)	Violation of any other section of this chapter is a municipal civil infraction.
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.1025; Ord. No. 96, § 25, 1-25-2001; Ord. No. 124, § 2, 7-7-2008; Ord. No. 131-11, §§ 1, 2, 7-5-2011) 
Chapter 28 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan penal code, MCL 750.1 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Construction. 
    The rule that a criminal statute is to be strictly construed shall not apply to this chapter or any of the provisions thereof. All provisions of this chapter shall be construed according to the fair import of their terms, to promote justice and to effect the objects of the law. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.762; Ord. No. 40, § 1.2, 10-4-1976)
Sec. 28-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act or doing of an act includes the term "omission to act." 
    Disorderly person means a person who commits any offense or performs or does an act prohibited by this article. 
    Property means any matter or thing upon or in respect to which any offense may be committed. 
    Public place means and includes any street, road, highway, alley, building, structure, park, playground, parking lot, sidewalk, and/or other public place, which is owned by the government and/or to which the public is invited and has access, including, without limitation, school property, school buildings, and any and all property owned or operated by the school district. 
    Writing, written, and any term of like import includes words printed, painted, engraved, lithographed, photographed or otherwise copied, traced or made visible to the eye. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 20.765-20.769; Ord. No. 40, §§ 1.5-1.9, 10-4-1976)
Sec. 28-3. - Loitering. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly loiter in or about any place where illegal occupation or business is being conducted. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 20.803, 48.141; Ord. No. 40, § 2.23, 10-4-1976; Ord. No. 78, § 4.1, 5-7-1990) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.167(1)(j). 
Secs. 28-4-28-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS 

Sec. 28-25. - False alarms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to summon, as a joke or prank or otherwise without any good reason therefore, by telephone or otherwise, the police or the fire department or any public or private ambulance to go to any address where the service called for is not needed. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.795; Ord. No. 40, § 2.15, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- False alarm of fire, MCL 750.240; false report of crime, MCL 750.411a. 
Sec. 28-26. - False report of crime. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make or file with the police department of the township any false, misleading or unfounded statement or report concerning the commission or alleged commission of any crime occurring within the township. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.797; Ord. No. 40, § 2.17, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.411a. 
Sec. 28-27. - Interfering with governmental function or property. 
(a)	No person shall intentionally obstruct, impair or hinder the performance of a governmental function or the use of government property by using or threatening to use violence, force, physical interference or obstacle. 
(b)	For purposes of this section the term "government" includes any principal subdivision or agency of the United States, State of Michigan, Township of Brandon, or any agency of local governmental operations within the township, The term "governmental function" includes any activity which a public agency or public servant is legally authorized to undertake. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.812; Ord. No. 40, § 2.32, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Obstruction of a police or government officer, MCL 750.479. 
Sec. 28-28. - Resisting or interfering with officer. 
    No person shall resist any police officer, any member of the police department, or any person duly empowered with police authority while in the discharge or apparent discharge of his duty, or in any way interfere with or hinder him in the discharge of his duty. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.821; Ord. No. 40, § 3.1, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Obstruction of a police or government officer, MCL 750.479. 
Sec. 28-29. - Assisting escape. 
    No person shall offer or endeavor to assist any person in the custody of a police officer, a member of the police department, or a person duly empowered with police authority to escape or attempt to escape from such custody. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.822; Ord. No. 40, § 3.2, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.184. 
Sec. 28-30. - Unauthorized use of uniform, etc. 
    No person other than an official police officer of the township shall wear or carry the uniform apparel, badge, identification card, or any other insignia of office like, or similar to, or a colorable imitation of that adopted and worn, or carried by the official police officers of the township. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.823; Ord. No. 40, § 3.3, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Falsely personating public officers, MCL 750.215. 
Sec. 28-31. - Giving liquor or tools of escape to confined persons. 
    No person shall make available to, present to, or place within the reach of any person confined, under the authority of the township, any intoxicating or malt liquor or any tool, implement, or other thing calculated to aid the escape of such person so confined. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.824; Ord. No. 40, § 3.4, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Weapons, liquor and controlled substances in jails, MCL 801.261 et seq. 
Secs. 28-32-28-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 

Sec. 28-51. - Assault and battery. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault, or an assault and battery on any person. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.781; Ord. No. 40, § 2.1, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Assaults, MCL 750.81 et seq. 
Sec. 28-52. - Harassment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, with the intent to harass, annoy or alarm another person, to: 
(1)	Follow a person in or about a public place; or
(2)	Engage in a course of conduct or repeatedly commit acts that alarm or seriously annoy another person and that serve no legitimate purpose. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.787; Ord. No. 40, § 2.7, 10-4-1976)
Sec. 28-53. - Malicious use of service provided by telecommunications service provider. 
    A person is guilty of a misdemeanor who maliciously uses any service provided by a telecommunications service provider with the intent to terrorize, frighten, intimidate, threaten, harass, molest or annoy another person, or to disturb the peace and quiet of another person by any of the following: 
(1)	Threatening physical harm or damage to any person or property in the course of a conversation or message through the use of a telecommunications service or device. 
(2)	Falsely and deliberately reporting by message through the use of a telecommunications service or device that a person has been injured, has suddenly taken ill, has suffered death or has been the victim of a crime or an accident. 
(3)	Deliberately refusing or failing to disengage a connection between a telecommunications device and another telecommunications device or between a telecommunications device and other equipment provided for the transmission of messages through the use of a telecommunications service or device. 
(4)	Using vulgar, indecent, obscene or offensive language or suggesting any lewd or lascivious act in the course of a conversation or message through the use of a telecommunications service or device. 
(5)	Repeatedly initiating a telephone call and, without speaking, deliberately hanging up or breaking the telephone connection as or after the telephone call is answered. 
(6)	Making an unsolicited commercial telephone call that is received between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "an unsolicited commercial telephone call" means a call made by a person or recording device on behalf of a person soliciting business or contributions. 
(7)	Deliberately engaging or causing to engage the use of a telecommunications service or device of another person in a repetitive manner that causes interruption in telecommunications service or prevents the person from utilizing his telecommunications service or device. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.798; Ord. No. 40, § 2.18, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.540e. 
Sec. 28-54. - Window peeping. 
    No person shall be found looking into the windows or doors of any house, apartment or other residence in the township in such a manner as would be likely to interfere with the occupant's reasonable expectation of privacy and without the occupant's express or implied consent. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 20.800, 48.143; Ord. No. 40, § 2.20, 10-4-1976; Ord. No. 78, § 4.3, 5-7-1990) 
State Law reference- Person window peeping deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(c). 
Sec. 28-55. - Begging and soliciting alms by accosting or forcing oneself upon the company of another. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accosting means approaching or speaking to a person in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon the person or property in his immediate possession. 
    Ask, beg or solicit means, without limitation, the spoken, written or printed word or such other acts as are conducted in furtherance of the purpose of obtaining alms. 
    Forcing oneself upon the company of another means continuing to request, beg or solicit alms from a person after that person has made a negative response, blocking the passage of the individual addressed, or otherwise engaging in conduct which could reasonably be construed as intended to compel or force a person to accede to demands. 
(b)	Exceptions. Except when performed in the manner and locations set forth in subsections (c) and (d) of this section, it shall not be unlawful to ask, beg or solicit money or other things of value. 
(c)	Location. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value: 
(1)	On private property if the owner, tenant or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; 
(2)	Within 15 feet of the entrance to, or exit from, any public toilet facility;
(3)	Within 15 feet of an automatic teller machine, provided that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance to, or exit from, the automated teller machine facility; 
(4)	Within 15 feet of any pay telephone, provided that when a pay telephone is located within a telephone booth or other facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance to, or exit from, the telephone booth or facility; 
(5)	In any public transportation vehicle, bus or subway station, or within 15 feet of any bus stop or taxistand; 
(6)	From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the owner or passenger of such vehicle; 
(7)	From any person who is waiting in line for entry to any building, public or private, including any residence, business or athletic facility; or 
(8)	Within 15 feet of the entrance to, or exit from, a building, public or private, including any residence, business or athletic facility. 
(d)	Manner. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value by: 
(1)	Accosting another; or
(2)	Forcing oneself upon the company of another.
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.804; Ord. No. 40, § 2.24, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Person begging deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(h). 
Secs. 28-56-28-83. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 28-84-28-109. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LARCENY AND FRAUD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Larceny generally, MCL 750.356 et seq.

Sec. 28-110. - Library materials; converting to own use. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to procure, or take in any way from any public library or the library of any literary, scientific, historical or library society or association, whether incorporated or unincorporated, any book, pamphlet, map, chart, painting, picture, photograph, periodical, newspaper, magazine, manuscript or exhibit or any part thereof, with intent to convert the same to his own use, or with intent to defraud the owner thereof, or who having procured or taken any such book, pamphlet, map, chart, painting, picture, photograph, periodical, newspaper, magazine, manuscript or exhibit or any part thereof to thereafter convert the same to his own use or fraudulently deprive the owner thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.857; Ord. No. 40, § 5.7, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.364. 
Sec. 28-111. - Larceny. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the offense of larceny, by stealing of the property of another, any money, goods or chattels, or any bank note, bank bill, bond, promissory note, due bill, bill of exchange or other bill, draft, order or certificate, or any book of accounts for or concerning money or goods due or to become due, or to be delivered, or any deed or writing containing a conveyance of land, or any other valuable contract in force, or any receipt, release or any writ, process or public record. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.863; Ord. No. 40, § 5.13, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.356. 
Sec. 28-112. - Stolen goods. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to buy, receive or aid in the concealment of any stolen, embezzled, or converted money, goods or property knowing the same to have been stolen, embezzled or converted. 
(b)	Any person being a dealer in or collector of any merchandise or personal property, or the agent, employee or representative of such dealer or collector, who fails to make reasonable inquiry that the property to him has a legal right to do so, shall be presumed to have bought or received such property knowing it to have been stolen, embezzled or converted. This presumption may, however, be rebutted by proof. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.862; Ord. No. 40, § 5.12, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.535. 
Sec. 28-113. - Failure to pay for food or lodging. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, put up, board or lodge at any boardinghouse as a guest or boarder by the day, week or month, or to procure any food, entertainment or accommodation without paying therefor, unless there is a distinct and express agreement made by such person with the owner, proprietor or keeper of such boardinghouse for credit, with intent to defraud such owner, proprietor or keeper out of the pay for such board, lodging, food, entertainment or accommodations. 
(b)	Obtaining such food, lodging, or accommodations by false pretense, or by false or fictitious show of baggage or other property, or refusal or neglect to pay therefor on demand, or payment thereof with check, draft or order upon a bank or other depository on which payment was refused, or abscending without paying or offering to pay therefor, or surreptitiously removing or attempting to remove baggage, shall be prima facie evidence of such intent to defraud mentioned in sections 28-111 and 28-112. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.871; Ord. No. 40, § 6.1, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.291 et seq. 
Sec. 28-114. - Checks; insufficient funds. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to, with intent to defraud, make or draw or utter or deliver any check, draft or order for the payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository knowing at the time of such making, drawing, uttering, or delivering that the maker, or drawer without sufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository, for the payment of such check, draft or order, in full, upon its presentation or for any person who, with the intent to defraud to make, draw, utter or deliver any check draft or order for the payment of money to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository and who shall not have sufficient funds for the payment for same when presentation for payment is made to the drawee. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.872; Ord. No. 40, § 6.2, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.131. 
Sec. 28-115. - Checks; intent to defraud. 
(a)	As against the maker or drawer thereof, the making, drawing, uttering or delivering of a check, draft or order, payment of which is refused by the drawee, when presented in the usual course of business, shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and knowledge of insufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository, but such presumption shall be rebutted by the payment of the amount due thereon, together with all costs and protest fee, within five days after receiving notice that such check, draft or order has not been paid by the drawee. 
(b)	Where such check, draft or order is protested, on the grounds of insufficiency of funds or credit, the notice of protest thereof shall be admissible as proof of presentation, nonpayment and protest, and shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud, and of knowledge of insufficient funds or credit with such bank or other depository. 
(c)	The term "credit" as used herein, shall be construed to mean an arrangement or understanding with the bank or depository, for the payment of such check, draft or order, in full, upon the presentation thereof for payment. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.873; Ord. No. 40, § 6.3, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.131a. 
Sec. 28-116. - Obtaining land or goods by false pretense; false weights and measures. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to, with intent to defraud or cheat, to designedly, by color or any false token or writing or by any false or bogus check or other written, printed or engraved instrument, by spurious coin or metal in the similitude of coin, or by any other false pretense, cause any person to grant, convey, assign, demise, lease or mortgage any land or interest in land, or obtain the signature of any person to any written instrument, the making whereof would be punishable as forgery, or obtain from any person any money or personal property or the use of any instrument, facility, or article or other valuable thing or service, or by means of any false weight or measures obtain a larger amount or quantity or property than was bargained for, or by means of any false weights or measures sell or dispose of a less amount of quantity or property than was bargained for. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.874; Ord. No. 40, § 6.4, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.218. 
Sec. 28-117. - False credit devices. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly obtain or attempt to obtain credit, or purchase or attempt to purchase any goods, property or service, by the use of any false, fictitious or counterfeit credit card, credit number, telephone number or other credit device, or by the use of any credit card, without the authority of the person to whom such card, number or device was issued, or by the use of any credit card, credit number, telephone number or other credit card, credit number or device has been revoked and notice of revocation has been given to the person to whom issued. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.875; Ord. No. 40, § 6.5, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.157s. 
Sec. 28-118. - Retail fraud. 
    A person who does any of the following in a store or in its immediate vicinity is guilty of retail fraud, a misdemeanor if: 
(1)	While a store is open to the public, alters, transfers, removes and replaces, conceals, or otherwise misrepresents the price at which property is offered for sale, with the intent not to pay for the property or to pay less than the price at which the property is offered for sale, if the resulting difference in price is less than $200.00. 
(2)	While a store is open to the public, steals property of the store that is offered for sale at a price of less than $200.00. 
(3)	With intent to defraud, obtains or attempts to obtain money or property from the store as a refund or exchange for property that was not paid for and belongs to the store, if the amount of money, or the value or property, obtained or attempted to be obtained is less than $200.00. 
The values of the difference in price, property stolen, or money or property obtained or attempted to be obtained in separate incidents pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct within any 12-month period may be aggregated to determine the total value involved in the offense under this section. 
(Ord. No. 132-11, 7-5-2011)
State Law reference- MCL 750.356d. 
Secs. 28-119-28-147. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TRESPASSING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Trespassing generally, MCL 750.546 et seq.

Sec. 28-148. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Owner means the title holder or contract purchaser of private property, or the lessee, tenant, occupant, agent or trustee thereof, when such lessee, tenant, occupant, agent or trustee has authority from the title holder or contract purchaser. 
    Trespass means presence on or use of private property by any person without the consent, authorization or ratification of the owner. 
    Vehicle means any vehicle of any type which utilizes sled-type runners, skis, wheels, or any endless belt tread, or any combination thereof, or other similar means of contact with the surface upon which it is operated, whether motor driven or not. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 48.231, 48.233, 48.234; Ord. No. 79, § 3.4, 5-7-1990)
Sec. 28-149. - Acts prohibited. 
    No person shall trespass upon the private property of another by making any use thereof whatsoever. Trespassing shall include, but not be limited to, operating, parking, leaving, stopping or standing a vehicle on the private property of another. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 48.241; Ord. No. 79, § 3.4, 5-7-1990)
Sec. 28-150. - Notice. 
(a)	Trespass upon land or premises of another. A person shall not do any of the following: 
(1)	Enter the lands or premises of another without lawful authority after having been forbidden to do so by the owner or occupant or the agent of the owner or occupant. 
(2)	Remain without lawful authority on the land or premises of another after being notified to depart by the owner or occupant or the agent of the owner or occupant. 
(3)	Enter or remain without lawful authority on fenced or posted farm property of another person without the consent of the owner or his or her lessee or agent. A request to leave the premises is not a necessary element for a violation of this subdivision. The subdivision does not apply to a person who is in the process of attempting, by the most direct route, to contact the owner or his or her lessee or agent to request consent. 
(b)	Recreational trespass. No person shall operate any vehicle for recreational purpose on any private property not owned or lawfully possessed by him or her unless permission to do so is first requested and received from the person owning or otherwise in lawful possession of said property. 
(1)	Exception. It shall not be deemed a violation of this section where the operator thereof is a member of the immediate family of the owner or one lawfully in possession of the property or the operator is accompanied by or operating the recreational vehicle in the presence of and with the approval of the one owning or in lawful possession of the property. 
(2)	Evidence of permission. The permission as required herein must be received in writing from the person requested to consent to such operation; such written evidence shall then be required to be shown to any peace officer requesting to see it. 
(3)	Inability to show permission. The inability or refusal of a vehicle operator to show written evidence of the prior receipt of permission to operate a vehicle for recreational purpose on the property shall afford any peace officer charged with enforcing this section with sufficient cause and belief to regard the recreational vehicle operator(s) presence on the property as being in violation of this section, such inability or refusal being a violation of this section in and of itself. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 48.251; Ord. No. 79, § 5.1, 5-7-1990; Ord. No. 148-13, § 2, 1-7-2013) 
State Law reference- MCL 750.552. 
Sec. 28-151. - Form of posted notice. 
    The form of the posted notice required by section 28-150 shall be substantially as follows: 
"This is private property for the use of ____________ only. All others using this property are trespassing." (Or similar language) 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 48.252; Ord. No. 79, § 5.2, 5-7-1990)
Sec. 28-152. - Prowling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to prowl upon the private premises of any other person in the nighttime, without authority or the permission of the owner of such premises. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.801; Ord. No. 40, § 2.21, 10-4-1976)
Sec. 28-153. - Presence on public building or structure. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to, without express authorization, climb upon and/or be or remain on any exterior portion of a public building or structure, unless such portion of the building or structure is a place to which the public is invited, e.g., public stairs or porches. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 48.146; Ord. No. 78, § 4.6, 5-7-1990)
Sec. 28-154. - Enforcement, remedies and penalty. 
    In any enforcement proceeding for violation of the provisions of this division, the license plate number displayed on any vehicle shall be prima facie evidence that the registered owner thereof is the person who has placed or used the vehicle on the private property. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 48.261; Ord. No. 79, § 6.1, 5-7-1990)
Sec. 28-155. - Complaint to be signed. 
    Any person observing a violation of this division may sign a complaint for the enforcement thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 48.262; Ord. No. 79, § 6.2, 5-7-1990)
Sec. 28-156. - Vehicle may be towed away. 
    Any owner or law enforcement agency may cause any vehicle that is violating the provisions of this division to be towed away with the expense thereof to be charged to the owner as a lien against the vehicle. As an alternative to or in addition to the towing, any officer may issue a ticket for trespass and leave it attached to such vehicle. The ticket shall require the appearance of the owner of the vehicle in court at the time and place designated therein to answer for the violation of this division. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 48.263; Ord. No. 79, § 6.3, 5-7-1990)
Sec. 28-157. - Penalty. 
    Violation of this division is a misdemeanor punishable by a maximum period of imprisonment of no more than 90 days and/or fine of no more than $500.00, or both, with the exception the maximum period for violation of section 28-150 shall be no more than 30 days imprisonment or a fine of not more than $250.00, or both. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 48.264; Ord. No. 79, § 6.4, 5-7-1990; Ord. No. 124, § 2, 7-7-2008; Ord. No. 127, § 4, 10-6-2008; Ord. No. 148-13, § 3, 1-7-2013) 
State Law reference- MCL 750.504 and MCL 750.552. 
Secs. 28-158-28-182. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DAMAGE TO PROPERTY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief generally, MCL 750.377a et seq.

Sec. 28-183. - Destruction or removal of property; posting handbills; water meters. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully destroy, remove, damage, alter or in any manner deface any property not his own, or any public school building, bridge, fire hydrant, alarm box, streetlight, street sign, or mark or post handbills on, or in any manner mar the walls of, any public building, or destroy a tree or pole within the township, or destroy, take, or meddle with any property belonging to the township or remove the same from the building or place where it may be kept, placed or stored, without proper authority; or disturb, tamper with, disconnect or damage any township water meter without proper authority. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.851; Ord. No. 40, § 5.1, 10-4-1976)
Sec. 28-184. - Releasing brake of, tampering with or damaging motor vehicle. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally and without authority from the owner, start or cause to be started the motor of any motor vehicle, or maliciously shift or change the starting device of gears of a standing motor vehicle to a position other than that in which it was left by the owner or driver of said motor vehicle. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally cut, mark, scratch or damage the chassis, running gear, body, sides, top, covering or upholstering of any motor vehicle of the property of another, or intentionally cut, mash, mark, destroy or damage such motor vehicle, or any of the accessories, equipment, appurtenances or attachments thereof, or any spare or extra parts thereon being or thereto attached, without the permission of the owner thereof. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally release the brake upon any standing motor vehicle, with intent to injure said machine or cause the same to be removed without the consent of the owner; provided, that this section shall not apply in case of moving or starting of a motor vehicle by the police under authority of local ordinance or by member of the fire departments in case of emergency in the vicinity of a fire. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 20.852-20.854; Ord. No. 40, §§ 5.2-5.4, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.416. 
Sec. 28-185. - Breaking and entering; entering without breaking. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to break and enter, or to enter without breaking, any dwelling, house, tent, hotel, office, store, shop, warehouse, barn, granary, factory or other building, boat, ship, railroad car, or structure used or kept for public or private use or any private apartment therein, or any cottage, clubhouse, boathouse, hunting or fishing lodge, garage or the outbuilding belonging thereto, or any other structure, whether occupied or unoccupied, without first obtaining permission to enter from the owner or occupant, agent, or person having immediate control thereof. Provided, that this section shall not apply to entering without breaking any place which at the time of such entry was open to the public, unless such entry has been expressly denied. This section shall not apply in cases where the breaking and entering or entering without breaking were committed by a peace officer or someone under his direction in the lawful performance of his duties as such peace officer. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.855; Ord. No. 40, § 5.5, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.115. 
Sec. 28-186. - Library materials. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully, maliciously or wantonly tear, deface or mutilate or write upon, or by other means injure or mar any book, pamphlet, map, chart, painting, picture, photograph, periodical, newspaper, magazine, manuscript or exhibit or any part thereof belonging to or loaned to any public library, or to the library of any literary, scientific, historical or library society or association, whether incorporated or unincorporated. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.858; Ord. No. 40, § 5.8, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.391. 
Sec. 28-187. - Personal property of another. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully and maliciously destroy or injure the personal property of another by any means not particularly mentioned or described in this division. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.859; Ord. No. 40, § 5.9, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.377a. 
Sec. 28-188. - Buildings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully and maliciously destroy or injure any house, barn, or other building of another, or the appurtenances thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.860; Ord. No. 40, § 5.10, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.380. 
Sec. 28-189. - Illegal dumping. 
    Any person who shall dump, deposit or place any filth, garbage or refuse, including but not limited to rubbish, waste material, offal paper, glass, cans, bottles, trash, debris, or other foreign substances, on the grounds or premises of another, without the specific permission of the owner thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 150-13, § 2, 1-7-2013)
State Law reference- MCL 750.552a. 
Sec. 28-190. - Placing or throwing glass or other debris on beach, public highways, etc. 
    Any person who shall place or throw glass or other dangerous pointed or edge substances in or on any beach or waters adjacent thereto, highway, walk, or on any public property within 50 feet of a public highway, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 150-13, § 3, 1-7-2013)
State Law reference- MCL 750.493a. 
Sec. 28-191. - Turfing. 
    Any person who willfully and maliciously, or wantonly and without cause, cuts down, destroys damages, injures, or in any manner defaces any tree, shrub, grass, turf, plants, crops or soil of another that is standing, growing or located on the land of another, and the value of the trees, shrubs, grass, turf, crops, or soil is less than $200.00, is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days, or a fine or not more than $500.00, or both imprisonment and fine. 
(Ord. No. 150-13, § 4, 1-7-2013)
State Law reference- MCL 750.546 et seq. 
Secs. 28-192-28-218. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 

Sec. 28-219. - Excessive noise. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to, after being warned at least once in advance by an official of the township or law enforcement agent, make, continue, or cause or contribute to be made or continued an excessive noise which could reasonably be expected to disturb, injure and/or endanger the health, repose, peace or safety of others within the township. Whether a particular noise is excessive shall be determined based upon the following standards: the nature and level of the noise; whether the noise is usual in the place and circumstances; the level of background noise; the proximity of the noise to residences, and particularly sleeping facilities; the nature and zoning of the area; the time of day or night; the duration of the noise; and whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 48.147; Ord. No. 78, § 4.7, 5-7-1990)
Sec. 28-220. - Disorderly intoxication. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be drunk or intoxicated or under the influence of any controlled substance in any public place and either endangering directly the safety of another person or of property or is acting in a manner that causes a public disturbance. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 20.782, 48.141; Ord. No. 40, § 2.2, 10-4-1976; Ord. No. 78, § 4.1, 5-7-1990) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.167(1)(e). 
Sec. 28-221. - Inciting disturbance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make or excite any disturbance or contention in any tavern, store or grocery, manufacturing establishment or any other business place or in any street, lane, alley, highway, public building, grounds or park, or at any election or other public meeting where citizens are peaceably and lawfully assembled. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.783; Ord. No. 40, § 2.3, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.170. 
Sec. 28-222. - Loud, boisterous or vulgar conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the public peace and quiet by loud, boisterous or vulgar conduct. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.784; Ord. No. 40, § 2.4, 10-4-1976)
Sec. 28-223. - Permitting presence of disorderly persons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or suffer any place occupied or controlled by him to be a resort of noisy, boisterous, or disorderly persons. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.785; Ord. No. 40, § 2.5, 10-4-1976)
Sec. 28-224. - Jostling, crowding. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to intentionally, or with willful or wanton disregard for others, molest, jostle, crowd, shove and/or push one or more other persons in a public place. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 20.786, 48.144; Ord. No. 40, § 2.6, 10-4-1976; Ord. No. 78, § 4.4, 5-7-1990) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.167(1)(l). 
Sec. 28-225. - Fighting. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to engage in a physical fight by hitting, assaulting, or striking another person with the hand, foot, or other bodily part, and/or with an object, with the intent of injuring, frightening or harassing such other person, or with willful or wanton disregard for whether such other person is injured, frightened or harassed. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 20.788, 48.145; Ord. No. 40, § 2.8, 10-4-1976; Ord. No. 78, § 4.5, 5-7-1990) 
Sec. 28-226. - Loitering. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Loitering on private property includes the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking aimlessly, and shall also include knowingly or willingly entering upon the property of another without the consent of the owner, lessee or other person rightfully in charge or possession thereof, if either of the following conditions exist: 
(1)	The premises is fenced or enclosed in a manner to exclude intruders; or
(2)	Notice against trespass is given by posting the premises in a conspicuous manner.
(b)	Certain types of loitering prohibited. No person shall loiter in a public place in such manner as to: 
(1)	Create, or cause to be created, any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person; 
(2)	Create, or cause to be created, a danger of breach of the peace;
(3)	Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles;
(4)	Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public place.
This subsection (b) shall include the making of any unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or which are calculated to annoy or disturb the person to or in whose hearing such remarks are made. 
(c)	Request to leave. Whenever the presence of any person in any public place is causing any of the conditions enumerated in subsection (b) of this section, the owner, lessee or person rightfully in charge or possession thereof or any police officer may order that person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse to leave after being ordered to do so shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 20.789, 48.141; Ord. No. 40, § 2.9, 10-4-1976; Ord. No. 78, § 4.1, 5-7-1990) 
Sec. 28-227. - Loitering in vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to, in a motor vehicle not situated on the public highway, stand idly, linger, or delay in movement in a public place, and concurrently: 
(1)	Obstruct or attempt to obstruct the free and uninterrupted passage of other motor vehicles; 
(2)	Knowingly acquiesce in illegal conduct being perpetrated in such person's presence;
(3)	Be under the influence of alcohol or a "controlled substance," as such term is defined in the state public health code, unless such substance has been prescribed by a person licensed by the government; 
(4)	Consume any intoxicating liquor, beer and/or wine where the public place in question is not licensed to sell, or is not a place authorized for consumption of, such liquor, beer and/or wine; or 
(5)	Delay in movement of the vehicle for a period in excess of that posted to be a maximum time to park or stand. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 48.142; Ord. No. 78, § 4.2, 5-7-1990)
Sec. 28-228. - Language or gestures causing public disorder. 
    A person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor if, with the purpose of causing public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, or if his conduct is reasonably likely to cause public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, such person willfully uses abusive or obscene language or makes an obscene gesture to any other person when such words, by their very utterance, inflict injury or tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace and invade the right of others to pursue their lawful activities. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.792; Ord. No. 40, § 2.12, 10-4-1976)
Sec. 28-229. - Use of places not designated as bathrooms or lavatory facilities. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to urinate or defecate in a place not expressly designed as a bathroom or lavatory facility for such purpose. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 48.141; Ord. No. 78, § 4.1, 5-7-1990)
Sec. 28-230. - Use of consumer fireworks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks except: 
(a)	On the day preceding, the day of, or the day after a national holiday as defined in 5 USC 6103. (New Year's day; Martin Luther King, Jr. birthday, the third Monday in January; Washington's birthday, the third Monday in February; Memorial Day, the last Monday in May; Independence Day, July 4; Labor Day, the first Monday in September; Columbus Day, the second Monday in October; Veteran's Day, November 11; Thanksgiving Day, the fourth Thursday in November; Christmas Day, December 25.) On those days, the ignition, discharge or use of consumer fireworks between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. or between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on New Year's day is prohibited. 
(b)	On the Friday and Saturday immediately preceding and immediately following the July 4 holiday between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 12 midnight. 
(c)	A person shall not ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks on public property, school property, church property, or the property of another person without that organization's or person's express permission. 
(d)	The possession or use of consumer fireworks at any time by a minor is prohibited.
(Ord. No. 161-14, 1-6-2014)
Secs. 28-231-28-251. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-252. - Throwing objects from moving vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wrongfully throw or propel any snowball, missile or object from any moving motor vehicles. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.810; Ord. No. 40, § 2.30, 10-4-1976)
Sec. 28-253. - Throwing objects toward person or vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wrongfully throw or propel any snowball, missile or object toward any person or motor vehicle. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.811; Ord. No. 40, § 2.31, 10-4-1976)
Secs. 28-254-28-284. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WEAPONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Firearms and weapons, MCL 750.222 et seq.

Sec. 28-285. - Hunting rules and regulations. 
(a)	Bald Eagle Lake; hunting prohibited. Hunting with or the discharge of a firearm is unlawful on the waters of Bald Eagle Lake and within 450 feet of the water's edge, section 19 and 30, T5N, R9E, of the township. 
(b)	Lake Louise, portion; hunting prohibited. Hunting with or the discharge of a firearm is unlawful on that portion of the waters of Lake Louise and within 450 feet of that portion of the water's edge located in sections 19, 20, and 30, T5N, R9E, of the township. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.052; Ord. No. 36, § 2, 7-7-1975)
Sec. 28-286. - Penalty. 
    Violation of this section is a municipal civil infraction. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.054; Ord. No. 36, § 4, 7-7-1975; Ord. No. 124, § 2, 7-7-2008)
State Law reference- Hunting area control, MCL 324.41902. 
Sec. 28-287. - Firearms-Pointing at another. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally without malice, point or aim any firearm at or toward any other person. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.806; Ord. No. 40, § 2.26, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.233. 
Sec. 28-288. - Same-Persons under influence of liquor or drugs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any exhilarating or stupefying drug to carry, have in possession or under control, or use in any manner or discharge any firearm. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.807; Ord. No. 40, § 2.27, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.237. 
Sec. 28-289. - Same-Reckless use. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to recklessly or heedlessly or willfully or wantonly use, carry, handle or discharge any firearm without due caution and circumspection for the rights, safety or property of others. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.808; Ord. No. 40, § 2.28, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Careless, reckless or negligent use of firearms, MCL 752.861 et seq. 
Sec. 28-290. - Same-Destroying or injuring property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to, because of carelessness, recklessness or negligence, but not wilfully or wantonly, cause or allow any firearm under his control to be discharged so as to destroy or injure the property of another real or personal. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.856; Ord. No. 40, § 5.6, 10-4-1976)
Sec. 28-291. - Same-Persons under 18 years of age. 
    It shall be unlawful: 
(1)	For any person under 18 years of age to use or possess any firearm in public, except under the direct supervision of an individual 18 years of age or older. This restriction shall not apply to an individual less than 18 years of age who possesses a firearm in accordance with Part 401 (Wild Life Conservation) of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.40101 et seq.), or Part 435 (Hunting and Fishing Licensing) of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.43501 et seq.). However, an individual less than 18 years of age may possess a firearm without a hunting license while at or going to or from a recognized target range or trap or skeet shooting ground if, while going to or from the range or ground, the firearm is enclosed and securely fastened in a case or locked in the trunk of a motor vehicle. 
(2)	For any person under 18 years of age to use or possess any rifle or handgun designed and manufactured exclusively for propelling BB's, not exceeding .177 caliber by means of spring, gas or air, outside the curtilage of his or her domicile, or the curtilage of a domicile of a person from whom express permission has been granted, unless he or she is accompanied by a person over 18 years of age. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.809; Ord. No. 40, § 2.29, 10-4-1976; Ord. of 7-7-1999, § 1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.234f, 752.891. 
Secs. 28-292-28-315. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-316. - Indecent behavior. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any indecent, or obscene conduct in any public place. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.790; Ord. No. 40, § 2.10, 10-4-1976)
Sec. 28-317. - Indecent exposure. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any indecent exposure of his person or of the person of another. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.794; Ord. No. 40, § 2.14, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.335a. 
Sec. 28-318. - Public nudity. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public nudity means knowingly or intentionally displaying in a public place, or for payment or promise of payment by any person, including, but not limited to, payment or promise of payment of an admission fee, of any individual's genitals or anus with less than a fully opaque covering. 
(b)	Prohibitions. 
(1)	Public nudity within the township boundaries is hereby prohibited.
(2)	No person shall aid or abet the knowing or intentional display in a public place, or for payment or promise of payment by any person, including, but not limited to, payment or promise of payment of an admission fee, of any individual's genitals or anus with less than a fully opaque covering, or a female individual's breast with less than a fully opaque covering of the nipple and areola. A mother's breastfeeding of her baby does not under any circumstances constitute nudity, irrespective of whether or not the nipple is covered during or incidental to the feeding. 
(c)	Applicability. This section applies only to live exhibitions and/or film or videotape displays intended for on-premises viewing. 
(d)	Knowledge presumed. The following persons are presumed to know of the display of public nudity with regard to any premises or business: 
(1)	Record landowner or land contract owner or lessee under a written lease;
(2)	Licensee of any premises licensed by the state liquor control commission;
(3)	Licensee under any sales tax license issued by the state department of treasury;
(4)	Manager or operator of any premises or business, who is on or at the premises at the time of the advertising or display of public nudity. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.791; Ord. No. 40, § 2.11, 10-4-1976)
Sec. 28-319. - Prostitution. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any act of prostitution.
(b)	A person commits the offense of prostitution if she engages in, or agrees to engage in, sexual conduct with another in return for a fee. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.802; Ord. No. 40, § 2.22, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Prostitution generally, MCL 750.448 et seq. 
Secs. 28-320-28-341. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POSSESSION OF CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Controlled substances, MCL 333.7101 et seq.

Subdivision I. - In General 

Secs. 28-342-28-370. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Control of Barbiturates and Other Harmful Drugs 

Sec. 28-371. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Delivery means sale, dispensing, giving away, or supplying in any other manner. 
    Drug means: 
(1)	Barbital and any derivative thereof; diethylbarbituric acid; any alkyl, aryl, metallic or halogenated derivative of barbituric acid; veronal (barbitone); proponal, ipral, dial; neonal (soneryl); sandoptal; amytal, Phenobarbital (luminal); phandorn; noctal, allonal (which contains allylisopropylbarbituric acid in combination with amidopyrine), or medinal; any preparation, mixture or other substance containing any of the foregoing substances. 
(2)	Any drug consisting of amphetamine, desoxyephedrine (methamphetamine), mephentermine, pipradol, phenmetrazine or any salt, mixture or optical isomer thereof which drug, sale, mixture or optical isomer has a stimulating effect on the central nervous system, except preparations for use in the nose and unfit for internal use. 
(3)	Chloral hydrate (choral), chlordiazepoxide and its salts (librium); diazepam (valium); ethchlorvynol (placidyl); ethinamate (valmid); glutethimide (doriden); meprobamate (miltown, equanil, meprospan, meprotabs); methyprylon (noludar); paraldehyde. 
(4)	For the purposes of this division, any controlled substance as defined in Article 7 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.7101 et seq.) is specifically incorporated herein by reference. 
    Manufacturer means persons other than pharmacists who manufacture barbiturates or stimulants, and includes persons who prepare such drugs in dosage forms by mixing, compounding, encapsulating, entableting or other process. 
    Patient means, as the case may be: 
(1)	The individual for whom a barbiturate or stimulant is prescribed or to whom a barbiturate or stimulant is administered; or 
(2)	The owner or the agent of the owner of the animal for which a barbiturate or stimulant is prescribed or to which a barbiturate or stimulant is administered. 
    Pharmacist means a person duly registered with the state board of pharmacy as a compounder, dispenser and supplier of drugs upon prescription. 
    Practitioner means a person licensed by law to prescribe and administer barbiturates or stimulants. 
    Prescription means a written or oral order by a practitioner to a pharmacist for a barbiturate or stimulant for a particular patient, which specifies the date of its issue, the name and address of such practitioner, the name and address of the patient (and, if such barbiturate or stimulant is prescribed for an animal, the species of such animal), the name and quantity of the barbiturate or stimulant prescribed, the directions for use of such drug, and in the case of a written order the signature of such practitioner. An oral order by a practitioner for a barbiturate or stimulant must be promptly reduced to writing by the pharmacist. 
    Warehousemen means persons who store barbiturates or stimulants for others and who have no control over the disposition of such barbiturates or stimulants except for the purpose of such storage. 
    Wholesaler means persons engaged in the business of distributing barbiturates or stimulants to persons included in any of the classes named in this section. 
(Ord. of 4-1-2008, § 2.1; Ord. No. 125, § 3.1, 10-20-2008)
Sec. 28-372. - Unlawful possession, sale, distribution. 
    It is unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession, or to sell, give away, barter, exchange or distribute any of the drugs specified in section 28-371, or any marijuana or narcotic drug, as defined in section 7106, Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.7106), or any controlled substance as defined in section 28-371 except on a written or oral prescription by a practitioner lawfully authorized to practice such profession. 
(Ord. of 4-1-2008, § 2.2; Ord. No. 125, § 3.2, 10-20-2008)
Sec. 28-373. - Control of codeine. 
(a)	Possession or sale unlawful. No person shall administer, dispose, sell, barter, exchange or offer for sale, when that person knows or can by reasonable diligence ascertain, that such administering, dispensing, selling, bartering, exchanging, or offering for sale will provide the person to whom or for whose such preparation is administered, dispensed, sold, bartered, exchanged or offered for sale, within 48 consecutive hours with more than six grains of codeine or any of its salts, except pursuant to a lawful prescription issued by a practitioner duly licensed under the laws of the state. 
(b)	Quantity in possession permitted. No person shall within any 48 consecutive hours purchase or have in his possession more than six grains of codeine or any of its salts, except pursuant to a lawful prescription issued by a practitioner duly licensed under the laws of the state. 
(Ord. of 4-1-2008, § 2.3; Ord. No. 125, § 3.3, 10-20-2008)
Sec. 28-374. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)	Practitioners.
(2)	Pharmacists when duly licensed by the state.
(3)	Manufacturers.
(4)	Pharmacists as manufacturers.
(5)	Common carriers or warehousers engaged in lawfully transporting or storing such harmful drugs. 
(6)	Police officers or employees in the performance of official duties requiring possession or control of such drugs, or persons aiding such officers or employees in the performance of such duties. 
(7)	Any patient in accordance with the terms of a prescription and prescribed treatment.
(8)	Persons who procure such drugs for the purpose of lawful research, teaching or testing, and not for sale. 
(9)	Lawfully licensed and registered hospitals or bona fide institutions wherein sick or injured persons are cared for and treated, or by a bona fide hospital for the treatment of animals. 
(Ord. of 4-1-2008, § 2.4; Ord. No. 125, § 3.4, 10-20-2008)
Sec. 28-375. - Confiscation of violations. 
    Any drugs or other substances governed by this article seized from the possession of any person convicted of a violation of this subdivision shall be confiscated and forfeited to the police agency, who shall make proper disposition thereof. 
(Ord. of 4-1-2008, § 2.5; Ord. No. 125, § 3.5, 10-20-2008)
Sec. 28-376. - Fraudulently obtaining, possession or selling. 
    It is unlawful for any person to procure, possess or have in his or her control or possession, or attempt the sale of a drug or other substance governed by this subdivision: 
(1)	By fraud, deceit, misrepresentation or subterfuge;
(2)	By the forgery or alteration of a prescription;
(3)	By the concealment of a material fact;
(4)	By the use of a false name or the giving of a false address;
(5)	By making a false statement in any prescription, order, report or record referred to in this article; 
(6)	By falsely assuming the title of, or falsely representing any person to be, a manufacturer, wholesaler, pharmacist or practitioner for the purpose of obtaining a prohibited drug; or 
(7)	By making, issuing or uttering any false or forged prescription.
(Ord. of 4-1-2008, § 2.6; Ord. No. 125, § 3.6, 10-20-2008)
Secs. 28-377-28-395. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Inhaling Intoxicating Substances 

Sec. 28-396. - Prohibited; exception. 
(a)	No person 17 years of age or under shall inhale, breathe, or drink any compound, liquid or chemical containing toluol, hexane, trichloroethylene, acetone, toluene, zylene, Freon, ethyl acetate, methl ethyl ketone, trichloroethane, isopropanol methyl isobutyl ketone, methyl cellosolve acetate, cyclohexanone, butynitrite, or any similar substance which the state board of health has by rule adopted declared to have potential for abuse and toxic effects on the central nervous system with the intent of inducing symptoms of intoxication, elation, dizziness, paralysis, irrational behavior, or in any manner change, distort or disturb the hearing, visual or mental processes. 
(b)	For the purpose of this section, any such condition so induced shall be deemed to be an intoxicated condition; provided, however, that the provisions to this section shall not apply to any person who inhales, breathes or drinks such material or substance pursuant to the direction or prescription of any doctor, physician, surgeon, dentist or podiatrist authorized to so direct or prescribe. 
(Ord. of 4-1-2008, § 3.1; Ord. No. 125, § 4.1, 10-20-2008)
Sec. 28-397. - Possessing, dealing in. 
    No person shall, for the purpose of violating or aiding another to violate any provision of this article, intentionally possess, buy, sell, transfer possession, or receive possession of any glue or spray paint containing the intoxicating substances defined in section 28-371. 
(Ord. of 4-1-2008, § 3.2; Ord. No. 125, § 4.2, 10-20-2008)
Sec. 28-398. - Sale or transfer to persons 17 years and under; exception. 
(a)	Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section and section 28-374, no person 17 years of age or under shall possess or buy any glue, spray paint, inhalant, or room odorizer, containing the intoxicating substances defined in section 28-371, and no person shall sell or transfer possession of any glue, spray paint, inhalant or room odorizer, containing the intoxicating substances defined in section 28-371 to another person 17 years of age or under. 
(b)	Provided, however, a person may sell or transfer possession of any glue or spray paint containing the intoxicating substances defined in section 28-371 to a person 17 years of age or under for model building or other lawful use where said juvenile has in possession and presents the written consent of the juvenile's parent or guardian, which consent shall contain the address and telephone number of said parent or guardian. 
(c)	This section shall not apply where the spray paint, glue or cement is sold delivered, or given away simultaneously with an as part of a kit used for the construction of model airplanes, model boats, model automobiles, model trains, or other similar models. 
(Ord. of 4-1-2008, § 3.3; Ord. No. 125, § 4.3, 10-20-2008)
Sec. 28-399. - Consents to be filed. 
    A person making a sale or transfer of possession of any glue or spray paint containing the intoxicating substances defined in section 28-371 to a person 17 years of age or under who presents the written consent of that person's parent or guardian shall keep the written consent required by section 28-398(b) in a permanent-type file available for inspection by the police department for a period of at least six months. 
(Ord. of 4-1-2008, § 3.4; Ord. No. 125, § 4.4 10-20-2008)
Sec. 28-400. - Sale from self-service display prohibited. 
    Retail establishments selling glue containing the intoxicating substances defined in section 28-371 shall not sell such glue from a self-service display. 
(Ord. of 4-1-2008, § 3.5; Ord. No. 125, § 4.5, 10-20-2008)
Sec. 28-401. - Exception for youth organizations. 
    This subdivision shall not apply to the distribution of spray paint, glue or cement by adult-supervised youth organizations for use by their regularly organized model classes. 
(Ord. of 4-1-2008, § 3.6; Ord. No. 125, § 4.6, 10-20-2008)
Secs. 28-402-28-430. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Nuisance Abatement 

Sec. 28-431. - Additional definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Controlled substance shall have the meaning assigned by MCL 333.7101 et seq. 
    Nuisance property means all places and the fixtures and movable contents thereof, used more than once within a period of 12 months for the purpose of unlawfully selling, possessing, serving, storing, delivering, manufacturing, cultivating, giving away, or using controlled substances, or otherwise violating this subdivision. 
    Owner means the person in whose name a place is recorded with the township treasurer for taxation purposes. 
    Place means any building, dwelling, establishment, or premises whatever in the township. If the place is a multi-unit dwelling, hotel or motel, or commercial or office building. The term "place" includes only the dwelling unit, room or suite of rooms, or area in which a nuisance is maintained or permitted. 
(Ord. of 4-1-2008, § 4.1; Ord. No. 125, § 5.1, 10-20-2008)
Sec. 28-432. - Notice. 
(a)	When a determination is made that a nuisance property exists within the township, the code enforcement officer, policy agency or township attorney shall by personal service or by certified mail, provide to the following persons the written notice described in subsection (b) of this section: 
(1)	The owner of the place at or in which a nuisance is maintained or permitted.
(2)	The owner's agent, if known.
(3)	All other persons known to maintain or permit the nuisance and all agents of such other persons. 
(b)	The written notice provided shall state:
(1)	That a nuisance, as defined in section 28-431, is maintained or permitted at or in a specified place. 
(2)	A determination that a second violation has occurred at the nuisance property shall result in a complaint being issued or a complaint to enjoin use of the place specified in the notice may be filed in county circuit court. 
(Ord. of 4-1-2008, § 4.2; Ord. No. 125, § 5.2, 10-20-2008)
Secs. 28-433-28-462. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DRUG PARAPHERNALIA[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Drug paraphernalia, MCL 333.7451 et seq.

Sec. 28-463. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Controlled substance means a controlled substance as that term is defined in Article 7 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.7101 et seq.), 
    Drug paraphernalia. 
(1)	The term "drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in preparing, testing, packaging, repacking, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of state or local law. The term "drug paraphernalia" includes but is not limited to: 
a.	Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled substances. 
b.	Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances. 
c.	Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana. 
d.	Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances. 
e.	Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging controlled substances. 
f.	Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances. 
g.	Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body. 
h.	Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or other controlled substances into the human body, such as: 
1.	Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens or punctured metal bowls. 
2.	Water pipes.
3.	Smoking and carburetion masks.
4.	Roach clips (meaning objects used to hold burning materials, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand). 
5.	Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials.
6.	Bongs.
(2)	In determining whether or not an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following: 
a.	Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the objects, concerning its use.
b.	The proximity of the object to controlled substances.
c.	The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object.
d.	Instruction, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use.
e.	Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use.
f.	National or local advertising concerning its use.
g.	The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
h.	Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products. 
i.	The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community.
j.	Expert testimony concerning the use of the object.
(Ord. No. 110, § 3, 9-5-2006)
Sec. 28-464. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)	Possession. It is unlawful for any person to use, or possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body, a controlled substance in violation of state or local law. 
(b)	Manufacture, delivery, or sale. It is unlawful for any person to deliver, sell, possess with intent to deliver or sell, or manufacture with intent to deliver or sell, drug paraphernalia, knowing that it will be used to plant, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body, a controlled substance in violation of sate or local law. 
(c)	Advertisement. It is unlawful for any person to place in a newspaper, magazine, handbill, sign, poster or other publication, any advertisement, knowing that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 4, 9-5-2006)
Sec. 28-465. - Civil forfeiture. 
    Any drug paraphernalia used, sold, possessed with intent to use or sell, or manufactured with intent to sell in violation of this division shall be seized and forfeited to the township. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 5, 9-5-2006)
Secs. 28-466-28-483. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES CONCERNING UNDERAGE PERSONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-484. - Neglected or delinquent children. 
    No person shall by any act, or by any word, encourage, contribute toward, cause or tend to cause any minor child under the age of 17 years to become neglected or delinquent so as to come or tend to come under the jurisdiction of the juvenile division of the probate court. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.837; Ord. No. 40, § 4.7, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.145. 
Sec. 28-485. - Leaving children unattended in motor vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, parent, guardian, custodian, or anyone else to whose care, children under 11 years of age are entrusted to leave, neglect or abandon said children in a parked motor vehicle in any public place or place open to the public without furnishing someone over the age of 17 years for supervision of said children. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.840; Ord. No. 40, § 4.10, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.135a. 
Sec. 28-486. - Abandoned refrigerators. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly leave in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container of a kind and size sufficient to permit the entrapment and suffocation of a child therein, without first removing the snap-lock or other locking device from the lid or cover thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.841; Ord. No. 40, § 4.11, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.493d. 
Sec. 28-487. - Presence in bars, dancehalls. 
    It shall be unlawful for any minor child under 17 years of age to be permitted to remain in any dancehall, saloon, barroom or any place where any spirituous or intoxicating liquor, or any wine or beer, or any beverage, or liquor containing any spirituous or intoxicating liquor, beer or malt liquor is sold, given away or furnished for a beverage, unless said minor is accompanied by parent or guardian. It shall be unlawful for any proprietor, keeper or manager of any such place to permit such minor child to remain in any such place, and it shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly encourage or induce in any way such minor child to enter such place or to remain therein. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.831; Ord. No. 40, § 4.1, 10-4-1976)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.141. 
Sec. 28-488. - Furnishing alcoholic liquor to persons under 21 years of age. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly give or furnish any alcoholic liquor to a person under 21 years of age except upon authorization of and pursuant to a prescription of a duly licensed physician. 
(Ord. No. 133-11, 7-5-2011)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.28, 750.141a. 
Sec. 28-489. - Children, contributing to neglect or delinquency of. 
    Any person who shall by any act, or by any word, encourage, contribute toward, cause or tend to cause any minor child under the age of 17 years to become neglected or delinquent so as to come or tend to come under the jurisdiction of the juvenile division of the probate court, as defined in section 2 or chapter 12a of Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of 1939, as added by Act No. 54 of the Public Acts of the First Extra Session of 1944, and any amendments thereto, whether or not such child shall in fact be adjudicated a ward of the probate court, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 133-11, 7-5-2011)
State Law reference- MCL 750.145. 
Sec. 28-490. - Aiding underage children to violate law misdemeanor. 
    Any person of the age of 16 years or over assisting, aiding, abetting, allowing, permitting or encouraging any minor under the age of 16 years to violate the provisions of sections 28-539 and 28-540, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 133-11, 7-5-2011)
State Law reference- MCL 722.753. 
Secs. 28-491-28-511. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HOUSE PARTIES 

Sec. 28-512. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult means a person 17 years of age or older. 
    Alcoholic liquor means any spirituous, vinous, malt, or fermented liquor, liquid or compound, whether or not medicated, proprietary, patented, and by whatever name called, containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume which are fit for use for beverage purposes as defined and classified by the commission according to alcoholic content as belonging to one of the varieties defined by state law. 
    Control means any form of regulation or dominion including a possessory right. 
    Controlled substance means a controlled substance as defined now or hereafter by Article 7 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.7101 et seq.). 
    House party means a social gathering of persons at a residence or premises where such persons are not the owner or those with rights of possession or their immediate family members although the owner or persons with right of possession may also be present. 
    Residence or premises means a motel room, hotel room, home, apartment, condominium, or other dwelling unit, including the curtilage of such dwelling unit, or a hall, meeting room or other place of assembly, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or specifically for social functions and whether owned, leased, rented or used with or without compensation. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 48.320; Ord. No. 80, art. II, 5-7-1990)
Sec. 28-513. - Adult responsible. 
    Any adult having control over any residence or premises who allows a house party to occur at such residence or premises shall be guilty of a misdemeanor: 
(1)	When the adult knows or reasonably should know that alcoholic liquor or controlled substances are possessed or being consumed by persons under 21 years of age at the residence or premises. 
(2)	Such adult fails to take steps reasonably calculated to prevent such possession or consumption of the alcoholic liquor or controlled substance by such person under 21 years of age. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 48.310; Ord. No. 80, art. I, 5-7-1990)
Sec. 28-514. - Exception. 
    The provisions of this division shall not apply to legally protected religious observances or legally protected educational activities. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 48.330; Ord. No. 80, art. III, 5-7-1990)
Secs. 28-515-28-538. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CURFEW FOR MINORS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Curfew for minors, MCL 722.751 et seq.

Sec. 28-539. - Curfew-Minors under 12 years of age. 
    It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 12 years to loiter, idle or congregate in or on any public street, highway, alley or park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.838; Ord. No. 40, § 4.8, 10-4-1976)
Sec. 28-540. - Same-Minors under 16 years of age. 
    It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 16 years to loiter, idle or congregate in or on any public street, highway, alley or park between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., immediately following. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.839; Ord. No. 40, § 4.9, 10-4-1976)
Sec. 28-541. - Exemptions. 
    The following activities shall be exempt from the curfew requirements of this division where the minor is: 
(1)	Accompanied by his parent, guardian or any other person 21 years of age or older who is authorized by a parent as the caretaker for the minor; 
(2)	On an errand, without any detour or stop, at the direction of his parent, guardian or caretaker; 
(3)	In a vehicle involved in interstate travel;
(4)	Engaged in a certain employment activity, or going to or from employment, without any detour or stop; 
(5)	Involved in an emergency;
(6)	On the sidewalk that abuts the minor's or the next door neighbor's residence, if the neighbor has not complained to the police; 
(7)	In attendance at an official school, religious or other recreational activity sponsored by the township, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or from such an activity, without any detour or stop, and supervised by adults; 
(8)	Exercising First Amendment rights, including free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly. 
Chapter 30 - OUTDOOR ASSEMBLIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Preamble. 
    The board of township finds and declares that the interests of the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of township require the regulation, licensing and control of assemblages of large numbers of people in excess of those normally drawing upon the health, sanitation, fire, police, transportation, utility and other public services regularly provided in this township. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.001; Ord. No. 20, § 1, 7-15-1972)
Sec. 30-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Attendant means any person who obtains admission to an outdoor assemblage whether by pass, permit, payment of money or services in lieu of payment of money for admission. 
    Licensee means any person to whom a license is issued pursuant to this chapter. 
    Outdoor assembly, or assembly means any event, all or any part of which includes a theatrical exhibition, public show, display, entertainment, amusement or other exhibition, including, but not limited to, musical festivals, rock festivals, peace festivals, or similar gatherings, but does not mean: 
(1)	An event which is conducted or sponsored by a governmental unit or agency on publicly owned land or property. 
(2)	A family reunion or family gathering at which all persons attending are related in at least the fourth degree as defined by the rules of civil law, when said reunion is being held on the property of one attending, which property has water and sanitary facilities. 
(3)	A private party being given by the owner of the parcel upon which the party is located, which parcel houses a structure with water and sanitary facilities, and also at which all those persons in attendance are nonpaying guests of the owner or of the person in rightful possession of said parcel, and also at which there are less than 100 persons in attendance. 
(4)	Any gathering of 25 people or less.
(5)	An event held entirely within the confines of a permanently enclosed and covered structure.
    Sponsor means any person who organizes, promotes, conducts, or causes to be conducted an outdoor assembly. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.002; Ord. No. 20, § 2, 7-15-1972; Ord. of 7-3-1976)
Sec. 30-3. - Violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, licensee, employee or agent to knowingly: 
(1)	Advertise, promote or sell tickets to, conduct or operate an assembly without first obtaining a license as herein provided. 
(2)	Conduct or operate an assembly in such manner as to create a public or private nuisance.
(3)	Conduct or permit, within the assembly, any obscene display, exhibition, show, play, entertainment or amusement. 
(4)	Permit any person on the premises to cause or create a disturbance in, around, or near the assembly by obscene or disorderly conduct. 
(5)	Permit any person to lawfully consume, sell or possess alcoholic liquor while on the premises. 
(6)	Permit any person to unlawfully use, sell or possess any narcotics, narcotic drugs, drugs, or other substances as defined in Article 7 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.7101 et seq.). 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.012; Ord. No. 20, § 12, 7-15-1972)
Sec. 30-4. - Exemptions. 
    Any person owning, operating, conducting or maintaining a permanent recreational facility, including, but not limited to, picnic area, park, swimming pool, or swimming beach shall be specifically exempted from compliance with this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.013; Ord. No. 20, § 13, 7-15-1972)
Sec. 30-5. - Violations as municipal civil infractions. 
    Violation of this chapter is a municipal civil infraction. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.014; Ord. No. 20, § 14, 7-15-1972; Ord. No. 124, § 2, 7-7-2008)
Secs. 30-6-30-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE 

Sec. 30-29. - Required. 
    A person shall not sponsor, operate, maintain, conduct or promote an outdoor assembly in the township unless he shall have first made application for, and obtained, as hereinafter prescribed, a license for each such assembly. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.003; Ord. No. 20, § 3, 7-15-1972)
Sec. 30-30. - Application-Fee. 
    Application for a license to conduct an outdoor assembly must be made in writing on such forms and in such manner as prescribed by the clerk of the township and shall be made at least 60 days prior to the date of the proposed assembly. Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the township board from time to time and shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)	The names, age, residence and mailing address of the person making the application. (Where the person making the application is a partnership, corporation or other association, this information shall be provided for all partners, officers and directors, or members. Where the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate of incorporation and articles of incorporation shall be filed, and the names and addresses shall be provided of all shareholders having and ownership interest greater than five percent.) 
(2)	A statement of the kind, character, purpose and type of proposed assembly.
(3)	The address, legal description and proof of ownership of the site at which the proposed assembly is to be conducted. Where ownership is not vested in the prospective licensee, he shall submit an affidavit from the owner indicating his consent to the use of the site for the proposed assembly. 
(4)	The date and hours during which the proposed assembly is to be conducted.
(5)	An estimate of the maximum number of attendants expected at the assembly for each day it is conducted and a detailed explanation of the evidence of admission which will be used and of the sequential numbering or other method which will be used for accounting purposes. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.004; Ord. No. 20, § 4, 7-15-1972)
Sec. 30-31. - Same-Accompanying information. 
(a)	Each application shall be accompanied by a detailed explanation, including drawings and diagrams where applicable, of the prospective licensee's plans to provide for the following: 
(1)	Police and fire protection.
(2)	Food and water supply and facilities.
(3)	Health and sanitation facilities.
(4)	Medical facilities and services including emergency vehicles and equipment.
(5)	Vehicle access and parking facilities.
(6)	Camping and trailer facilities.
(7)	Illumination facilities.
(8)	Communications facilities.
(9)	Noise control and abatement.
(10)	Facilities for cleanup and waste disposal.
(11)	Insurance and bonding arrangements.
(b)	In addition, the application shall be accompanied by a map of the overall site of the proposed assembly. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.005; Ord. No. 20, § 5, 7-15-1972)
Sec. 30-32. - Same-Investigation. 
    On receipt by the clerk, copies of the application shall be forwarded to the chief law enforcement and health officers for the township, the state fire marshal, and to such other appropriate public officials as the clerk deems necessary. Such officers and officials shall review and investigate matters relevant to the application and within 20 days of receipt thereof shall report their findings and recommendations to the township board. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.006; Ord. No. 20, § 6, 7-15-1972)
Sec. 30-33. - Issuance; time limit. 
    Within 30 days of the filing of the application, the township board shall issue, set conditions prerequisite to the issuance of, or deny, a license. The township board may require that adequate security or insurance be provided before a license is issued. Where conditions are imposed as prerequisite to the issuance of a license, or where a license is denied, within five days of such action, notice thereof must be mailed to the applicant by certified mail, and, in the case of denial, the reasons therefor shall be stated in the notice. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.007; Ord. No. 20, § 7, 7-15-1972)
Sec. 30-34. - Denial. 
    A license may be denied if: 
(1)	The applicant fails to comply with any or all requirements of this chapter, or with any or all conditions imposed pursuant hereto, or with any other applicable provisions of state or local law; or 
(2)	The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement in the application or in any supporting document. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.008; Ord. No. 20, § 8, 7-15-1972)
Sec. 30-35. - Content; posting. 
    A license shall specify the name and address of the licensee, the kind and location of the assembly, the maximum number of attendants permissible, the duration of the license and any other conditions imposed pursuant to this chapter. It shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises of the assembly, and shall not be transferred to any other person or location. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.009; Ord. No. 20, § 9, 7-15-1972)
Sec. 30-36. - Minimum requirements. 
    In processing an application the township board shall, at a minimum, require the following: 
(1)	Security personnel. The licensee shall employ at his own expense security personnel as are necessary and sufficient to provide for the adequate security and protection of the maximum number of attendants at the assembly and for the preservation of order and protection of property in and around the site of the assembly. No license shall be issued unless the chief law enforcement officer for the township in cooperation with the director of state police or his designatee has approved the security personnel to be used and is satisfied that such necessary and sufficient security personnel will be provided by the licensee for the duration of the assembly. 
(2)	Water facilities. The licensee shall provide potable water, sufficient in quantity and pressure to ensure proper operation of all water using facilities under conditions of peak demand. Such water shall be supplied from a public water system, if available, and if not available, then from a source constructed, located, and approved in accordance with part 127 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.12701 et seq.), and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law, or from a source and delivered and stored in a manner approved by the township health officer. 
(3)	Restroom facilities. The licensee shall provide separate enclosed flush-type water closets as defined in Public Act No. 733 of 2002 (MCL 338.3511 et seq.), and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law. If such flush-type facilities are not available the township health officer may permit the use of other facilities which are in compliance with section 12771 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.12771), and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law. The licensee shall provide lavatory and drinking water facilities constructed, installed, and maintained in accordance with Public Act No. 733 of 2002 (MCL 338.3511 et seq.), and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law. All lavatories shall be provided with hot and cold water and soap and paper towels. 
a.	The number and type of facilities required shall be determined, on the basis of the number of attendants, in the following manner: 
FacilitiesMaleFemaleToilets1:3001:200Urinals1:100Lavatories1:3001:200Drinking fountains1:5000Taps or faucets1:5000 
b.	Where the assembly is to continue for more than 12 hours, the licensee shall provide shower facilities, on the basis of the number of attendants, in the following manner: 
FacilitiesMaleFemaleShower Heads1:1001:100 
c.	All facilities shall be installed, connected, and maintained free from obstruction, leaks and defects and shall at all times be in operable condition as determined by the township health officer. 
(4)	Food service. If the assembly is distant from food service establishments open to the public, the licensee shall make food services available on the premises as will adequately feed the attendants. If food service is made available on the premises, it shall be delivered only through concessions licensed and operated in accordance with the provisions of Public Act No. 92 of 2000 (MCL 289.1101 et seq.), and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law and approved by the township health officer. 
(5)	Medical facilities. If the assembly is not readily and quickly accessible to adequate existing medical facilities, the licensee shall be required to provide such facilities on the premises of the assembly. The kind, location, staff strength, medical and other supplies and equipment of such facilities shall be as prescribed by the township health officer. 
(6)	Liquid waste disposal. The licensee shall provide for liquid waste disposal in accordance with all rules and regulations pertaining thereto established by the township health officer. If such rules and regulations are not available or if they are inadequate, then liquid waste disposal shall be in accordance with the United States Public Health Service Publication No. 526, entitled "Manual of Septic Tank Practice." If liquid waste retention and disposal is dependent upon pumpers and haulers, they shall be licensed in accordance with part 117 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.11701 et seq.), and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law, and prior to issuance of any license, the licensee shall provide the township health officer with a true copy of an executed agreement in force and effect with a licensed pumper or hauler, which agreement will ensure proper, effective and frequent removal of liquid waste from the premises so as to neither create nor cause a nuisance or menace to the public health. 
(7)	Solid waste disposal. The licensee shall provide for solid waste storage on, and removal from, the premises. Storage shall be in approved, covered, flytight and rodentproof containers, provided in sufficient quantity to accommodate the number of attendants. Prior to the issuance of any license, the licensee shall provide the township health officer with a true copy of an executed agreement in force and effect with a licensed refuse collector, which agreement will assure proper, effective and frequent removal of solid waste from the premises so as to neither create nor cause a nuisance or menace to the public health. The licensee shall implement effective control measures to minimize the presence of rodents, flies, roaches and other vermin on the premises. Poisonous materials, such as insecticides or rodenticides shall not be used in any way so as to contaminate food, equipment, or otherwise constitute a hazard to the public health. Solid waste containing food waste shall be stored so as to be inaccessible to vermin. The premises shall be kept in such condition as to prevent the harborage or feeding of vermin. 
(8)	Public bathing beaches. The licensee shall provide or make available or accessible public bathing beaches only in accordance with sections 12541--12546 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.12541 et seq.), and the rules and regulations adopted thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable provision of state or local law. 
(9)	Public swimming pools. The licensee shall provide or make available public swimming pools only in accordance with sections 12521--12534 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.12521 et seq.), and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable provision of state or local law. 
(10)	Access and traffic control. The licensee shall provide for ingress to and egress from the premises so as to ensure the orderly flow of traffic onto and off the premises. Access to the premises shall be from a highway or road which is a part of the county system of highways or which is a highway maintained by the state. Traffic lanes and other space shall be provided, designated and kept open for access by ambulance, fire equipment, helicopter and other emergency vehicles. Prior to the issuance of a license, the director of the department of state police and the director of the department of state highways, or their designatees, must approve the licensee's plan for access and traffic control. 
(11)	Parking. The licensee shall provide a parking area sufficient to accommodate all motor vehicles, but in no case shall he provide less than one automobile space for every four attendants. 
(12)	Camping and trailer parking. A licensee who permits attendants to remain on the premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall provide for camping and trailer parking and facilities in accordance with sections 12501--12516 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.12501 et seq.), and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable provision by state or local law. 
(13)	Illumination. The licensee shall provide electrical illumination of all occupied areas sufficient to insure the safety and comfort of all attendants. The licensee's lighting plan shall be approved by the township electrical inspector. 
(14)	Insurance. Before the issuance of a license, the licensee shall obtain public liability insurance with limits as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the township board from time to time from a company approved by the commissioner of insurance of the state, which insurance shall insure liability for death or injury to persons or damage to property which may result from the conduct of the assembly or conduct incident thereto and which insurance shall remain in full force and effect in the specified amounts for the duration of the license. The evidence of insurance shall include an endorsement to the effect that the insurance company shall notify the township clerk in writing at least ten days before the expiration or cancellation of said insurance. 
(15)	Bonding. Before the issuance of a license, the licensee shall obtain from a corporate bonding company authorized to do business in this state, a corporate surety bond in the amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the township board from time to time, in a form to be approved by the township attorney, conditioned upon the licensee's faithful compliance with all of the terms and provisions of this chapter and all applicable provisions of state or local law, and which shall indemnify the township, its agents, officers, and employees and the township board against any and all loss, injury or damage whatever arising out of or in any way connected with the assembly, and which shall indemnify the owners of property adjoining the assembly site for any costs attributable to cleaning up and/or removing debris, trash, or other waste resultant from the assembly. 
(16)	Fire protection. The licensee shall, at his own expense, take such steps to provide equipment, supplies or whatever to insure fire protection as prescribed or determined by the state fire marshal and the chief of the fire department of township. 
(17)	Sound producing equipment. Sound producing equipment, including, but not limited to, public address systems, radios, phonographs, musical instruments and other recording devices, shall not be operated on the premises of the assembly so as to be unreasonably loud or raucous, or so as to be a nuisance or disturbance to the peace and tranquility of the citizens of the township. In no instance shall the overall noise level, whether produced by the attendants, performers, musical instruments, general equipment, amplification equipment, public address system or combination thereof, exceed 90 dBA (decibels on the "a" scale) in a sound meter having characteristics defined by the American Standards Association, S1, 4-1966 "general purpose sound meter," measured at any point at a right angle to the assembly 1,000 feet from the periphery of the outer bounds of the assembly as described in the license. 
(18)	Fencing. The licensee shall erect a fence completely enclosing the site, of sufficient height and strength as will preclude persons in excess of the maximum permissible attendants from gaining access and which will have sufficient gates properly located as to provide ready and safe ingress and egress. 
(19)	Communications. The licensee shall provide public telephone equipment for general use on the basis of at least one unit for each 1,000 attendants. 
(20)	Miscellaneous. Prior to the issuance of a license, the township board may impose any other condition reasonably calculated to protect the health, safety, welfare and property of attendants or of citizens of the township. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.010; Ord. No. 20, § 10, 7-15-1972)
Sec. 30-37. - License revocation. 
    The township board may revoke a license whenever the licensee, his employee or agent fails, neglects or refuses to fully comply with any and all provisions and requirements set forth herein or with any and all provisions, regulations, ordinances, statutes, or other laws incorporated herein by reference. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.011; Ord. No. 20, § 11, 7-15-1972)
Chapter 32 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to operate recreation and playgrounds, MCL 123.51 et seq.; playground equipment safety act, MCL 408.681 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 32-1-32-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARK REGULATIONS 

Sec. 32-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Enforcement official means the person authorized to enforce ordinances and the laws in township, including, but not limited to, the state police and county sheriff's department, and shall further include such person specifically authorized by the board to serve in the capacity of ordinance enforcement officer as designated in this or any other ordinance of the township. 
    Park means an area owned and/or maintained by the township for park purposes, and designated as such by the board, provided, however, property owned by the township for future park purposes, and not designated as being an open park by the board, shall not be considered as being a park for purposes of this article. 
    Park committee means the park committee designated by the board. 
    Recreation director shall be the head of the township parks and recreation department unless the board appoints some other person by resolution. 
    Special permit means a permit, which may be granted pursuant to section 32-22. 
    Vehicle means an automobile, truck, motorcycle, and/or any other motor driven vehicle, or other vehicle customarily pulled or pushed by a motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 120, art. III, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 32-20. - Schedule. 
(a)	Parks shall be open each day, including Sundays and all holidays unless otherwise resolved by the board and posted in particular instances. 
(b)	Parks shall be open for public use during the hours of 8:30 a.m. to 9:30 p.m., and/or during such other longer of more restrictive hours as the recreation director may determine and post, and/or as otherwise expressly provided for in a special permit. 
(c)	All regularly scheduled recreation department activities shall have priority over all other activities in the park. 
(Ord. No. 120, art. IV, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 32-21. - Prohibited uses and acts. 
    The following uses and acts shall be prohibited in all parks, subject to express authorization to the contrary in a special permit: 
(1)	Entering or remaining in a park at a time not authorized in section 32-20. 
(2)	Interfering, injuring, destroying, impairing and/or removing of wildlife, or the habitat of wildlife. 
(3)	Causing any vehicle to be operated or parked except in areas designated for such purposes.
(4)	Obstructing any walkway or driveway.
(5)	Defacing, marring, removing or in any manner damaging any monument, park improvement, tree, shrub, flower, plant, equipment, fixture, or any other earth of dirt or other property constituting a part of the park. 
(6)	Engaging in begging or solicitation.
(7)	Placing or depositing garbage, glass, tin cans, paper waste or other refuse in any location except in a container provided for such purpose. 
(8)	Polluting any water.
(9)	Bringing an animal into a park except dogs on leashes no longer than 6 feet, and Seeing Eye dogs and dogs trained and used to assist persons with special needs. Persons bringing dogs into the park, other than the service dogs, shall clean up after their animals by picking up waste material, placing it in a plastic bag, and disposing of the bags in park trash receptacles. 
(10)	Igniting or using a ground fire or open fire, providing this restriction shall not be applicable to barbecue burners for cooking and picnic areas where such burners are continuously attended. 
(11)	Leaving the park without first extinguishing a fire which a person has ignited.
(12)	Camping or temporarily lodging except under written special permits from the board.
(13)	Loitering.
(14)	Discharging any firearm, air gun, slingshot, trap or spring propelled gun, bows and arrows, and cross bows. 
(15)	Possession or use of alcohol, tobacco or controlled substances.
(16)	Loud music, concerts, special events, not allowed except under written special permits from the board. 
(17)	Climbing of trees or fence.
(18)	Fighting.
(19)	Careless driving.
(20)	Parking in handicap parking spaces without a handicap parking permit.
(21)	Failing to obey the directions of an enforcement official while on park property.
(22)	Engaging in any activity that causes damage to the playing fields.
(23)	Interfering with or preventing an enforcement official and/or township employee from discharging his lawful duty in a park, or in connection with a park matter. 
(24)	All activities described in section 32-22(c) except after issuance and display of a valid special permit. 
(Ord. No. 120, art. V, 3-17-2008; Ord. No. 147-12, §§ 3, 4, 10-29-2012)
Sec. 32-22. - Special permit procedures. 
(a)	Any person desiring to use a park at a time or in a manner not otherwise permitted hereunder, or as otherwise specified in recreation department regulations, may submit to the recreation department a request for authorization by way of written application. Such application may be granted in whole or in part, with or without conditions, as provided below. Rights under a special permit may be exercised to the limited extent expressly authorized therein, only after the permit has been issued, and only for the limited period of the time stated therein. The application for a special permit shall first be submitted to the recreation director who shall have the authority to render a decision. The recreation director shall also have the discretion to send a request for special permit to the township board for its review and decision. 
(b)	The application shall be made on the form provided by and submitted to the board. The application shall contain at least the following: 
(1)	Name, address, phone number and signature of the applicant, who shall be a person responsible for the compliance with the permit. 
(2)	Name of the organization, if any, desiring to exercise rights under the special permit.
(3)	Date and specific time periods proposed for special permit use.
(4)	Name of the park proposed to be used under the special permit.
(5)	Specific statement of each and every deviation from this article requested, or other activity as specified under subsection (c) of this section, identifying with respect to each the section number of this article involved. 
(6)	All safety or other precautions or measures to be taken in order to insure and protect the health, safety, peace and general welfare, particularly with regard to the deviations sought. 
(7)	Proof of insurance in connection with the activity sought to be undertaken, with the name of the insurance company and limits of liability. 
(8)	A description of the supervision and maintenance proposed for the activity.
(c)	The recreation director may review and grant a special permit for the following activities in a park, provided that the appropriate information has been included on the form and provided required fees are remitted: 
(1)	Causing or participating in a picnic or other function at which there are 50 or more persons in attendance, including any spectators, at any given time. 
(2)	Reserving, in advance, a park or any portion thereof, for exclusive use.
(3)	Selling or offering for sale any goods or services.
(4)	Placing or affixing any sign, advertisement or display in the park.
(5)	Using amplifiers, loudspeakers, and/or the like.
(6)	Using the park at earlier or later times of day then otherwise permitted.
(7)	Classic car show and/or motorcycle show.
(8)	Any form of tournament play.
(9)	Outdoor movie theaters.
(10)	School functions or field trips.
(11)	Company events for registered nonprofit youth organizations.
(d)	Applications for a special permit for purposes not listed under subsection (c) of this section, shall be submitted to the board for action, along with any recommendations or comments deemed appropriate by the recreation director. In the review of an application, the following standards shall be applied. 
(1)	The rights of other persons likely to be using the park at the time in question, and rights of persons on surrounding property, shall not be unreasonably impaired and prejudiced, viewed in relation to the objectives and purpose of the park. 
(2)	Reasonable precautions and measures shall be taken and exercised in order to protect the public health and safety, peace and welfare, with particular regard to the deviations sought. 
(3)	The adequacy of supervision.
(4)	The clarity with which it has been demonstrated that the proposed use or activity sought in the special permit will not result in public and/or private harm, injury, damage and/or unreasonable annoyance. 
(e)	A special permit may be granted or denied, in whole or in part, or may be granted, in whole or in part, with reasonable conditions, provided such conditions shall be reasonably designed and calculated to achieve the objectives and protections of this article. An interested person aggrieved by a decision of the recreation director may request a review by the township board. It shall be within the discretion of the township board whether to review the decision and whether to affirm, reverse or amend the decision of the recreation director. 
(Ord. No. 120, art. VI, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 32-23. - Penalties. 
(a)	Violation of section 32-21(3), (19), [or] (20) is a civil infraction. 
(b)	A person in violation of any other section of article II [of this chapter] shall be subject to either or both of the following, at the discretion of the court: 
(1)	Ejectment from park by the enforcement official.
(2)	Misdemeanor arrest and/or citation.
(Ord. No. 120, art. VII, 3-17-2008; Ord. No. 134-11, §§ 1, 2, 7-5-2011)
Chapter 34 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Home solicitation sales, MCL 445.111 et seq.; transient merchants, MCL 445.371 et seq.; charitable organizations and solicitations act, MCL 400.271 et seq.; public safety solicitation act, MCL 14.301 et seq.; veteran's license for peddlers, MCL 35.441 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Registered solicitor means and includes, any person who has obtained a valid certificate of registration as hereinafter provided, which certificate is in the possession of the solicitor and on his or her person while engaged in soliciting. 
    Residence means and includes, every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure. 
    Soliciting means and includes, any one or more of the following activities: 
(1)	Seeking to sell or obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services, and the like of any kind, character or description whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever; 
(2)	Seeking to sell or obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of insurance of any kind, type, or character; 
(3)	Seeking to sell or obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind of publication; 
(4)	Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other valuable things for the support or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit association, organization, corporation or project; or 
(5)	Seeking to sell or vend ice cream, foodstuffs, wares, or other articles of whatever nature from any vehicle, on or off of any street, roadway, alley, highway or other passageway within this municipality, whether said vehicle is motorized or not. At any given location said vehicles shall not stand, stop or park for a period of longer than 15 minutes providing said standing, stopping, or parking is not in violation of any local ordinance or state statutes. 
The activities described in this section shall not be deemed to be soliciting if the activity takes place in a permanent structure open for business purposes, and if said activities are a part of that business purpose. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 20.121-20.123; Ord. No. 47, §§ 2.1-2.3, 8-29-1977; Ord. of 3-18-1985) 
Sec. 34-2. - Instructions to solicitors. 
    Every person desiring to secure the protection provided by these regulations pertaining to soliciting shall comply with the following directions, to-wit: 
(1)	Any persons soliciting within the township shall abide by any instructions given any person so soliciting by the occupant of any residence within township where said instructions are an invitation to the solicitor to come upon the premises, or a denial to the solicitor of access to the premises. Said instructions may be oral or in writing, and if in writing, said instructions shall be in the following form: 
A weatherproof card approximately three inches by four inches in size shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence, indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the words, as follows: 1) "ONLY SOLICITORS REGISTERED IN BRANDON TOWNSHIP INVITED" or, 2) "NO SOLICITORS INVITED". The letters on such cards shall be at least one-third inch in height. For the purpose of uniformity, the clerk may, on the direction of the township board, provide such cards to township residents at the cost thereof. 
(2)	Any such card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the directions contained on said card, and any violation of such directions shall be deemed a trespass, punishable as a violation hereof. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 20.141, 20.142; Ord. No. 47, §§ 4.1, 4.2, 8-29-1977)
Sec. 34-3. - Request to leave. 
    Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peaceably depart from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant, and any refusal to do so shall be deemed a trespass, and a violation hereof. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.143; Ord. No. 47, § 4.3, 8-29-1977)
Sec. 34-4. - Hours. 
    It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person whether registered under this article or not, to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof, or engage in soliciting as herein defined, prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. of any day. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.153; Ord. No. 47, § 5.3, 8-29-1977)
Sec. 34-5. - Groups exempted. 
(a)	The township board may, by resolution, declare any nonprofit charitable group to be exempt herefrom. 
(b)	No exception shall be for more than a 30-day period.
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 20.161, 20.162; Ord. No. 47, §§ 6.1, 6.2, 8-29-1977)
Sec. 34-6. - State requirements upheld. 
    Nothing contained herein shall in any event be construed or effected so as to avoid or mitigate against any requirement of the state whatsoever. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.170; Ord. No. 47, § 7.1, 8-29-1977)
Sec. 34-7. - Violations as municipal civil infractions. 
    Violation of this chapter is a municipal civil infraction. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.181; Ord. No. 47, § 8.1, 8-29-1977; Ord. No. 124, § 2, 7-7-2008) 
Secs. 34-8-34-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGISTRATION 

Sec. 34-35. - Certificate of registration required. 
    Every person desiring to engage in soliciting as herein defined from persons or residences within this municipality shall, prior to engaging in such solicitation, make written application for and in fact obtain a certificate of registration as herein provided. Such certificate shall be carried by the solicitor. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.131; Ord. No. 47, § 3.1, 8-29-1977)
Sec. 34-36. - Application for certificate of registration. 
    Application for certificate of registration shall be made to the township clerk upon a form provided by the township. The applicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested on the application, to-wit: 
(1)	Name and address of present place of residence and length of residence at such address; also business address other than present address; 
(2)	Address of place of residence during the past three years if other than present address;
(3)	Age of the applicant;
(4)	Physical description of the applicant;
(5)	Name and address of the person, corporation or association whom the applicant is employed by or represents; and the length of time of such employment or representation; 
(6)	Name and address of employer during the past three years, if other than the present employer; 
(7)	Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the soliciting in which the applicant will engage; 
(8)	Period of time for which the certificate is sought;
(9)	The date or approximate date of the latest previous application for certificate under this article, if any; 
(10)	Whether a certificate of registration issued to the applicant under this article ever been revoked; 
(11)	Whether the applicant ever been convicted of a violation of a felony under the laws of the state or any other state or federal law of the United States. 
All statements made by the applicant under the application or in connection therewith shall be under oath, and sworn to. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.132; Ord. No. 47, § 3.2, 8-29-1977)
Sec. 34-37. - Fees. 
    The fee for a certificate of registration under this article shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the township board from time to time. 
Sec. 34-38. - Records. 
    The township clerk shall cause to be kept in the clerk's office an accurate record of every application received and acted upon together with all other information and data pertaining thereto and all certificates of registration issued under the provisions of this article. The clerk shall also keep a record of the denial of any such applications as are denied. Applications for certificates shall be numbered in consecutive order as filed, and every certificate issued, and any renewal thereof, shall be identified with a duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.133; Ord. No. 47, § 3.3, 8-29-1977)
Sec. 34-39. - When certificate will not be issued. 
    No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the state or any other state or any federal law of the United States, within five years of the date of the application; nor shall any certificate of registration be issued to any person who has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article, nor to any person whose certificate of registration issued hereunder has previously been revoked as herein provided. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.134; Ord. No. 47, § 3.4, 8-29-1977)
Sec. 34-40. - Revocation. 
    Any certificate of registration issued hereunder shall be revoked by the clerk if the holder of the certificate is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article, or if the holder of any certificate has made a false material statement in the application, or if the holder of any certificate otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a certificate of registration in accordance with the terms of this article. Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the clerk to the holder of this certificate in person or by mail addressed to his residence address as set forth in the application. Immediately upon the giving of such notice, or the mailing thereof, as aforesaid, whichever first occurs, such certificate of registration shall become null and void. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.135; Ord. No. 47, § 3.5, 8-29-1977)
Sec. 34-41. - Time period. 
    The certificate of registration, when issued, shall be for a period of time applied for in accordance with the application as aforesaid or for 30 days, whichever period is the shorter, and said certificate shall state thereon the expiration date thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.136; Ord. No. 47, § 3.6, 8-29-1977)
Sec. 34-42. - Compliance with ordinances, laws. 
    Upon the compliance of the terms hereof, any person bearing a certificate of registration shall be entitled to solicit, so long as said solicitations are otherwise in compliance with applicable local ordinance and state and federal law. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.137; Ord. No. 47, § 3.7, 8-29-1977)
Chapter 36 - SECONDHAND GOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Licensing of secondhand and junk dealers, MCL 445.401 et seq.; pawnbrokers licensing, MCL 446.201 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 36-1-36-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - JUNKYARDS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Licensing and regulation of secondhand and junk dealers, MCL 445.401 et seq.; junkyards near highways, MCL 252.201 et seq.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 36-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Junkyard shall have the meaning ascribed to it in chapter 46. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.210; Ord. No. 4, art. 1, 12-6-1976)
Sec. 36-20. - Record required. 
    Every person licensed under the provisions of this article shall keep a suitable book containing the full name and address of every person from whom any junk or motor vehicle or any part thereof is purchased, with a full and complete description of the property acquired and the date of the purchase. Such record shall be open to the inspection at any time by any enforcement officers of the state, county or of township. No purchase of any property shall be made from any person under the age of 18 years without the written approval of such person's parent or guardian, which approval shall be filed with the record of such purchase. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.240; Ord. No. 4, § 4.1, 12-6-1976)
Sec. 36-21. - Violations as municipal civil infractions. 
    Violation of this article is a municipal civil infraction. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.260; Ord. No. 4, § 6.1, 12-6-1976; Ord. No. 124, § 2, 7-7-2008)
Secs. 36-22-36-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 36-46. - License required. 
    No person shall operate or maintain a junkyard or place for the dismantling of motor vehicles, or engage in or carry on the business of dealing in junk or the dismantling of motor vehicles in the township, without first having secured a license from the township board in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.221; Ord. No. 4, § 2.1, 12-6-1976)
Sec. 36-47. - Application form; fee. 
    All applications for a license under the provisions of this article shall be in writing, verified by the applicant, on a form furnished by the township clerk, which form shall be prepared in a manner as instructed by the township board by resolution. The application shall be accompanied by the license fee, which fee shall be as determined from time to time by the township board, and which fee shall be established by resolution, a copy of which shall be attached to this article and be deemed a part hereof. Upon the approval of the application, the fee shall be paid into the township general fund, and in the event said application is not approved, such portion of the fee as the township board shall deem proper by resolution shall be returned to the applicant. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.231; Ord. No. 4, § 3.1, 12-6-1976)
Sec. 36-48. - Township board hearing. 
    Upon the receipt of an application hereunder, the township clerk shall present said application to the township board at the township board's next regular meeting, or at a special meeting called for that purpose or any other purpose. Upon receipt of the application, the township board may, upon ascertaining that all requirements hereunder are complied with, direct the issuance of a license, or in the alternative, the board may adjourn the hearing for the purpose of holding a public hearing or for the purpose of securing such additional information regarding the application as may be necessary for decision thereon. No license shall be issued unless the application therefor is first approved by a majority of the members of township board. The board may, in its discretion, refuse to grant any license applied for hereunder when in its judgment, the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of township shall require. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.232; Ord. No. 4, § 3.2, 12-6-1976)
Sec. 36-49. - Bond. 
    No license shall be issued hereunder until the applicant shall have deposited with the township clerk a bond in the penal sum as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the township board from time to time in a form as approved by the township board, and conditioned upon the fact that the applicant will faithfully abide by all provisions of state law and of this division during the continuation of such license. Upon any violation of any applicable state law, or of any of the terms of this division, the township board may, by majority vote, direct the forfeiture of any such bond. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.233; Ord. No. 4, § 3.3, 12-6-1976)
Sec. 36-50. - Procedures for revocation. 
    Any license issued hereunder may be revoked by the township board for any violation by the licensee of the laws of this state or the ordinances of this township. Upon receiving notice of such violation, the township board shall fix a date for hearing thereon, and the township clerk shall give the licensee written notice thereon of at least five days in advance of such hearing. Upon the date of hearing, or any adjournment thereof, the board shall hear the evidence produced touching upon said alleged violation, and if it appears that the licensee is guilty thereof, the board may adopt a resolution revoking the license theretofore granted. In the event of such revocation, any fees, bonds, or other funds paid the township by the licensee shall be deemed forfeited. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.250; Ord. No. 4, § 5.1, 12-6-1976)
Chapter 38 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Garbage disposal act, MCL 123.361 et seq.; solid waste facilities, MCL 324.4301 et seq.; hazardous waste management act, MCL 324.11101 et seq.; hazardous materials transportation act, MCL 29.471 et seq.; solid waste management act, MCL 324.11501 et seq.; waste reduction assistance act, MCL 324.14501 et seq.; clean Michigan fund act, MCL 324.19101 et seq.; low-level radioactive waste authority act, MCL 333.26201 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1-38-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 38-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Garbage means rejected food wastes including waste accumulation of animal, fruit, or vegetable matter used or intended for food or that results from the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in, or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit, or vegetable matter. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste, including paper, cardboard, metal containers, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, demolished building materials, or litter of any kind that may be a detriment to the public health and safety. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-151; Ord. No. 9A, § 1, 7-20-1964)
Sec. 38-20. - Receptacles. 
    It shall be the duty of owners, proprietors or persons in charge of every residential premises, commercial property, manufacturing establishment or other structure in the township to place or cause to be placed any decaying vegetable or animal substance, garbage, or any substance that may be injurious to the public health or a source of filth, in a suitable receptacle which shall be covered at all times with an appropriate cover. All individuals, persons, firms or corporations subject to the provisions of this regulation shall provide a sufficient number of containers to store all garbage from said premises and structures in accordance with the terms hereof. All receptacles shall be thoroughly cleaned by the owners as often as shall be necessary in order to prevent insects and rodents from being attracted thereto and from emitting offensive odors. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-152; Ord. No. 9A, § 2, 7-20-1964)
Sec. 38-21. - Storage. 
    No garbage or any substances, that may be injurious to the public health or a source of filth may be stored in receptacles on any premises for a period in excess of ten days. Containers or receptacles for garbage and/or rubbish may be kept only in the back portion of any building or structure for a continuous period in excess of 24 hours. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-153; Ord. No. 9A, § 3, 7-20-1964)
Sec. 38-22. - Transportation. 
    All garbage and rubbish transported within the limits of township shall be carried in an enclosed truck or watertight containers, and shall be moved in such a manner that no part thereof will be deposited upon the public roadways or private property. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-154; Ord. No. 9A, § 4, 7-20-1964)
Sec. 38-23. - Disposal of rubbish. 
    All rubbish deposited on premises in township shall be covered and so managed and controlled so as not to become a nuisance, a fire hazard, a breeding ground for rodents or vermin or in any way endanger the health or welfare of any person. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-157; Ord. No. 9A, § 7, 7-20-1964)
Sec. 38-24. - Violations as municipal civil infractions. 
    Violation of this article is a municipal civil infraction, and the sanction for a violation shall be a civil fine in the amount as provided by this article. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 35-158; Ord. No. 9A, § 8, 7-20-1964; Ord. No. 124, § 2, 7-7-2008)
Secs. 38-25-38-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LANDFILLS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-52. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ashes means the residue from burning of wood, coal, coke, refuse, wastewater sludge or other combustible materials. 
    Bulky wastes means large items of refuse including but not limited to appliances, vehicles, furniture, large auto parts, tires, trees and branches, stumps, and flotage. 
    Cell means compacted refuse completely enveloped by cover material. 
    Garbage means rejected food wastes including waste accumulation of animal, fruit, or vegetable matter used or intended for food or that results from the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in, or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit, or vegetable matter. 
    Groundwater means any water found under the surface of the earth. 
    Hazardous wastes means any material including, but not limited to, explosives, pathological wastes, pesticides and chemicals (including empty containers previously used for such materials) which, when discharged on land, into the air, or into or upon surface waters or groundwaters, presents an imminent and substantial danger to public health or welfare or to elements of the human environment, including, but not limited to, aquatic organisms, fish, shellfish, terrestrial life, birds and other wildlife. 
    Impermeable means a hydraulic conductivity of no greater than 1 × 10-7 centimeters per second as determined by field and/or laboratory tests made according to standard test methods. 
    Industrial solid waste means any waste substance or a combination thereof resulting from the operation of or from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade or business, or from the development of any agricultural or natural resources. 
    Inert solid wastes means wastes including but not limited to, glass, crockery, brick, plastics, rubber or other materials, which are shown through analytical testing to have minimum potential for environmental degradation and leachate production. 
    Landfill means any disposal area or tract of land, including buildings and appurtenances, that is used to receive, dispose of, bury, or cover over refuse. 
    Leachate means fluid that has percolated through, or come into contact with, solid waste and which contains contaminants consisting of dissolved or suspended materials, chemicals or microbial waste products from the solid waste. 
    Lift means a layer of refuse cells. 
    Other wastes means garbage, refuse, decayed wood, sawdust, shavings, bark, lime cinders, offal, and all discarded materials other than sewage or industrial waste. 
    Refuse means any putrescible or nonputrescible solid waste, except human excreta, but including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleaning, dead animals, offal, and solid agricultural, commercial, industrial, hazardous and institutional wastes and construction wastes. 
    Rubbish, combustible means miscellaneous burnable solid waste, excluding garbage and high putrescible wastes, but including paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, bedding, leather, grass, leaves and yard trimmings, and certain inorganic materials such as plastics. 
    Rubbish, noncombustible means miscellaneous solid waste materials that will not burn at ordinary incinerator operating temperatures (1300 Fahrenheit to 2000 Fahrenheit) including tin cans, metals, dirt, ceramics and glass. 
    Sewage means water-carried human or animal wastes from septic tanks, water closets, residences, building, industrial and municipal establishments, or other places, together with such groundwater infiltration, subsurface water, mixtures of industrial wastes or other wastes as may be present. 
    Solid waste means garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator ash, incinerator residue, street cleanings, municipal and industrial sludges, solid commercial and solid industrial waste, and animal waste other than organic waste generated in the production of livestock and poultry. However, solid waste does not include the items excepted in the definition of solid waste in MCL 324.11506. 
    Special solid waste means hazardous wastes, radioactive wastes, agricultural wastes, industrial wastes or sludges and sewage residues. 
    Surface waters means water occurring generally on the surface of the earth. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.320; Ord. No. 46, art. 2, 10-8-1977)
Secs. 38-53-38-77. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 38-78. - Required. 
    From and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, no person shall operate a landfill in the township except in accordance with a permit issued by authority of and according to the terms of this division, including compliance with application requirements. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.331; Ord. No. 46, § 3.1, 10-8-1977)
Sec. 38-79. - Exceptions. 
    No permit shall be required for the filling of land with inert solid waste, noncombustible rubbish, sand, gravel, earth, rock, concrete, or other similar materials, excluding ashes, when such filling is an element of construction activity for which a building permit has been issued, or when such filling is less than 100 cubic yards in volume. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.333; Ord. No. 46, § 3.3, 10-8-1977)
Sec. 38-80. - Consult planning commission. 
    The board shall first seek the findings and recommendations of the township planning commission on each application. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.341; Ord. No. 46, § 4.1, 10-8-1977)
Sec. 38-81. - Planning commission hearing. 
    The planning commission shall hold a public hearing so as to provide for public input into the consideration of said application. Notice of such hearing shall be given at least seven days prior to the date scheduled for such hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.342; Ord. No. 46, § 4.2, 10-8-1977)
Sec. 38-82. - Planning commission recommendation. 
    After the public hearing and after considering all available facts and details, the planning commission shall recommend issuance of a permit only if it finds that: 
(1)	The granting of said permit will not be injurious to the public health, safety, and welfare of the township and its residents; 
(2)	There has been compliance with all the requirements and standards of this division, and the other applicable township ordinances, standards and regulations; 
(3)	The proposed operation will not create an unreasonable hazard, annoyance or inconvenience to the owners or occupants of nearby property; and 
(4)	It will not create any significant obstacle to the implementation of the intent of the plan for township development as evidenced by the zoning ordinance and the master plan of the township. The planning commission may recommend such additional conditions to the granting of the permit as it finds necessary to insure that the intent and purpose of this division is fulfilled. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.343; Ord. No. 46, § 4.3, 10-8-1977)
Sec. 38-83. - Acting upon application. 
    The board shall review said recommendation and act upon the application. The board may direct the township building department to issue a permit for the operation of a landfill for a period of up to one year, expiring on October 31 of each year, and renewable annually at the discretion and direction of the board. The board may attach such conditions to the granting and the renewal of the permit as it finds necessary to insure that the intent and purpose of this division are fulfilled, such conditions on renewal may include changes in the face value of bonds required by section 38-88. Any violation of a condition included in the permit shall constitute a violation of this division and shall entitle the board to revoke or refuse to renew the permit, together with such other remedies as may be applicable hereunder. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.344; Ord. No. 46, § 4.4, 10-8-1977)
Sec. 38-84. - Application-Information. 
    An applicant for a permit shall pay such fees and/or costs as are required by resolution of the township board and shall submit to the township board an application containing the following information: 
(1)	Legal description. A legal description of the premises wherein the operations are proposed shall be provided. 
(2)	Legal interest. Names and addresses of all parties having an interest in said premises setting forth their legal interest. Proof of legal interest shall be provided. 
(3)	Similar operations. Details of similar operations carried on by the applicant. 
(4)	Proposed final land use. A statement which specifies in detail the proposed use of the land after completion of landfill operations. The final grades presented shall be consistent with the purposes for the proposed use of the property after completion. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 20.350-20.354; Ord. No. 46, art. 5, § A-D, 10-8-1977)
Sec. 38-85. - Same-Detailed technical contents. 
    A permit application, prepared by a professional engineer experienced in civil engineering and registered in the state, shall contain or be accompanied by the following information: 
(1)	Survey maps may be prepared by a professional land surveyor registered in the state.
(2)	Background data.
a.	An estimate of the total amount of refuse to be filled and the period of time of such operations. 
b.	Estimated present and future populations and geographic areas to be served.
c.	Anticipated ratio of the maximum daily incoming volumes to the average daily incoming volumes. 
d.	Estimated average and maximum daily number of refuse hauling vehicles to enter the site. 
(3)	Maps drawn to the scale of 100 feet to the inch or larger showing the following information:
a.	Property boundaries.
b.	Topographic survey map with two-foot contour interval and a scale of one inch to 100 feet. 
c.	Access road location.
d.	On-site road locations.
e.	Proposed traffic patterns.
f.	Location of fencing.
g.	Location of any weighing facilities.
h.	Location of existing and proposed utilities.
i.	Indication of use of adjoining land.
j.	Borrow and soil storage areas.
k.	Location of public and private water supplies, wells, springs, streams, swamps, or other bodies of water within one-fourth of a mile of the proposed landfill site property line. 
l.	Location of gas and oil wells.
m.	Location of high-tension power line rights-of-way.
n.	Location of fuel transmission pipeline rights-of-way.
o.	Location of mining operations within one-fourth of one mile of property lines of the proposed landfill. 
p.	Existing or proposed on-site structures.
q.	Direction and intensity of prevailing winds and normal variation.
(4)	Design plans.
a.	A plan of operations specific as to areas to be filled; schedule of filling; site preparations, excavations, and balancing; source and types of materials to be used as cover. 
b.	A detailed statement as to the methods of operation including the type and number of machinery or equipment to be used. 
c.	Details relative to:
1.	Compaction of solid wastes.
2.	Application of daily cover material.
3.	Elevation and grade of final cover.
4.	Linear construction.
5.	Leachate collection treatment and recirculation or disposal.
6.	Management of groundwater.
7.	Management of surface water.
8.	Erosion control.
9.	Revegetation procedures to be used.
10.	Typical cross section of lifts, dimensions and elevations of the base lifts.
11.	Grades required for proper drainage of lifts.
12.	Methods for control and disposal of potentially contaminated runoff occurring during landfill operation. 
13.	Decomposition gas control measures.
14.	Construction of berms and other barriers.
15.	Paper and litter control measures.
(5)	Hydrogeologic investigation and report. A soils, geologic and groundwater report of the characteristics of the proposed site, prepared by a competent hydrogeologist and based on a geological investigation showing the following: 
a.	Borings and wells in sufficient number and depth to determine, with reasonable confidence, the characteristics of the soils, geology and groundwater flows over the site. 
1.	Borings and wells shall be drilled ten feet into the groundwater or 20 feet below the base of the proposed landfill, whichever is deeper. 
2.	One well shall be drilled near the point of highest ground surface elevation, ten feet into the groundwater. 
3.	A minimum of one groundwater elevation and quality monitoring well shall be drilled in each dominant direction of groundwater movement, down-gradient of refuse placement. One monitoring well shall be installed up-gradient of refuse placement. Groundwater monitoring well screens shall be inserted so that the top of the screen is five feet below the yearly low groundwater table elevation in unconfined aquifers. 
4.	All useable aquifers underlying the proposed landfill site and within one-fourth mile of the site shall be delineated. 
b.	All wells and bore holes shall be suitably plugged upon completion of the investigation, excluding extended use monitoring wells. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.355; Ord. No. 46, art. 5, § E, 10-8-1977)
Sec. 38-86. - Environmental impact statement. 
    An environmental impact statement (EIS) shall be prepared and submitted with the application for permit for all activities permitted under this division. The content and detail of the EIS shall be commensurate with the size and potential impact of the activity. The EIS shall assess the magnitude and importance of the short and long term effects of the activity on the human environment. The degree to which the activity affects the likelihood of future, nearby, similar activities and the probable, cumulative environmental effects shall be assessed. The content and format of the EIS shall generally follow those guidelines, current at the time of application of the state environmental review board. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.356; Ord. No. 46, art. 5, § F, 10-8-1977)
Sec. 38-87. - Other information. 
    Such other information and material as the planning commission or board may require. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.357; Ord. No. 46, art. 5, § G, 10-8-1977)
Sec. 38-88. - Bonds. 
(a)	The applicant shall post a corporate surety or cash bond naming the township as the beneficiary thereof in an amount determined by the township board to be reasonably necessary to insure compliance hereunder. In no case will the sum of the surety bond be less than the amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the township board from time to time. Every bond shall guarantee compliance with this division, the permit requirements and conditions, and that the operation will be carried out according to the approved plans and specifications. Every bond shall guarantee the avoidance of harmful movement of gases or contamination to the ground or surface water and/or environment during operations and for five years after the completion thereof. Upon failure of an applicant to fulfill any of the conditions of the bond or the permit, the township may use the proceeds of the bond to go upon the landfill site and perform any acts necessary to produce compliance. By filing an application every applicant shall be deemed to have granted permission to township officials to go onto the landfill site for the purpose of bringing such property into compliance. 
(b)	In fixing the amount of such surety bond, the township board shall take into account the size and slope of the proposed operation, current prevailing costs of rehabilitating the premises, and other conditions and factors as might be relevant. The surety shall be informed by the applicant that the township must be notified in the event of any lapse in the effectiveness of the bond. Proof that the surety has been informed of this requirement shall be provided. For each acre restored and reclaimed in accordance herewith, or otherwise, a bond may be proportionately reduced as determined by the township board. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.361; Ord. No. 46, art. 6, § A, 10-8-1977)
Sec. 38-89. - Insurance. 
    The applicant shall secure and file with the township clerk certificates of insurance, insuring the applicant, his employees and/or agents or representatives, and the township, its officials, agents and employees for general comprehensive liability in an amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the township board from time to time. The certifications or renewals thereof shall provide that the township shall be notified upon discontinuance or alteration of any such insurance coverage for any reason. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.362; Ord. No. 46, art. 6, § B, 10-8-1977)
Secs. 38-90-38-114. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS 

Sec. 38-115. - General. 
(a)	Landfills consistent with the provisions of this division shall be permitted in the township so as to provide an engineered method of disposing of solid wastes on land, without creating unreasonable environmental hazards. Methods used to dispose of solid wastes shall include spreading in thin layers, confining to the smallest practical area, compacting to the smallest practical volume, and covering with suitable material at least once a day before the end of each operating day. Planning, design and operation of landfill facilities shall be based on empirically derived data and state of the technology. Landfill liners and leachate collection and treatment systems shall be incorporated in the design and operations of landfill facilities unless it can be demonstrated, through application of accepted engineering principles, that the natural hydrogeologic environment at the site is protective of the surface and groundwater resource. Demonstration of naturally protective hydrogeologic environments shall be based on: 
(1)	The hydrogeologic investigation requirements as specified herein.
(2)	Testing of the hydraulic conductivities of the natural soils below and contiguous to refuse placement. 
(3)	Testing of cation exchange capacities and overall attenuation capabilities of the natural soils below and contiguous to refuse placement. Chemical and physical natural soil testing shall be undertaken on undisturbed natural soils or on disturbed natural soils which are restored to field bulk density and moisture content level. Contaminant attenuation capacity testing shall be performed with representative municipal refuse leachate or with solutions specifically approved by the township. 
(4)	Minerological evaluations.
(5)	Soils testing by competent soils scientists and/or hydrogeologists.
(b)	Design plans shall include provisions for control of decomposition gases. Monitoring of decomposition gases may be required. Sanitary landfills shall be operated so as to create an environment which is aesthetically acceptable and to preclude pollution of land, air, and surface and groundwater resources. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.371; Ord. No. 46, art. 7, § A, 10-8-1977)
Sec. 38-116. - General provisions. 
    The operation of a sanitary landfill shall be conducted in a manner which prohibits insect and rodent breeding, excessive odor, excessive dust and fires. Special wastes shall be disposed of separately and immediately in accordance with the provisions of this division. The site shall be maintained in such condition as to reasonably conceal all evidence of solid waste disposal. Access to the site shall be limited to landfill employees and those persons specifically authorized access to the site. This provision shall not be construed to limit the right of entry by the township supervisor or his duly authorized representative. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.372; Ord. No. 46, art. 7, § B, 10-8-1977)
Sec. 38-117. - Setbacks and greenbelt. 
    There shall be no filling or depositing of refuse except inert solid waste and noncombustible rubbish within 500 feet of any existing dwelling and 250 feet from any zoning district other than the general industrial zone district and from any road right-of-way. There shall be a greenbelt of not less than 25 feet on exterior property lines in accordance with the requirements as established by the board. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.374; Ord. No. 46, art. 7, § D, 10-8-1977)
Sec. 38-118. - Standards for landfill design and operation. 
(a)	Weight, volume and type. Every permit holder shall provide a means of estimating the weight and daily volume and type of solid waste being received. The weight and volume figures obtained shall be related to the various types of solid waste as defined in section 38-52. 
(b)	Access roads. Access roads to the point of waste discharge shall be designed and constructed so that traffic will flow smoothly and will not be interrupted by inclement weather. Adequate standing and parking facilities shall be provided on the site so that no packer or other collection vehicle at any time stands on a public right-of-way awaiting entrance to the site. Roads used for ingress or egress which are located within 400 feet of occupied residences, or which are also used as the main means of ingress or egress for any residence, shall be kept dust free by oiling or chemical treatment or by hardtopping with cement, or bituminous substance to a distance equal to the length of the road, but in no event for a distance greater than one mile. 
(c)	Fences. A fence, or some other suitable substitute as shall be approved by the board, a minimum of eight feet and maximum of 12 feet in height, shall enclose the filling operation to prevent the scattering of rubbish, garbage or other fill materials, to obscure the landfill from public sight, and to prevent access by unauthorized persons. 
(d)	Equipment. Adequate numbers and type of equipment commensurate with the size of the operation shall be available at the site to insure operation of landfill in accordance with the provisions of this division. Provisions shall be made for the routine operational maintenance of equipment at the landfill site. Substitute equipment shall be obtained when maintenance or breakdown renders regular operating equipment inoperative for a period in excess of 24 hours. 
(e)	Personnel. Sufficient numbers and types of personnel shall be available at the site to insure operation in accordance with this division. Competent supervision of personnel shall be provided. 
(f)	Supervision. Unloading of refuse shall be continuously supervised in accordance with the landfill design. Unloading of refuse and access to the site shall be limited to those times when the manager is on duty. 
(g)	Communication equipment. Telephone or radio communication equipment, suitable shelter, and sanitary services shall be provided for personnel at the site. 
(h)	Groundwater and surface water protection. 
(1)	Unless it is demonstrated acceptable engineering procedure that the natural hydrogeologic environment at the site will adequately protect groundwaters and surface waters, all leachate shall be collected and treated so as to provide for the removal of pollutants reflecting the application of a practicable level of technology. In such cases all refuse disposal areas and leachate collection ditches and ponds shall be lined with an impermeable liner. An artificial impermeable liner shall be installed unless the applicant can prove to the satisfaction of the township that a natural soil liner is impermeable. All treated leachate shall be recirculated into the fill area or disposed of in a manner which will adequately protect the public health and safety as determined by the board, and the water resources commission of the state. It shall be demonstrated by the applicant that groundwaters and surface waters resulting from refuse disposal and/or disposal of treated leachate will be compatible with existing and potential uses of these waters. 
(2)	Wells or other monitoring devices shall be installed and maintained to determine the initial characterization of the groundwater quality, gradient and direction of flow, and to monitor changes in these parameters during the operation of the landfill and subsequent to complete filling. At least five feet of separation between refuse deposits (or the bottom of the liner when liners are required) and the estimated yearly high groundwater table shall be maintained. When the refuse or liner is to be placed below the maximum existing groundwater level, permanent, gravity groundwater interception measures will be required to maintain the five feet of separation. In critical groundwater protection circumstances, the board may require ground and additional surface water control and/or other contingency protection measures. The refuse filling shall be kept a minimum of 300 feet from all regular flowing or standing surface waters. Operations shall be planned so that rainwater is drained off the fill or disposal area at all times, and to prevent runoff from adjacent areas from flowing onto fill areas. Standing water shall not be allowed on the fill at any time. The completed fill shall have a minimum slope of two percent to facilitate surface drainage and a maximum slope not to exceed 15 percent to avoid accelerated erosion, considering revegetation and restoration. 
(i)	Drainage. Natural drainage shall not be blocked or diverted in such a manner as to cause the natural water to back up onto adjacent property or to flow in a different course upon leaving the property upon which the blockage or diversion occurs unless a special condition is attached to the permit by the township board pursuant to plans, prepared by a professional engineer experienced in civil engineering and registered in the state, which provide for drainage which will not be detrimental to surrounding properties. 
(j)	Gases. Decomposition gases generated within a landfill shall be controlled on site. Decomposition gases shall not be allowed to migrate laterally from the landfill. Gases shall be vented into the atmosphere through cutoff trenches, forced ventilation systems, or other suitable methods, in such a way that they do not become concentrated in explosive or hazardous quantities. The ventilation system shall be maintained during operation and for a period of five years after completion or longer if deemed necessary by the township board. 
(k)	Compaction. Solid waste shall be spread and compacted in shallow layers not exceeding a depth of two feet of uncompacted material. Compaction of solid waste shall be made to the maximum extent practicable. Individual cells in sanitary landfills shall be of a width and depth commensurate with good design practice considering the types of equipment to be utilized. The working face of the cell shall be as narrow as feasible considering the number of trucks to be served simultaneously. 
(l)	Frequence and depth of cover. 
(1)	Daily cover. A layer of suitable cover material shall be placed over all solid waste as soon as possible after deposit and, at least, by the end of each working day. This layer shall be of such depth that when compacted it produces a cover layer of at least six inches in depth. The required minimum of six inches of cover shall be maintained at all times. Any disposal area at which operations cease for a period greater than six months, shall be covered with a minimum of one foot of compacted, suitable intermediate cover material, over the daily cover. 
(2)	Final cover. Final cover of suitable material compacted to a minimum thickness of two feet, shall be placed over all completed areas or cells by the end of the working day on which the area or cell is completed. Areas receiving final cover shall be seeded to provide vegetation to stabilize the cover and prevent accelerated soil erosion and dust. 
(3)	General cover requirements. Three feet of clearance shall be maintained between trenches when the trench method is used. Operations shall be planned and conducted so that the minimum possible amount of solid waste is exposed at any one time. Spraying exposed solid waste with insecticides and deodorizers and supplemental rodent control measures may be required when cover cannot be accomplished immediately or whenever such measures are necessary. 
(m)	Cover material. The soil used as the cover material shall be of such character that it can be compacted to minimize percolation of water through the cover (unless suitable leachate containment, collection, treatment and disposal and/or recirculation procedures are utilized), does not crack excessively when dry and is free of putrescible materials and large objects. Final cover shall be capable of growing and supporting vegetation. 
(n)	Salvage. Salvage operations shall not be permitted unless special provisions are approved by the board to insure that separation of the material and proper disposition are undertaken in a suitable manner. No salvage operation shall be allowed which creates unsightliness, nuisances, health hazards, or potential health or safety hazards. 
(o)	Scavenging and animal feeding. Scavenging and animal feeding on the landfill site shall not be permitted. 
(p)	Completed sections. The permittee shall inspect the entire surface of completed sections of the landfill at least quarterly following placement of the final two feet of cover material. All cracked, eroded, and uneven area shall be promptly repaired. 
(q)	Bulky wastes. Adequate provision shall be made for the handling and compaction of bulky solid waste when such wastes are not excluded from the site. Tires, as a general operational procedure, should be excluded from the site. When tires are accepted they shall be spread evenly over the bottom of the refuse cell or shreaded prior to disposal. 
(r)	Malodorous solid waste. Unusually malodorous solid wastes shall be covered immediately after disposal. 
(s)	Dust control. Suitable and adequate measures shall be taken on the site to control dust. If the site is reached by dirt or gravel road, the operator shall provide and maintain suitable dust control from the boundary of said landfill to a paved road, such control not to exceed one mile in length. 
(t)	Noise and vibration. Every effort shall be made by the permittee to minimize noise levels transmitted beyond the property line of the site. Objectionable noises due to intermittance, beat, frequency or shrillness, shall be muffled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent occupants. Every effort shall be made to prevent transmission of ground vibration beyond the property line. Noise and vibration levels of such magnitude so as to interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of adjacent properties are prohibited. 
(u)	Odors. The emission of noxious, malodorous matter in such quantities as to produce a public nuisance or hazard beyond lot lines is prohibited. Unusually malodorous solid waste shall be covered immediately after disposal. 
(v)	Glare or heat. Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed within an enclosure so as to completely obscure and shield such operation from direct view from any point along the lot line, except during the period of construction of facilities to be used and occupied. 
(w)	Light. Exterior lighting shall be so installed that the surface of the source of light shall be so arranged as far as practical to reflect light away from any residential use. 
(x)	Operating hours. Operation of any landfill compaction, refuse hauling and earthmoving equipment shall not begin before 8:00 a.m. nor end after 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday; 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon, Saturday; no such operation shall occur on Sundays and holidays. 
(y)	Burning. Burning at the site of any landfill is hereby prohibited. All precautions shall be taken to avert spontaneous combustion. 
(z)	Blowing paper. Measures shall be provided to control blowing paper and litter. Fences, the site itself and the entire area nearby, shall be policed regularly. 
(aa)	Insect and rodent control. Conditions unfavorable for the production of insects and rodents shall be maintained by carrying out routine landfill operations promptly in a systematic manner. Supplemental insect and rodent control measures shall be instituted whenever necessary. 
(bb)	Special solid waste. Special solid wastes shall not be deposited at any landfill or disposed of without first submitting a plan and obtaining the board's approval for such disposal. Hazardous waste shall not be accepted at any landfill unless the applicant documents at least five years acceptable experience in the handling of the hazardous waste and further documents that suitable equipment and trained personnel will be utilized to assure that the acceptance (and transportation) of such wastes will not jeopardize the health, safety and welfare of the public and operational personnel. Whenever hazardous waste, including, but not limited to, radioactive waste and those materials listed on the state water resources commission critical materials list, is proposed for disposal, a separate environmental impact assessment shall be required for each type of waste. The assessment shall consider past operation of the landfill and shall be of a scope consistent with the degree of hazard associated with the waste. The board may require such additional information, or attach such conditions to its approval, as it may deem necessary to assure the health, safety and welfare of the public and operational personnel. 
(cc)	Soils on public roads. The permit holder shall take whatever steps are necessary to avoid any motor vehicle's carrying any refuse onto any public right-of-way. If soil or refuse is carried or tracked onto a public right-of-way, the permit holder shall clean the right-of-way when and as often as is necessary. The board may require, as a condition of issuing or renewing a permit, the paving of access roads for the protection of general health, safety and welfare of the residents of the township and the public in general. In any case, a permit holder shall not leave any such debris or soil on a public right-of-way after the end of a working day. If notified during a working day by the township that cleaning is required, it shall be accomplished within one hour, weather permitting, of the giving of such notice. 
(dd)	Changes. The permittee shall obtain board approval before making any changes in the original plans, specifications, reports and methods of operation as submitted in the permit application. No such change shall be initiated until the written approval of the board has been obtained. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.375; Ord. No. 46, art. 7, § E, 10-8-1977)
Sec. 38-119. - Completion of landfills. 
(a)	Requirements. When the permittee decides to temporarily or permanently suspend disposal operations at a licensed site, the permittee shall so notify the township. The permittee shall not remove equipment from the site prior to approval by the township. The township shall direct the permittee to perform corrective work at the site when such work is required in order to fulfill the requirements of this division. The corrective work, if required, shall be completed before the landfill operation is suspended, or accepted as completed. An insect and rodent control program may be required as part of the completion work. 
(b)	Repair. The permittee shall repair all cracked, eroded, and uneven areas in the final cover, which occur during a five year period following completion of the landfill. During this period, the cover surface shall be reseeded if insufficient vegetation exists to stabilize the surface. 
(c)	Monitoring program. 
(1)	Ground and surface waters. A sample of groundwater shall be collected from each and every monitor well, points of discharge of intercepted groundwater (springs) and surface water bodies prior to the beginning of any landfill operations. These samples shall be analyzed for iron, chloride, hardness as CaCO3, sulfate, nitrates, chemical oxygen demand (COD), total dissolved solids (TDS), and pH. These initial samples will serve as background data against which future samples can be compared. All monitoring points shall be sampled and tested for the required parameters every three months and/or more or less frequently should the need be demonstrated. The depth to the water table from a point of known elevation shall be measured and recorded in all monitor wells prior to pumping and collection of each water quality sample. Well shall be pumped for five minutes prior to sampling. Additional guidelines for monitoring well installation and sampling may be promulgated by the township. Should any sample appear to have been influenced by the landfill operation additional sampling, monitoring points and wells, analyses and/or corrective measures may be required by the township. The monitoring and analysis program shall be continued for at least five years following completion of the landfill or longer period if required by the township. The permittee shall submit the results of all analyses to the township not later than 30 days after sample collection. Additional monitoring wells may be required when the initial monitoring wells indicate a change in the groundwater flow system. 
(2)	Decomposition gases. When monitoring points for decomposition gases are required in the landfill, the permittee shall maintain them and for at least five years following completion or a longer period if required by the township. The permittee shall submit quarterly gas composition data to the township. The township may require quarterly gas generation rate data. 
(3)	Leachate. The permittee shall maintain and operate the leachate collection and treatment system at the completed landfill for at least five years following completion or a longer period if required by the township. The permittee shall submit leachate quantity and quality data to the township for those parameters and at such frequencies as specified by the township. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.376; Ord. No. 46, art. 7, § F, 10-8-1977)
Sec. 38-120. - Required operating reports and records. 
(a)	The permittee shall maintain written records of the estimated volume and weight of solid wastes accepted at the landfill. In addition, the permittee shall maintain records of the location and completion date of each refuse lift or trench. Separate records of the same type shall be compiled for hazardous wastes. 
(b)	Separate records of the quantity and discharge quality of all leachate shall also be maintained and at such frequencies as specified by the township. All submitted records shall be signed by the landfill supervisor. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.377; Ord. No. 46, art. 7, § G, 10-8-1977)
Sec. 38-121. - Reports. 
    The permittee shall submit quarterly reports to the township. These reports shall include the following information. 
(1)	Monthly data on quantities of waste (weight and volumes) for each distinguishable type of waste including those that require separate disposal. Mixed municipal refuse may be considered as a single type of waste. 
(2)	A schedule of charges for use of the sanitary landfill.
(3)	Estimated volume of landfill used during the quarter and the landfill's projected life. 
(4)	Identification and number of lifts or trenches completed and dates completed.
(5)	During the year following final cover (completion) of areas of the landfill, the quarterly report shall include a description of the repairs effected which includes location and extent. 
(6)	The accuracy of the reports shall be verified by signature of the permittee.
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.378; Ord. No. 46, art. 7, § H, 10-8-1977)
Sec. 38-122. - Construction certification. 
    As-built drawings detailing the location, material and method of construction of landfill liners; leachate collection, treatment and disposal systems; groundwater and surface water control measures; monitoring points; and other constructed features required by this division shall be prepared and sealed by a registered professional engineer including certification that construction of landfill facilities conforms to submitted plans and specifications and specific conditions attached to the landfill permit by the township board. In addition, testing according to standard methods, shall be made to determine the hydraulic conductivity of installed liners. Such testing shall be performed and certified by a qualified testing laboratory or a registered professional engineer at a frequency to be specified by the township, depending on the nature of the liner materials. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.379; Ord. No. 46, art. 7, § I, 10-8-1977)
Secs. 38-123-38-142. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RESTORATION AND INSPECTION 

Sec. 38-143. - Progressive restoration. 
    All areas within any area operating under a single permit shall be restored progressively. Said restoration shall be in accordance with the plan or agreement or requirement as developed by the board at the time the permit is secured. Said restoration shall be to a condition which blends with the general surrounding terrain so as to appear reasonably natural. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.381; Ord. No. 46, art. 8, § A, 10-8-1977)
Sec. 38-144. - Refund or reduction of bond. 
    Upon completion of the restoration, or upon completion of a part thereof, the permit holder may make application to the board for refund or reduction of the bond or its pro-rata share as set forth in section 38-88. Upon examination by the board or its agent, and the satisfaction of the board that said restoration is in keeping with the general surrounding terrain so as to appear reasonably natural, the board may refund or reduce the bond pro-rata. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.382; Ord. No. 46, art. 8, § B, 10-8-1977)
Sec. 38-145. - Restoration by township. 
    In the event that the restoration should not comply with the above requirements, or in the event said restoration is not complete within 60 days after expiration of all permits issued pursuant to this division, the township may utilize the bond proceeds to restore the site and affected areas to comply with the approved plan and perform whatever work needs to be done to avoid harmful movement of gases or contamination to the groundwater or surface water and/or environment for five years after completion or expiration of permits, should the cost of said restoration exceed the amount of the bond, the permittee shall pay the township the amount of such excess. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.383; Ord. No. 46, art. 8, § C, 10-8-1977)
Sec. 38-146. - Inspections. 
    An inspector from the building department or other persons as may be appointed by the board shall conduct inspections and shall notify the owner and/or operator by regular mail of any portions of the site that it deems abandoned and/or ready for restoration. Upon receipt of such notification, the owner and/or operator shall have said areas restored within 30 days or within such additional time as may be allowed by the board. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.384; Ord. No. 46, art. 8, § D, 10-8-1977)
Sec. 38-147. - Topographic survey map. 
    Prior to complete refund of the bond, the permit holder shall demonstrate compliance with the approved restoration plan by providing a topographic survey map of the restored areas at a scale of one inch to 100 feet prepared and sealed by a land surveyor registered in the state or a professional engineer, experienced in civil engineering and registered in the state. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.385; Ord. No. 46, art. 8, § E, 10-8-1977)
Secs. 38-148-38-177. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 38-178. - Inspection of landfill sites; fee. 
    The township through its township supervisor or his duly authorized agent shall have the right to enter upon any landfill site for the purpose of conducting inspection to assure compliance herewith. Any refusal to permit said inspection shall be deemed a violation hereof and shall further be cause for summary proceedings to close said landfill operation pending said inspection. The fee for said inspection shall be set by the board, which fee is intended to cover the cost of said inspection. In the event inspections are conducted more than once in a month, only one fee shall be charged for that month. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.390; Ord. No. 46, art. 9, 10-8-1977)
Sec. 38-179. - Closing operation. 
    In those cases where the board determines that any landfill operation is being conducted in violation hereof, or in violation of the conditions of any permit issued in accordance herewith, and further, that said violation poses an immediate threat to the health, safety and welfare of the community, the board may forthwith order the operation closed, and that all activity in connection therewith cease, and/or that such action as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare be taken immediately. Further, should the owner and/or operator of the premises in question fail or refuse to abide by the order of the board, the board may, by court order or otherwise, accomplish the purpose of its order. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.401; Ord. No. 46, § 10.1, 10-8-1977)
Sec. 38-180. - Notice to cease violation. 
    In those cases where the board determines that any landfill is being operated in violation hereof, or in violation of the conditions of a permit issued in accordance herewith, and that said operation is not an immediate threat to the health, safety and welfare of the community, the board may serve notice upon the owner and/or operator of said violation and request that said violation cease forthwith. Such notice shall contain a provision advising the owner and/or operator that an immediate hearing may be obtained before the township board for the purpose of reviewing the alleged violation. Any request for such hearing must be made within 48 hours after service of this described notice, and any hearing so held in no less than 36 nor more than 72 hours following said request. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.402; Ord. No. 46, § 10.2, 10-8-1977)
Sec. 38-181. - Violations as municipal civil infractions. 
    Violation of this article is a municipal civil infraction. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 20.403; Ord. No. 46, § 10.3, 10-8-1977; Ord. No. 124, § 2, 7-7-2008) 
Chapter 40 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan vehicle code, MCL 257.1 et seq.; regulation of traffic and motor vehicles by local authorities, MCL 257.605, 257.606, 257.610.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 40-1-40-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC CODE 

Sec. 40-19. - State vehicle code adopted. 
(a)	The Michigan Vehicle Code, as promulgated under Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq.), and subsequent amendments is hereby adopted by reference. 
(b)	References in the Michigan Vehicle Code to the term "governmental unit" for the purposes of this article shall mean the township. 
(c)	Penalties. Violations of the Michigan Vehicle Code for which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days and/or fine is greater than $500.00 shall not be enforced by the township as an ordinance violation; provided, however, that a violation of MCL 257.625(1)(c) is punishable by one or more of the following: 
(1)	Community service for not more than 360 hours.
(2)	Imprisonment for not more than 180 days.
(3)	A fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $700.00.
(d)	Operating while intoxicated (BAC .17 or more). Section 625(1)(c) of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.1 et seq., is hereby adopted by reference as an ordinance of the township pursuant to Public Act 8 of 2012. 
(Ord. No. 101, §§ 1.1, 2.1, 4.1, 7-14-2003; Ord. No. 106, §§ 1.1, 2.1, 4.1 8-15-2005; Ord. No. 146-12, §§ 3, 4, 7-30-2012) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt the Michigan vehicle code by reference, MCL 42.23; MCL 257.1 et seq. as amended; MCL 42.21 as amended. 
Sec. 40-20. - Code and amendments and revision adopted. 
(a)	The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages as promulgated by the director of the department of state police pursuant to Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, Public Act No. 306 of 1969 (MCL 24.201 et seq.), made effective October 30, 2002, is incorporated by reference. 
(b)	References in the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages to the term "governmental unit" shall mean the township. 
(c)	The penalties provided by the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, townships and Village are adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 100, §§ I, II, IV, 7-21-2003)
State Law reference- Authority to adopt the Uniform Traffic Code by reference, MCL 257.257.951 et seq. 
Sec. 40-21. - State Motor Carrier Safety Act adopted. 
(a)	The Michigan Motor Carrier Safety Act as promulgated under Public Act No. 181 of 1963 (MCL 480.11 et seq.), and subsequent amendments is hereby adopted by reference. 
(b)	References in the Motor Carrier Safety Act to the term "governmental unit" for the purposes of this article shall mean Brandon Township. 
(c)	The penalties provided by the Michigan Motor Carrier Safety Act are adopted by reference; provided, however, no fine shall exceed $500.00, nor period of imprisonment to exceed 93 days, pursuant to section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 136-11, § 1, 7-5-2011)
State Law reference- Authority to adopt the Michigan Carrier Safety Act by reference, MCL 42.23. 
Secs. 40-22-40-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate standing or parking of vehicles, MCL 257.606(1)(a); stopping, standing and parking of vehicles, MCL 257.672 et seq.

Secs. 40-44-40-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRUCK AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLE ROUTES 

Sec. 40-75. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Implement of husbandry means a vehicle which is either a farm tractor, a vehicle designed to be drawn by a farm tractor or an animal, a vehicle which directly harvests farm products, or a vehicle which directly applies fertilizer, spray, or seeds to a farm field. 
    Road means any street, highway, vehicle route, or roadway, within the township. 
    Semi-trailer means every vehicle with or without motive power, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that some part of its load rests upon or is carried by some other vehicle. 
    Trailer means every vehicle with or without motive power, designed for carrying persons or property, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. 
    Truck means every motor vehicle which is designed, used, or maintained, primarily for the transportation of property, except for pickup trucks or vans where such pickup trucks or vans are designed and designated by their manufacturer so as to carry loads of no more than one ton. The term "truck" shall also be deemed to include the term "commercial vehicles" which vehicles shall be defined to include all motor vehicles used for the transportation of passengers for hire, or constructed to use for transportation of goods, wares or merchandise, and/or all motor vehicles designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either independently or any part of the weight of the vehicle or load so drawn. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 21.511-21.513, 21.515, 21.516; Ord. No. 70, art. I, §§ 1-3, 5, 6, 2-6-1984) 
Sec. 40-76. - Truck routes. 
    The list of roads in the township, to the exclusion of all other roads, designated as truck routes and classified for truck traffic, is on file in the office of the township clerk. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 21.530; Ord. No. 70, art. III, 2-6-1984)
Sec. 40-77. - Travel on roads other than truck routes; prohibited. 
    Except as expressly permitted under this article, no person shall operate a truck or truck tractor and semi-trailer or truck tractor and trailer combination, or truck and trailer combination or commercial vehicle, in the township, on any road other than a designated truck route. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 21.540; Ord. No. 70, art. IV, 2-6-1984)
Sec. 40-78. - Exemptions. 
(a)	The truck route limitations prescribed in this article shall not apply to:
(1)	Traffic on M-15;
(2)	Fire truck or other emergency vehicles or any vehicle on emergency business involved in the saving of life or property; 
(3)	Implements of husbandry incidentally moved upon a road;
(4)	Road repair, construction or maintenance vehicles while involved in the repair, construction or maintenance of roads within the township; or 
(5)	Garbage service vehicles while involved in the provision of services to residences of the township. 
(b)	The truck route limitations prescribed in this article shall not apply to vehicles which would otherwise be restricted to truck routes when such vehicles are being used to make pickups, deliveries, or service calls in the township on roads other than designated truck routes. However, during such pickup, delivery, or service call, such vehicle shall restrict its travel of such designated truck routes to a minimum and such vehicles shall not be driven or moved on other than truck routes except when being used to make pickups, deliveries, or service calls within the township. Such vehicles shall be driven in such a manner as to leave permitted truck route and proceed to its designation or designations in the township by the most direct route. Upon completion of the pickup, delivery, or service call, the vehicle shall return to the nearest permitted truck route by the most direct route. This section shall not be interpreted as permitting a vehicle otherwise restricted to a truck route from entering or leaving the township by other than a truck route. 
(c)	The truck route limitations prescribed in this article shall not apply to trucks, truck tractors, semi-trailers, truck tractor and trailer combinations, or truck and trailer combinations, or commercial vehicles, when such vehicles are leaving from or returning to their customary storage location at the owner's or operator's personal residence, so long as such storage is pursuant to other applicable township ordinances, nor shall such limitations apply to such a vehicle when such vehicle is leaving a commercial or industrial location in the township provided that the most direct route to and from such location to a designated truck is being utilized. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 21.550; Ord. No. 70, art. V, 2-6-1984)
Sec. 40-79. - Special permits. 
    The township supervisor or the supervisor's designee shall have the authority to grant a written permit in a special case, which permit shall constitute an exception to this article in accordance with the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permit, however, shall not be given for more than one purpose and in no case shall such a permit be valid for a period longer than ten days from the date of issue. Such permit shall describe the vehicle, and the time and dates of travel, and the route to be taken by the vehicle. The township may, by resolution, set a fee for such special permits. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 21.560; Ord. No. 70, art. VI, 2-6-1984)
Sec. 40-80. - Signs. 
    The township board shall procure and have posted appropriate signs along the designated truck routes and such other highways as required by the laws of the state. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 21.570; Ord. No. 70, art. VII, 2-6-1984)
Sec. 40-81. - Violations as municipal civil infractions. 
    Violation of this article is a municipal civil infraction. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 21.580; Ord. No. 70, art. VIII, 2-6-1984; Ord. No. 124, § 2, 7-7-2008) 
Secs. 40-82-40-107. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TRUCK CONTROL 

Sec. 40-108. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Through trucks means trucks proceeding upon the designated roadway without a stop for the purpose of servicing property along said roadway. By way of example, delivery trucks delivering along any designated roadway, service trucks servicing premises along any designated roadway or trucks owned by residents of property along said designated roadway shall not be considered to be through trucks. 
    Truck means any vehicle designated principally for the purpose of carrying other than human passengers and with a gross vehicle weight of excess of 10,000 pounds. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 21.633-21.633; Ord. No. 83, art. III, 10-15-1990)
Sec. 40-109. - Prohibited routes. 
(a)	Through trucks are prohibited on Wolfe Road from M-15 to the Westerly township line.
(b)	Any person operating a through truck on Wolfe Road between M-15 and the township Westerly boundary shall be guilty of a civil infraction. 
(c)	The owner of any vehicle operating as a through truck on Wolfe Road from M-15 to the Westerly township line shall be deemed to have consented to such operation and shall be guilty of a civil infraction. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 21.641-21.643; Ord. No. 83, § 4.3, 10-15-1990)
Sec. 40-110. - Exemptions. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the term "truck" shall not include, and this article shall not apply to, emergency vehicles, public utility vehicles, road commission vehicles or farm vehicles. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 21.621; Ord. No. 83, § 2.1, 10-15-1990)
Sec. 40-111. - Signs. 
    The road commission for county, upon receipt of a copy of this article, is hereby requested to post appropriate signs prohibiting through trucks on the roads designated herein in accordance with the requirements of section 726 of Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.726). 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 21.651; Ord. No. 83, § 5.1, 10-15-1990)
Sec. 40-112. - Violations as municipal civil infractions. 
    Violation of this article is a municipal civil infraction. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 21.671; Ord. No. 83, § 7.1, 10-15-1990)
Secs. 40-113-40-137. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFF-ROAD RECREATION VEHICLES 

Sec. 40-138. - Adoption of state law by reference. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference the off-road recreation vehicle laws in part 811 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.81101 et seq.). 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt state laws by reference, MCL 42.23. 
Sec. 40-139. - Violations. 
    All penalty provisions set forth in MCL 324.81101 et seq. that do not exceed ordinance authorization chapter 1, section 1-11 shall apply. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 21.380; Ord. No. 30, § 8.1, 5-22-1974; Ord. No. 124, § 2, 7-7-2008; Ord. No. 135-11, §§ 1, 2, 7-5-2011) 
Chapter 42 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Ownership and operation of water supply or sewage disposal facility by city, Mich. Const. 1963, art. 7, § 24; local authority to provide and regulate sewer and water service, MCL 324.4301 et seq.; water and sewer authorities, MCL 124.281 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1-42-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 

Secs. 42-19-42-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM 

Sec. 42-40. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)	The township is a rural community which is not presently serviced by public sewers. It is considered unlikely that a public sewer system servicing a major portion of the township will be constructed within the township in the foreseeable future. 
(b)	Pursuant to Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (NREPA) MCL 324.101 et seq., the state department of environmental quality (MDEQ) is authorized to issue permits for on-site sewage disposal systems that service more than one property (referred to herein as a community wastewater treatment system (WWTS). In issuing a permit the MDEQ requests the township to adopt a resolution stating that the township will assume responsibility for the operation, maintenance, and, in the event of system failure, cleanup of the proposed system, if the owner fails to do so. The township is not required to consent. While the township recognizes that a community sewer system may be in the best interests of the health, safety, and welfare of the township and its residents in some circumstances, the township requires assurance that should an MDEQ permit be issued, and if the township consents to support such system, that the township shall be indemnified from any costs or liability in connection with the design, construction, operation, maintenance, repair and/or replacement of that system. To this effect, this article is intended to regulate community sewer systems to provide those assurances. 
(c)	This article sets forth uniform requirements for applicants who desire to develop land within the township using a community WWTP as permitted by state law and this article and enables the township to comply with all currently applicable state and federal laws. 
(d)	The objectives of this article are:
(1)	To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the community's natural resources which will directly or indirectly contaminate or otherwise damage such resources. 
(2)	To prevent the flow of pollutants into the township soils and wetlands which will pass through, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with accepted disposal standards. 
(3)	To provide for supervision of systems and response to system failures when deemed appropriate. This article provides for the regulation of the construction and operation of community wastewater treatment systems through the issuance of permits to certain users and through enforcement of general requirements for such users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user reporting, assumes that existing customer's capacity will not be preempted, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(Ord. No. 118, art. 2, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 42-41. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act of Michigan, Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.101 et seq.). 
    Association, for a condominium project, shall have the same meaning as the term "Association of Co-Owners" found in Public Act No. 59 of 1978 (MCL 559.101 et seq.). For a subdivision or other development it shall mean an association of homeowners or property owners organized pursuant to deed restrictions, restrictive covenants or voluntary nonprofit organization in a particular development. 
    Development or project shall include a subdivision as defined by Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.), a condominium pursuant to the provisions of Public Act No. 59 of 1978 (MCL 559.101 et seq.), or any group of dwellings or structures which are proposed to be serviced by a community sewer system. 
    Development documents means: 
(1)	For a condominium project, the master deed and bylaws provided by Public Act No. 59 of 1978 (MCL 559.101 et seq.); and 
(2)	With regard to subdivisions or other developments, deed restrictions, restrictive covenants, operating agreements, maintenance agreements, bylaws or other documents related to the mutual use of a WWTS. 
    Dwelling means a structure primarily designed or used for residential purposes. 
    Expansion means any activity whereby additional structures or users shall be added to an existing system. 
    MDEQ means the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, or its successors. 
    MDEQ permit means a permit issued in accordance with part 4 of the Act (MCL 324.401 et seq.). 
    Owner means the person with authority to bind property and responsibility for property, including without limitation, owner of a fee simple interest, a land contract purchaser and seller, or owner of a unit in a condominium, which is serviced or is proposed to be serviced by a WWTS. 
    Private community wastewater treatment system or system or WWTS means a facility for the transportation, collection, processing or treatment of sanitary sewage which is owned by a nongovernmental entity and which services or which is proposed to service more than one dwelling, commercial building, or user. 
    Public sanitary sewer system means a publicly owned sanitary sewer system. 
    Sanitary sewer system means a facility for the transportation, collection, processing, or treatment of sanitary sewage including a community WWTS. 
    Structure means for the purposes of this article only, a building in which toilet, kitchen, laundry, bathing or other facilities which generate wastewater are used for household, commercial, industrial, or other purposes. 
(Ord. No. 118, art. 3, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 42-42. - Regulations. 
(a)	Except as provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to construct, install, or operate a community WWTS to service developments within the township. 
(b)	The township shall grant approval for a community WWTS only after the applicant has provided all information and met all the standards contained in this article. 
(c)	Any development proposed to be serviced by a community WWTS shall require a permit under this article and also be required to secure special land use approval as specified under township ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 118, art. 5, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 42-43. - Requirements for approval. 
(a)	Any community sewer system shall comply with the terms of this article, applicable standards of the MDEQ, state department of community health, and county health department, and any other applicable laws and regulations of the federal government, state, county, and the township. 
(b)	No new community WWTS or an expansion of an existing system shall be constructed, installed, or operated within the township unless the plans for the installation and system design have been approved by the township, and the county health department, the state department of public health, and/or MDEQ (whichever has jurisdiction) as conforming with their regulations and a permit issued in accordance therewith, and any other applicable governmental unit having jurisdiction over the system. 
(c)	Any community WWTS operated within the township shall be done without cost to the township. 
(d)	The applicant shall provide the following to the township before approval for a community WWTS may be granted: 
(1)	A certification from the system design engineer indicating that the system as designed and constructed will adequately process sanitary sewage and waste as required by applicable laws and regulations of the federal government, state, county and the township. The consulting engineer for the township shall review and make a recommendation regarding the adequacy of such certification. 
(2)	An executed agreement between the applicant, owner, and/or association, and a qualified operator possession the required ability to operate and manage the systems as determined by the township, in its sole discretion. The agreement shall contain provisions for: 
a.	Operation and maintenance of the system;
b.	Collection of charges for connection to and use of the system;
c.	Pumping and cleaning individual and common septic tanks consistent with applicable laws and regulations of any governmental agency having jurisdiction; 
d.	An actual schedule for maintenance and inspections of the system; and
e.	Compliance with all applicable governmental laws, ordinances, regulations, and agreements regarding the system. 
The agreement shall provide that it may not be terminated without township approval. The language of such agreement shall be approved by the township attorney prior to granting of township approval. 
(3)	An executed indemnification agreement, in form acceptable to the township wherein the applicant, association and owner shall jointly and severally indemnify the township from any and all costs and liability incurred by the township with respect to operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of the system. 
(4)	Establishment of a cash deposit or delivery of any irrevocable letter of credit in an amount determined by the township to defray township costs in the maintenance, operation, repair and/or replacement of the system. The amount of the deposit or letter of credit shall be established by the township prior to granting approval for the system. If the applicant elects to provide a cash deposit the funds shall be kept in a bank account in a depository approved by the township, and shall not be withdrawn in any manner whatsoever except with the written approval of the township. The funds shall be maintained in an interest bearing account and the township shall be named as an approved signatory. The township shall have the right to audit this account and the use made of funds therefrom. The applicant or association shall provide a copy of a bank statement at least annually, or upon request of the township, which shall verify that the funds remain on deposit. The fund may be terminated and the proceeds used for any lawful purpose upon the written approval of both the applicant and/or association and the township, except as provided in subsection (d)(5) of this section. If a letter of credit is elected, it shall be in form approved by the township attorney and shall provide that it shall not be revoked for any reason whatsoever without 60 days' advance notice to the township and shall include a provision for withdrawal of funds by the township in advance of such termination. This provision may be waived by the township board if there are other bonds, letters of credit or cash deposits established by other government entities which would provide substantially the same protective measures. 
(5)	Payment by the applicant of an application fee designed to reimburse the township for all its expenses involved in review of the construction and design of the system, or preparing or reviewing any documents referenced in this article, including review by the township engineer and township attorney, as required. 
(6)	Copies of proposed development documents, in form acceptable to the township attorney, which shall have specific provisions regarding operation and maintenance of the system, identifying an individual or entity responsible for such operation and maintenance, establishing standards for operation, maintenance, repair and/or replacement of the system, providing that should the designated individual or entity fail to comply with the requirements, that the township, may, with or without notice, enter onto the property, perform any necessary maintenance, repair, replacement and/or operation, with the owner and/or association reimbursing the township all such costs plus a 25 percent administration fee; and provide that in default of such payment, the township shall be entitled to withdraw any or all of the cash deposit or letter of credit referenced in subsection (d)(4) of this section, without the consent of the applicant, association or any other person or entity, and undertake whatever collection proceedings are available to it by law against such entity and current and future owners of the serviced property, including, but not limited to, the addition of any such costs to the tax roll to be collected as a special assessment against any real property, or interest in the development, with interest and penalties as applied to delinquent taxes. 
(7)	The provisions of the permitting authority, maintenance responsibility, indemnification, and special assessment requirements of this article shall also be included in a separate document, in form approved by the township attorney, and included within the condominium disclosure documents for a condominium project, or in a separate document for other developments, delivered to the prospective purchaser prior to execution of a purchase agreement for property proposed to be serviced by a community sewer system. 
(8)	A permanent and irrevocable easement, in recordable form, shall be granted by the applicant, owner and/or association to the township and its employees, agents, and contractors authorizing them to enter onto the property upon which the system is located for the purpose of inspections, improvement, repairing, maintaining, and/or replacing the system or any portion thereof, and which shall provide that the system area shall be maintained to be accessible at all times, prohibiting any structures or landscaping within such area that would unreasonably interfere with such access. 
(9)	A statement acknowledging that the township shall have the option to purchase for the sum of $1.00 marketable title to any lands required to be titled in the name of the township by governmental or regulatory requirements, or easements reasonably deemed by the township to be necessary in conjunction with the township's assumption of responsibility for the community sewer system or future publicly owned community sewer system. 
(e)	If in the future a public sanitary system is constructed which passes not more than 200 feet at the nearest point from a structure and/or system in which sanitary sewage originates and which is served by a community WWTS, the owner of such property shall, within 18 months after publication of a notice by the township of the availability of a public sewer system in a newspaper of general circulation in the township, connect said structure to the public sanitary sewer system. If within such 18 month period, repairs are necessary in a system, the connection to the public system shall take place at that time. Applicable provisions shall be placed in the development documents referencing such requirement. 
(f)	For new developments proposing to use community WWTS, no parcel identification number will be issued for individual building sites until construction of the community WWTS has been completed and approved by the township. The township may however, permit the construction of model structures as determined by the building department. 
(g)	No building permit shall be issued for any structure or development proposed to be serviced by a community WWTS system until the township has approved such system in accordance with terms and provisions of this article. The township may however, permit the construction of model structures as determined by the building department. 
(h)	Anything in this article to the contrary notwithstanding, the township shall not be responsible or obligated to perform any needed or desired repairs, maintenance, improvement, and/or replacement of the system or any portion thereof. Any such repairs, maintenance, improvement and/or replacement undertaken by the township shall be in its sole and absolute discretion. 
(i)	At the time approval for a community WWTS system is granted, the township may condition such approval upon the applicant and any responsible operator or owner of the property proposed to be serviced by the system and/or any association, to adhere to certain operational and maintenance requirements. The contractor and/or association shall furnish periodic operating reports in accordance with the maintenance requirements and schedule. Any such requirements shall be made a part of the development documents. 
(j)	The development documents referenced in subsection (d)(6) and (8) and (9) of this section shall be recorded at the office of the county register of deeds. After approval by the township the development documents, as they pertain to the system, shall not be changed without township approval. The documents shall display language to that effect. 
(k)	A common drainfield used as a part of a system regulated under this article shall not be considered a part of a parcel, lot or unit for purposes of application of the township zoning ordinance, and the land area shall not be included in the gross density calculation for purposes of the township zoning ordinance. This provision shall not apply to an individual septic tank and associated collection system, if applicable. 
(l)	The association, individual owners and/or users of the system shall be responsible for all costs involved in the installation, operation, maintenance, repair, replacement, and liability associated with the system. The township may, at its option, elect to collect any costs it may incur in connection with the system pursuant to the other provisions of this article, or by direct court action against the association, owners and/or users of the system. 
(Ord. No. 118, art. 5, 3-17-2008)
Sec. 42-44. - Enforcement and penalties and fees. 
(a)	Civil remedies. The provisions of this article shall be enforceable through any and all remedies available at law or in equity in any court of competent jurisdiction. Any violation of this article is deemed to be a nuisance per se. 
(1)	The township may commence a civil suit in any court of competent jurisdiction for an order abating or enjoining the violation, and/or requiring restoration of the property as nearly as possible to its condition before the violation. 
(2)	The township may also issue a stop-work order or withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy, permits or inspection until the provisions of this article, including any conditions attached to a permit, have been fully met. Failure to obey a stop-work order shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(b)	Criminal remedies. Any person convicted of knowingly violating the terms of this article, or any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other document, filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, shall, upon conviction be punished for violation of a misdemeanor. 
(c)	Fees. Applications for community wastewater utility systems approval under this article shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable administrative application fee in an amount specified from time to time by resolution of the township board. In addition, an applicant shall pay an additional escrow fee in an amount determined by resolution of the township board for the estimated cost of outside consultant who may be retained by the township in connection with the review of the application. In the event the cost of the services of the consultant is less than the escrow fee, the applicant shall be refunded the balance. In the event the cost of the services of the consultant exceeds the amount of the escrow fee, the applicant shall pay the deficiency to the township prior to the issuance of a permit. A denial of an application for a permit shall not affect the applicant's obligation to pay the escrow fee provided for in this section. 
(Ord. No. 118, art. 6, 3-17-2008)
Chapter 44 - WATERWAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Wetlands protection, MCL 324.30301 et seq.; watercraft and marine safety, MCL 324.80101 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 44-1-44-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATERCRAFT REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Special local rules, MCL 324.80110 et seq.

Sec. 44-19. - Definitions. 
    All words and phrases used in this article shall be construed and have the same meanings as those words and phrases defined in Part 801 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.80101 et seq.). 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 21.451, 21.471; Ord. No. 28, § 1, 5-6-1974; Ord. No. 57, § 1, 5-5-1980) 
Sec. 44-20. - Seymour Lake; electric motors only. 
    On the waters of Seymour Lake, sections 27 and 34, T5N, R9E, in the township, it is unlawful: 
(1)	To operate a vessel powered by a motor other than an electric motor.
(2)	For the operator of a vessel to exceed a slow no wake speed.
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 21.452; Ord. No. 28, § 2, 5-6-1974; Ord. of 8-13-1990)
Sec. 44-21. - Davison Lake; high-speed boating and water skiing prohibited. 
    On the waters of Davison Lake, in the township, no operator of any motorboat shall: 
(1)	Operate such motorboat at high speed, which means a speed at or above which a motorboat reaches a planing condition; or 
(2)	Have in tow or otherwise assist in the propulsion of a person on water skis, water sled, surfboard or other similar contrivance. 
Sec. 44-22. - Perry Lake; operation of vessel powered by motor. 
    On the waters of Perry Lake, Section 21, T5N, R9E, in the township, it is unlawful to operate a vessel powered by a motor except an electric motor. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, § 21.472; Ord. No. 57, § 2, 5-5-1980)
Sec. 44-23. - Violations as municipal civil infractions. 
    Violation of this article is a municipal civil infraction. 
(Comp. Ords. of 1989, §§ 21.454, 21.474; Ord. No. 28, § 4, 5-6-1974; Ord. No. 57, § 4, 5-5-1980; Ord. No. 124, § 2, 7-7-2008) 
Chapter 46 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan zoning enabling act, MCL 125.3101 et seq.; Michigan planning enabling act, MCL 125.3801 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Brandon Township Zoning Ordinance of 2008." 
(Ord. No. 122, § 1.01, 7-7-2008)
Sec. 46-2. - Purposes. 
    This chapter is established for the purposes of: 
(1)	Providing for the orderly development of the township;
(2)	Placing no undue burden upon agriculture, developers, industry, commerce or residents;
(3)	Assuring the provision of adequate sites for industry, commerce or residents;
(4)	Providing for the free movement of vehicles upon the proper streets and highways of the township; 
(5)	Protecting agriculture, industry, commerce and residences against incongruous and incompatible uses of land; 
(6)	Promoting the proper use of land and natural resources for the economic well-being for the township as a whole; 
(7)	Assuring the provision of adequate space for the parking of vehicles of customers using commercial, retail and industrial areas; 
(8)	Assuring that all uses of land and buildings within the township be so related as to provide for economy in government, protection of the environment and mutual support; and 
(9)	Promoting and protecting the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the residents, merchants and workers. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 1.03)
Sec. 46-3. - Severability clause. 
(a)	If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any part of this chapter to be invalid, such ruling shall not affect any other provisions of this chapter not specifically included in said ruling. 
(b)	If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare invalid the application of any provision of this chapter to a particular parcel, lot, use, building, or structure, such ruling shall not affect the application of said provision to any other parcel, lot, use, building, or structure not specifically included in said ruling. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 1.04)
Sec. 46-4. - Conflict with other laws. 
(a)	Where any condition imposed by any provision of this chapter upon the use of any lot, building, or structure is either more restrictive or less restrictive than any comparable condition imposed by any other provision of this chapter or by the provision of an ordinance adopted under any other law, the provision which is more restrictive or which imposes a higher standard or requirement shall govern. 
(b)	This chapter is not intended to abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or other private agreement provided that where any provision of this chapter is more restrictive or imposes a higher standard or requirement than such easement, covenant or other private agreement, the provision of this chapter shall govern. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 1.05)
Sec. 46-5. - Rules of interpretation. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: 
    The term "used" or "occupied" includes the words "intended," "designed," or "arranged to be used" or "occupied." 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 2.01)
Sec. 46-6. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory use, building or structure means a use, building or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use, building or structure. 
    Animal means a nonhuman zoological species, classified for purposes of this chapter as follows: 
(1)	Class I animal. Domesticated household pets. 
(2)	Class II animal. An animal which is normally part of the livestock maintained on a farm including: 
a.	Bovine and like animals, such as cows.
b.	Equine and like animals, such as horses.
c.	Swine and like animals, such as pigs and hogs.
d.	Ovis (ovine) and like animals, such as sheep and goats.
e.	Llama, Emu, Ostrich and Alpaca and like animals.
f.	Other animals, similar to those listed in section (2) a-e of this class II category, weighing in excess of 75 pounds, and not otherwise specifically classified herein. 
(3)	Class III animal. Included in class III are animals weighing less than 75 pounds not otherwise specifically classified herein; rabbits (which are not maintained or kept as domesticated household pets); animals considered as poultry, animals considered as waterfowl. 
    Automobile carwash means a building, or portion thereof, the primary purpose of which is that of washing vehicles either by automatic or self-service means. 
    Automobile repair means general repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles, collision service, such as body, frame, or fender straightening and repair, overall painting, vehicle rust-proofing and any related activities. 
    Automobile service station means a building or premises used primarily for the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale of motor fuels directly to users of motor vehicles; together with the sale of minor accessories and services for motor vehicles such as filling tires with air, checking fluid levels, adding water to batteries or radiators, automobile repair and similar activities; as well as selling convenience foods and other such items through a convenience store. 
    Banquet/meeting hall means a building or part of a building used for the purposes of entertaining a large group of people where food and beverage may be provided; and where a caterer's establishment may be included only if it is in conjunction with a banquet/meeting hall. This use shall also include a building or part thereof in which facilities are provided for such purposes as meeting for groups of civic, educational, political, religious or social purposes. 
    Basement means that portion of a building which is partly or wholly below grade but so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to the floor is greater than or equal to the vertical distance from the average grade to the ceiling. A basement shall not be counted as a story. 
    Billboard. See Sign, outdoor advertising. 
    Buildable area means the interior portion of the net lot area that remains after the minimum yard requirements have been met pursuant to the application of the appropriate zoning district regulations specified in this chapter. 
    Building means a structure erected on-site, a mobile home or mobile structure, a pre-manufactured or pre-cut structure above or below ground, designed primarily for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
    Building height means the vertical distance measured from average grade on the front of the building to the highest point of the roof for all structures. 
    Campground means a parcel in which sites are offered for the use of the public or members of an organization, either free of charge or for a fee, for the establishment of temporary living quarters for tents, recreational vehicles or similar facilities. The term "campground" shall not include any use of land involving the operations of programs involving persons sentenced or assigned to said programs for governmental agencies or courts of law having statutory authority to detain persons against their will, a "seasonal mobile home park" licensed under Public Act No. 96 of 1987 (MCL 125.2301 et seq.). For purposes of this chapter, the following additional terms are defined: 
(1)	Modern campground means a campground where water flush toilets and water under pressure are available at a service building or where a water outlet and a sewer connection are available at each site. 
(2)	Primitive campground means a campground where a service building is typically present and where a water outlet and a sewer connection are not available at each site. 
(3)	Temporary campground means a campground used on a temporary or short-term basis not to exceed a period of four weeks. 
(4)	Temporary living quarters means as related to camping, means a recreational unit or a building within a modern camp, which is occupied or used for more than four hours between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., which is not intended to be occupied or used in excess of three consecutive months. 
    Child-care facility. 
(1)	Day-care center means a facility, other than a private residence, receiving one or more preschool or school age children for care for periods of less than 24 hours a day, and where the parents or guardians are not immediately available to the child. The term "day-care center" includes a facility which provides care for not less than two consecutive weeks, regardless of the number of hours of care per day. The facility is generally described as a child-care center, day-care center, day nursery, nursery school, parent cooperative preschool, play group or drop-in center. 
(2)	The term "day-care center" does not include any of the following:
a.	A Sunday school, a vacation Bible school or a religious instructional class that is conducted by a religious organization where children are in attendance for not greater than three hours per day for an indefinite period, or not greater than eight hours per day for a period not to exceed four weeks during a 12-month period. 
b.	A facility operated by a religious organization where children are cared for not greater than three hours while persons responsible for the children are attending religious services. 
c.	A program that is primarily supervised, school-age-child-focused training in a specific subject, including, but not limited to, dancing, drama, music, or religion. This exclusion applies only to the time a child is involved in supervised, school-age-child-focused training. 
d.	A program that is primarily an incident of group athletic or social activities for school-age children sponsored by or under the supervision of an organized club or hobby group, including, but not limited to, youth clubs, scouting, and school-age recreational or supplementary education programs. This exclusion applies only to the time the school-age child is engaged in the group athletic or social activities and if the school-age child can come and go at will. 
(3)	Group day-care home means a private home in which more than six but not more than 12 minor children are given care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage or adoption. The term "group day-care home" includes a home that gives care to an unrelated minor child for more than four weeks during a calendar year. The owner of the child group day-care home business must also be a resident of the private home. 
(4)	Family day-care home means a private home in which one but fewer than seven minor children are received for care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage or adoption. The term "family day-care home" includes a home that gives care to an unrelated child for more than four weeks during a calendar year. Child family day-care homes are subject to applicable state law and licensing. The owner of the child family day-care home business must also be a resident of the private home. 
    Club means buildings and facilities owned and operated by a corporation or association or persons for social or recreational purposes for members and guests, but not operated primarily for profit or to render a service customarily carried on as a business. 
    Condominium means and shall include the following elements: 
(1)	Condominium act refers to Public Act No. 59 of 1978 (MCL 559.101 et seq.). 
(2)	Condominium documents means the master deed, recorded pursuant to the condominium act, and any other instrument referred to in the master deed or bylaws which affects the rights and obligations of a co-owner in the condominium. 
(3)	Condominium unit means the portion of a condominium project designed and intended for separate ownership and use, as described in the master deed. The condominium unit includes the condominium unit and the contiguous limited common element surrounding the condominium unit, and shall be the counterpart of the term "lot" as used in connection with a project developed under the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(4)	General common element means the common elements other than the limited common elements reserved in the master deed for use by all of the co-owners. 
(5)	Limited common element means a portion of the common elements reserved in the master deed for the exclusive use of less than all of the co-owners. 
(6)	Master deed means the condominium document recording the condominium project, to which are attached as exhibits and incorporated by reference with the bylaws for the project and the condominium subdivision plan for the project, and all other information required by section 8 of the condominium act. 
(7)	Site condominium means a condominium development in which each co-owner owns exclusive rights to a volume of space within which a structure or structures may be constructed, herein defined as a condominium unit. Such developments are also described in the master deed. 
    Congregate housing means a dwelling providing shelter and services for four or more elderly persons within which are provided living and sleeping facilities, meal preparation, laundry services and room cleaning. Such facilities may also provide other services, such as transportation for routine social and medical appointments and counseling. 
    Deck means a structure with or without a roof having a foundation to hold it erect, and attached to or abutting one or more walls of a building or constructed separately from a building, with or without direct access to the ground, the floor of which is above finished grade, and intended for use as an outdoor living area. 
    Drive-through facility means an establishment that is designed to permit customers to receive products or services while remaining seated in a motor vehicle. 
    Dwelling area means the dwelling area of a dwelling unit is composed of sleeping rooms, kitchen, dining room, den, studio, bathrooms, and family and living rooms. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family, means a building or structure designed for or occupied by two or more families, with separate housekeeping, kitchen and bathroom facilities for each and conforming in all other respects to the standards in section 46-216(g). 
    Dwelling, single-family, means a building containing not more than one dwelling unit. 
    Dwelling, townhouse, means a row of three or more attached one-family dwellings not more than 21/2 stories in height with separate housekeeping, kitchen and bathroom facilities for each, and with outside exposure front and back, for each dwelling unit and conforming in all other respects to the standards in section 46-216(g). 
    Dwelling unit means one or more rooms connected together with principal kitchen and bathroom facilities designed as a unit for residence by only one family for living and sleeping purposes, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment, and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which might be in the same structure. 
    Dwelling unit, mobile home, means a mobile home designed for or occupied by one family only. 
    Essential services means the erection, construction, alterations, or maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments, commissions, or boards, or by other government agencies of underground, surface, or overhead gas, electric, steam, or water transmission or distribution system, collection, communications, supply or disposal systems, dams, weirs, culverts, bridges, canals, locks, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, towers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, or signs and fire hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal departments or commissions, or other government agencies, or for the public health, safety, or general welfare, but not including buildings other than those buildings which are primarily enclosures or shelters for the installed central services equipment. 
    Family means an individual or group of two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, together with foster and step children and servants of the principal occupants, with not more than one additional unrelated person, who are domiciled together as a single, domestic, housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit; or a collective number of individuals domiciled together in one dwelling unit whose relationship is of a continuing nontransient domestic character and who are cooking and living as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit. This definition shall not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, coterie, organization, or group of students or other individuals whose domestic relationship is of a transitory or seasonal nature or for an anticipated limited duration of a school term or other similar determinable period. 
    Farm means the land, plants, animals, buildings, structures, including ponds used for agricultural or aquacultural activities, machinery, equipment, and other appurtenances used in the commercial production of farm products. 
    Farm buildings means any building or structure, other than a dwelling, erected, moved upon, or used on a farm, which is essential and customarily used on farms of that type for pursuit of agricultural activities. 
    Farm operation means the operation and management of a farm or a condition or activity that occurs at any time as necessary on a farm in connection with the commercial production, harvesting, and storage of farm products. 
    Farm product means those plants and animals useful to human beings produced by agriculture and includes, but is not limited to, forages and sod crops, grains and feed crops, field crops, dairy and dairy products, poultry and poultry products, cervidae, livestock, including breeding and grazing, equine, fish, and other agricultural products, bees and bee products, berries, herbs, fruits, vegetables, flowers, seeds, grasses, nursery stock, trees and tree products, mushrooms, and other similar products, or any other product which incorporates the use of food, feed, fiber, or fur, as determined by the state commission of agriculture. 
    Fence means an enclosure, especially an enclosing barrier erected to prevent straying from within or intrusion. Materials and structures specially designed and manufactured for use as fences or barriers shall only be permitted. 
    Floodplain means lands which are subject to periodic flooding and have been defined by the Corps of Engineers, Soil Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, or by any other relevant state or federal agency to have alluvial soil deposits, indicating that such flooding has taken place; or as defined by any registered engineer or land surveyor and accepted by the township board as such a floodplain. 
    Floor area means the sum of the gross horizontal floor areas of the several stories of a building, as measured to the exterior of the face of the exterior walls, plus that area, similarly measured, of all other floors, except basements, that are accessible by a fixed stairway, ramp, escalator, or elevator; including all enclosed porches and balconies, and all stairways, breezeways, storage area, recreational rooms, boiler rooms, and other areas within or contiguous to the structure; and the measurement shall include the floor space of all accessory buildings measured similarly. 
    Floor area, dwelling unit, means the floor area as defined preceding, except that only those parts of a dwelling unit that are permanent, structural parts of the dwelling, meet all requirements of the state construction code, and are designed, constructed, and heated for a yearround human occupancy, may be included in the computation of floor area used to meet minimum floor area requirements. 
    Floor area ratio means the ratio of the floor area of a building to the area of the lot on which it is located, calculated by dividing the floor area by the lot area and expressing it as a percentage. 
    Foster care facilities, adult, means a governmental or nongovernmental establishment that provides foster care to adults. It includes facilities and foster care homes for adults who are aged, mentally ill, developmentally disabled, or physically handicapped who require supervision on an ongoing basis but who do not require continuous nursing care. An adult foster care facility does not include nursing homes, homes for the aged, hospitals, alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation center, residential centers for persons released from or assigned to a correctional facility, or any other facilities which have been exempted from the definition of adult foster care facility by the Adult Foster Care Facility Licensing Act, Public Act No. 218 of 1979 (MCL 400.701 et seq.). The types of licensed adult foster care facilities include the following: 
(1)	Foster care small group home, adult, means a facility with the approved capacity to receive 12 or fewer adults who are provided supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, for 24 hours a day, five or more days a week, and for two or more consecutive weeks for compensation. 
(2)	Foster care large group home, adult, means a facility with approved capacity to receive at least 13 but not more than 20 adults to be provided supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, for 24 hours a day, five or more days a week, and for two or more consecutive weeks for compensation. 
(3)	Foster care family home, adult, means a private residence with the approved capacity to receive six or fewer adults to be provided with foster care for five or more days a week and for two or more consecutive weeks. The adult foster care family home licensee must be a member of the household and an occupant of the residence. 
(4)	Foster care congregate facility, adult, means an adult foster care facility with the approved capacity to receive more than 20 adults to be provided with foster care. 
    Garage, private, means an accessory building or structure used principally for storage of automobiles and for other incidental storage purpose only. 
    Grade means the degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface. 
    Grade, finished, means the final elevation of the ground surface after development. 
    Grade, natural, means the elevation of the ground surface in its natural state, before manmade alterations. 
    Hazardous substances means hazardous substances include hazardous chemicals as defined by the state department of community health and state department of labor and economic growth; flammable and combustible liquids as defined by the department of state police, fire marshal division; hazardous materials as defined by the U.S. Department of Transportation; and critical materials, polluting materials, and hazardous waste as defined by the state department of environmental quality. Petroleum products and waste oil are subject to regulation under this section. 
    Home occupation means an occupation that is carried on in the home by resident members of the family, being clearly incidental and secondary to the principal residential use. 
    Horse stable means a structure that is used for the shelter and care of horses. 
    Hospital, general, means an installation providing health services primarily for in-patient medical or surgical care of the sick or injured, and includes related facilities such as laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central service facilities and staff offices which are integral parts of the facilities. 
    Housing for the elderly means a building or group of buildings containing dwellings intended for, and solely occupied by, elderly persons as defined by the federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988. Housing for the elderly may include independent and/or assisted living arrangements but shall not include convalescent or nursing facilities regulated by the state. 
    Intensive livestock operation means an agricultural operation in which type II and type III animals are bred and/or raised within a confined area, either inside or outside, generally at densities greater than permitted by section 46-282. Such operations are further characterized as having an animal feeding building or feedlot which is a facility, other than a pasture, where animals are fed and/or confined. 
    Junkyard means a place, structure, parcel or use of land where junk, waste, discard, salvage or similar materials such as old iron or other metal, wood, lumber, glass, paper, rags, cloth, leather, rubber, bagging, cordage, barrels, containers, etc., are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including auto wrecking yards, inoperative machines, used lumber yards, house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment and including establishments for the sale, purchase, or storage of salvaged machinery and the processing of used, discarded, or salvaged materials, for any 30 consecutive days. 
    Kennel, commercial, means a commercial kennel means any, building, structure, enclosure or premises where five or more dogs or cats, six months of age or older, are kept for commercial purposes, including boarding, breeding, or sale, or the rendering of services for profit. For the purposes hereof, five animals kept and maintained as a hobby kennel, or for any other purpose, shall be deemed and considered a commercial kennel. 
    Kennel, hobby, means any building, structure, enclosure or other premises where four or less dogs or cats, six months of age or older, are kept, harbored or maintained: 
(1)	For showing in recognized dog shows, obedience trials, or field trials.
(2)	For working and hunting.
(3)	For improving the variety or breed with a view to exhibition in shows and trials.
(4)	For household pets.
    Landscaping means that the following definitions shall apply in the application of this chapter: 
(1)	Berm means a landscaped mound of earth which blends with the surrounding terrain. 
(2)	Buffer means a landscaped area composed of living material, wall, berm, or combination thereof, established and/or maintained to provide visual screening, noise reduction, and transition between conflicting types of land uses. 
(3)	Conflicting nonresidential land uses means any nonresidential use, such as office, commercial, industrial, research, parking or public road right-of-way land use which abuts a residential land use. 
(4)	Conflicting residential use means any residential land use developed at a higher density which abuts a residential land use developed at a lower density. 
(5)	Greenbelt means a landscaped area, established at a depth of the minimum required front yard setback within a zoning district, which is intended to provide a transition between a public road right-of-way and an existing or proposed land use and/or between a conflicting land use and an existing or proposed land use. 
(6)	Opacity means the state of being impervious to sight. 
(7)	Plant material means a collection of living evergreen and/or deciduous, woody-stemmed trees, shrubs, vines and ground cover. 
    Large scale retail establishment means a retail establishment, commonly referred to as a big box store, which exceeds 50,000 square feet in gross floor area. 
    Livestock means the word livestock means horses, cattle, sheep, and swine. 
    Loading space, off-street, means space logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used, and accessible to such vehicles when required off-street parking spaces are filled. Required off-street loading space is not to be included as off-street parking space in computation of required off-street parking space. 
    Lodging means a series of attached, semidetached or detached rental units containing bedroom, bathroom and closet space. Such units shall provide for overnight lodging, are offered to the public for compensation and shall cater primarily to the public traveling by motor vehicle. 
    Lot means a lot is the contiguous land in the same ownership that is not divided by a street right-of-way or a street or drive easement, including any part thereof subject to any easement for any purpose other than a street or drive, and excluding any portion thereof in a street right-of-way or a street or drive easement of at least sufficient size to meet minimum requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. Such lot shall have frontage on a public street, or on a private street approved by the township board, and may consist of: 
(1)	A single lot of record;
(2)	A portion of a lot of record;
(3)	Any combination of complete and/or portions of lots of record;
(4)	A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; or
(5)	Any parcel of land which constitutes or is treated as a condominium unit in accordance with the state condominium act, being P.A. 1978, No. 59, as amended, shall be defined and treated as a lot for all purposes of this chapter provided that in no case of division or combination shall the area of any lot or parcel created, including residuals, be less than that required by this chapter. 
    Lot coverage means the percentage of the lot area covered by the ground floor of principal and accessory buildings. 
    Lot depth means the distance between the midpoints of the straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear. 
    Lot frontage means the front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest the street. For the purposes of determining yard requirements on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated under the definition of the term "yards" in this section. For the purpose of determining minimum lot width the frontage of only one street shall be used. 
    Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision and is shown on a plat or map thereof which has been recorded in the office of the register of deeds for county prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived; or a parcel of land described by metes and bounds which is the subject of a deed or land contract recorded in said office prior to said date. 
    Lot types means: 
(1)	Corner lot means a lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. A lot abutting a curved street shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines to the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
(2)	Interior lot means a lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a street. 
(3)	Through lot means a lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street, and may be referred to as a double frontage lot. 
    Lot width means the required distance between the side lot lines, measured in a straight line at the two points where the required front setback intersects the side lot lines. For lots located on the turning circle of a cul-de-sac, the lot width may be reduced to 80 percent of the required lot width. 
    Lot, zoning, means a tract or parcel of land which is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed or built as a unit, under single ownership or control. A zoning lot may or may not coincide with a lot of record. 
    Manufactured housing means a dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the building site and bearing a seal that it is built in compliance with applicable national or state construction code standards. 
    Material change means includes, but is not limited to, any commencement of mining, excavation, grading, or land clearance; deposit of refuse, waste, or fill on land not already used for that purpose or permitted to be used for that purpose by this chapter, or which extends the height of any existing deposit above the level of the land adjoining the site; alteration of a shore, bank, or floodplain of a river, stream, or of any lake or pond, natural or artificial. 
    Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a chassis and designated to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical system contained in the structure. Mobile home does not include a recreation vehicle. 
    Mobile home pad means that part of a mobile home site specifically designated for the placement of a mobile home. 
    Mobile home park means a parcel or tract of land under the control of a person on which three or more mobile homes are located on a continual nonrecreational basis and which is offered to the public for that purpose regardless of whether a charge is made therefor, together with any building, structure, enclosure, street, equipment or facility used or intended for use incident to the occupancy of a mobile home and which is not intended for use as a temporary trailer park. 
    Mobile home park, seasonal, means a parcel or tract of land under the control of a person on which three or more mobile homes are located on a continual or temporary basis but occupied on a temporary basis only, and which is offered to the public for that purpose regardless of whether a charge is made therefor, together with any building, enclosure, street, equipment, or facility used or intended for use incident to the occupancy of a mobile home. The term "seasonal mobile home park" does not include a campground licensed pursuant to laws of the state. 
    Mobile home site means the entire area which is designated for use by a specific mobile home. 
    Motor home means a self-propelled, licensed vehicle prefabricated on its own chassis, intended for recreation activities and temporary occupancy. 
    Natural features means a wetland, as defined and regulated by the state and means a watercourse, including a lake, pond, river, stream or creek. 
    Nonconforming use, building or structure means a structure or building lawfully constructed that does not conform to the requirements of the district in which it is situated. 
    Nursing or convalescent home means a state licensed facility for the care of children, of the aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders. Said home shall conform and qualify for license under state law even through state law has different size regulations. 
    Open air business uses means, as used in this chapter, shall be deemed to include any of the following businesses when said business is not conducted from a wholly enclosed building: 
(1)	Bicycle, trailer, motor vehicle, boats or home equipment sale or rental services.
(2)	Outdoor display and sale of garages, swimming pools, and similar uses.
(3)	Retail sale of trees, fruits, vegetables, shrubbery, plants, seed, topsoil, humus, fertilizer, trellis, lawn furniture, playground equipment, and other home garden supplies and equipment. 
(4)	Tennis courts, archery ranges, shuffleboard, horseshoe courts, miniature golf, golf driving range, amusement park or similar recreational uses. 
    Ordinary high water mark means the line between upland and bottomland which persists through successive changes in water levels, below which the presence of action of the water is so common or recurrent that the character of the land is marked distinctly from the upland and is apparent in the soil itself, the configuration of the surface of the soil and vegetation. On an inland lake which has a level established by law, it means the high established level. Where water returns to its natural level as a result of the permanent removal or abandonment of a dam, it means the natural ordinary high water mark. 
    Parcel means a piece or tract of land. 
    Park means a public or private area dedicated to recreation use and generally characterized by its natural historic, and landscape features. It is used for both passive and active forms of recreation and may be designed to serve the residents of a neighborhood, community, or region. For purposes of this chapter, the following more specific definitions shall apply: 
(1)	Neighborhood park means a park which is designed and equipped to primarily serve neighboring residential areas. 
(2)	Community park means a park which is designed and equipped to serve the township, as well as neighboring residential areas. 
(3)	Regional park means a park which is designed and equipped to serve areas outside the township, as well as the township. 
    Parking facility, off-street, means a land surface or area providing vehicular parking spaces along with adequate drives and aisles for maneuvering so as to provide access for entrance and exit for the parking of motor vehicles. 
    Parking space means one unit of parking facility provided for the parking of one vehicle. 
    Private road means a means of ingress and egress serving two or more parcels which is not dedicated for public use to the county road commission. 
    Public utility means any person, firm, corporation, municipal department or board duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal, state, or municipal regulations, to the public: electricity, gas, steam, communications, telegraph, transportation, water or sanitary sewer facilities. 
    Recreational equipment means equipment designed and used primarily for recreational use such as boats and boat trailers, travel trailers, pick-up campers or coaches (designed to be mounted on automotive vehicles), motorized dwellings, tent trailers, and the like, and cases and boxes used for transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not. 
    Restaurant means any establishment whose principal business is the sale of food and beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose method of operation is characteristic of a carry-out restaurant, drive-in restaurant, drive-through restaurant, standard restaurant or bar/lounge, or a combination thereof, as defined below: 
(1)	Carry-out restaurant means a restaurant whose method of operation involves the sale of food, beverages and/or frozen desserts in disposable or edible containers or wrappers in a ready-to-consume state for consumption primarily off the premises. 
(2)	Drive-in restaurant means a restaurant whose method of operation involves delivery of prepared food so as to allow its consumption in a motor vehicle or elsewhere on the premises, but outside of an enclosed building. 
(3)	Drive-through restaurant means a restaurant whose method of operation involves the delivery of prepared food to the customer in a motor vehicle, typically through a drive-through window, for consumption off the premises. 
(4)	Standard restaurant means a restaurant whose method of operation involves either: 
a.	The delivery of prepared food by wait staff to customers seated at tables within a completely enclosed building; or 
b.	The acquisition by customers of prepared food at a cafeteria line and its subsequent consumption by the customers at tables within a completely enclosed building. 
    Road. See Street. 
    Roadside stand means a temporary building or structure operated for the purpose of selling only produce raised or produced on the premises where situated, and its use shall not make a commercial district, nor shall its use be deemed a commercial activity. 
    Salvage yard means an open area where waste, used or second-hand materials are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. The term "salvage yard" includes automobile wrecking yards and any area of more than 200 square feet used for the storage, keeping or abandonment of salvaged materials, but does not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings. 
    Screen means a structure providing enclosure, such as a fence, and a visual barrier between the area enclosed and the adjacent property. A screen may also be a nonstructure, consisting of shrubs, or other growing materials. 
    Self-storage facility means a building consisting of individual, small self-contained units that are leased for the storage of personal and household goods. 
    Setback means the minimum horizontal distance between the building or structure, excluding steps and unroofed porches, and the adjacent property line, lot line, right-of-way, or easement if for ingress and egress. 
    Shopping center means a grouping of commercial establishments with the following characteristics: 
(1)	A parcel of land and buildings under single ownership or control;
(2)	A single building or a carefully coordinated group of buildings located on contiguous parcels having a variety of stores creating attraction of the unit as a whole; and 
(3)	A large area of free parking.
    Sign means any device, fixture, placard, or structure that uses any color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol, or writing to advertise, announce the purpose of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate information of any kind to the public. House numbers, addresses, and name plates not exceeding two square feet shall not be considered signs. 
(1)	Abandoned sign means after a period of two years a sign which no longer directs or exhorts any person, or advertises a bona fide business, lesser, owner, product or activity conducted or product available on the premises where such sign is displayed. 
(2)	Animated sign means any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene. 
(3)	Banner means any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is attached to a pole or a building at one or more edges. National flags, state or municipal flags, or the official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered banners. 
(4)	Beacon means any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same zoning lot as the light source: also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. 
(5)	Building marker means any sign indicating the name of a building and date and incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut into masonry surface or made of other permanent material. 
(6)	Building sign means any sign attached to any part of a building, as contrasted to a ground sign. Building signs shall include the following types of signs as defined in this section: canopy, projecting, wall, permanent window, and channel letter signs. 
(7)	Business center sign means a sign which identifies a group of two or more stores, offices, research facilities, or manufacturing facilities which collectively have a name different than the name of the individual establishments and which have common parking facilities, or which is platted business subdivision. 
(8)	Canopy sign means any sign that is part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance window, or outdoor service area. 
(9)	Casual sales sign means a temporary sign used for special sales, not scheduled with any regularity, and includes home garage sales, attic sales, flea market sales and other occasional casual sales whether or not commercially oriented. The sign must be located on the same lot as the special sale. 
(10)	Changeable copy sign means a sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face of the surface of the sign. A sign on which the message changes more than one time per day shall be considered an animated sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this chapter. A sign on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature shall be considered a time and temperature portion of a sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this chapter. 
(11)	Channel letter sign means any sign installed as a cabinet or as individual letters, with self-contained illumination. Some channel letters may be mounted on a raceway (wire way) while others may be mounted flat against the building wall. Channel letter signs shall not exceed more than 12 inches from the building wall. 
(12)	Commercial activity signs means a temporary sign which includes signs advertising the opening of a new business, sales, change in hours of operation, or the conduct of commercial activities during other than regular business hours. Temporary banners are included in this definition. 
(13)	Commercial message means any sign wording, logo, or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity. 
(14)	District means zoning district as established by this chapter. 
(15)	Flag means any fabric or banner containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, or other entity. 
(16)	Ground sign means any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure. 
(17)	Height of sign means the vertical distance to the top edge of the copy area or structure, whichever is higher, as measured from the adjacent street grade. 
(18)	Identification sign means a sign which carries only the name of the firm, the major enterprise, or the principal product or service offered for sale on the premises or a combination of these signs only to identify location of said premises and not to advertise. Such situated, or on which the principal product is offered for sale. 
(19)	Incidental sign means a sign, generally information, that has a purpose secondary to the use of a zone lot on which it is located, such as "no parking," "entrance," "loading only," "telephone," handicap," "no hunting," "no trespassing" and other similar directives. No commercial message shall be considered incidental. 
(20)	Incidental business sign means signs associated with the drive-thru portion of a business, such as a menu-board sign. 
(21)	Integral sign means integral signs are names of buildings, dates of erection, monument citations, commemorative tablets and the like, when carved into stone, concrete or similar material or made of other permanent type construction and made an integral part of the structure. 
(22)	Nonconforming sign means any sign that does not conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(23)	Off-site sign (off-premises sign) means a sign other than an on-site sign including billboards. 
(24)	On-site sign (on-premises sign) means a sign which advertises or identifies only goods, services, facilities, events, or attractions on the premises where located. 
(25)	Outdoor advertising sign means a sign, including billboards, on which the written or pictorial information is intended to advertise a use, product, service, goods, event or facility located on other premises, and which is intended primarily for advertising purposes. 
(26)	Pennant means any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind. 
(27)	Political sign means a sign relating to the election of a person to public office or relating to a political party or relating to an issue or matter to be voted upon at an election called by a public body. Political signs are considered temporary signs. 
(28)	Portable sign means any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs converted to A or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles or trailers parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is licensed operable and used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business. 
(29)	Projecting sign means any sign affixed perpendicular to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends more than six inches beyond the surface of such building or wall, with the exception of channel letter signs. 
(30)	Real estate sign means a sign advertising that the property said sign is located upon is for sale, rent or lease. Real estate signs are considered temporary signs. 
(31)	Residential entry sign means a sign at the entrance of a residential development for the purposes of identifying a subdivision, site condominium, multiple-family development, or mobile home park. 
(32)	Roof sign means any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof. 
(33)	Roof sign, integral means any sign erected or constructed as an integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and such that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six inches. 
(34)	Suspended sign means a sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface. 
(35)	Temporary sign means a sign that is intended to be displayed for a limited period of time. 
(36)	Wall sign means a sign attached parallel to a wall, painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface. 
(37)	Window sign means any sign, pictures, symbol, or combination thereof, designed to communicate information about a community activity, business, commodity, event, sale, or service that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window. Political signs, or other noncommercial advertising, shall not be deemed to be window signs for the purpose of this chapter and shall not be subject to the provisions regulating window signs in this chapter. 
    Special land use means a use which may be permitted after recommendation by the planning commission and approval by the township board. A special land use may be granted in a zoning district only when there is a specific provision for such use in this chapter. A special land use is a special land use as provided in Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3101 et seq.). 
    Story means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it. 
    Story, one-half, means a story under the gable, hip, or gambrel roof, the wall plates on which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than two feet above the floor of such story and the floor area shall not exceed two-thirds of the area of the floor below. 
    Street means a traffic way which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Street line means the right-of-way line of a public street or the easement line of a private street approved by the township board. 
    Structure means anything constructed, erected or placed with a fixed location on the ground or affixed to something having a fixed location on the ground. 
    Time limits means time limits means calendar days, unless otherwise specified in this chapter. 
    Travel trailer means a vehicular, portable structure built on a nonmotorized chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational purposes, having a body width not exceeding eight feet. 
    Undefined terms means any term not defined herein shall have the meaning of common or standard use. 
    Variance means a relaxation of the terms of this chapter where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
    Vehicle means, unless specifically indicated otherwise, a motorized vehicle intended to be driven on roads or trails, such as cars, pickup trucks, vans and motorcycles, and other vehicles defined as motor vehicles by the state vehicle code. 
    Vehicle collision repair facility means a facility which offers and provides for, vehicle frame straightening, repair or replacement of vehicle sheet metal, vehicle painting or repainting, and similar related services. 
    Vehicle repair facility, major, means a facility which offers and provides for, repair of mechanical, electrical, cooling, exhaust, brake, and power system repairs, including, transmission repair shops, shops used for the internal repair or engine components and drive train repair, and radiator repair shops. Collision shops are included in this definition. 
    Vehicle repair facility, minor, means a facility which offers or provides for, repair of mechanical, electrical, cooling, exhaust, brake, and power system repairs. Collision shops, transmission repair shops, shops used for the internal repair of engine components and drive train repair, and radiator repair, are expressly excluded from this definition. 
    Vehicle sales and service facility means a building or premises used primarily for the sale, lease or rental of new and/or used automobiles. These facilities may also provide both minor and major repair services in a completely enclosed building as an ancillary service. 
    Wetland means land characterized by the presence of water or a frequency and duration sufficient to support and that under normal circumstances does support wetland vegetation or aquatic life and is commonly referred to as a bog, swamp, or marsh. 
    Wind energy conversion system (WECS) means any device such as a turbine, windmill or charger that converts wind energy to a usable form of energy. 
    Ambient noise means regularly occurring background noise not produced by the object or device in question. 
    Commercial wind energy conversion system means any WECS that is designed and built to provide electricity to the electric utility's power grid as an ongoing commercial enterprise or for commercial profit. 
    dB(A) means A-weighted decibels. This is the standard used to measure environmental noise. 
    On-site wind energy conversion system means a WECS which is used only by the primary residence or residences in a cooperative effort, business or agricultural operation and not sold or transferred to the electrical grid for commercial profit. 
    Wireless communications facilities means all structures and accessory facilities relating to the use of the radio frequency spectrum for the purpose of transmitting or receiving radio signals. This may include, but shall not be limited to, radio towers, television towers, telephone devices and exchanges, micro-wave relay facilities, telephone transmission equipment building and commercial mobile radio service facilities. Not included within this definition are: citizen band radio facilities; short wave receiving facilities; amateur (ham) radio facilities; satellite dishes; and, governmental facilities which are subject to state or federal law or regulations which preempt municipal regulatory authority. For purposes of this chapter, the following additional terms are defined: 
(1)	Attached wireless communications facilities means wireless communications facilities that are affixed to existing structures, such as existing buildings, towers, water tanks, utility poles, and the like. A wireless communication support structure proposed to be newly established shall not be included within this definition. 
(2)	Wireless communication support structures means structures erected or modified to support wireless communication antennas. Support structures within this definition include, but shall not be limited to, monopoles, lattice towers, light poles, wood poles and guyed towers, or other structures which appear to be something other than a mere support structure. 
(3)	Collocation means the location by two or more wireless communication providers of wireless communication facilities on a common structure, tower, or building, with the view toward reducing the overall number of structures required to support wireless communications antennas within the community. 
    Yard, front, means an open, unoccupied space extending the full width of the lot and situated between the street line and the front building line and parallel to the street line. 
    Yard, minimum, means the minimum distance which any building must be located from a property line, a street right-of-way line, an easement line of an approved private street, or a high water line. 
    Yard, rear, means an open, unoccupied space extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear building line and parallel to the rear lot line. 
    Yard, side, means an open, unoccupied space situated between the side building line and the adjacent side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard and parallel to the side lot line. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 2.02; Ord. No. 129, § 2.02, 2-1-2010; Ord. No. 156-14, 4-7-2014; Ord. No. 162-15, 5-4-2015; Ord. No. 163-15, 5-4-2015; Ord. No. 164-15, 5-4-2015 ) 
Secs. 46-7-46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-31. - Enforcement officer. 
    The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the enforcement officer, who shall be appointed by the township board. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 3.01)
Sec. 46-32. - Duties of enforcement officer. 
    The enforcement officer (also referred to as the director of planning and building or his authorized representative) shall have the power to grant zoning compliance and occupancy permits and to make inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for the enforcement officer to approve any plans or issue a building permit for any excavation or construction until such plans have been found to be in conformity with this chapter. To this end, the director of planning and building shall require that every application for a permit for excavation, construction, moving, or alteration or change in type of use or the type of occupancy, be accompanied by written statement and plans or plats drawn to scale, in triplicate, and showing the following, in sufficient detail, to ascertain whether the proposed work or use is in conformance with this chapter. 
(1)	The actual shape, location, and dimensions of the lot.
(2)	The shape, size, and location of all buildings or other structures to be erected, altered, or moved, and of any buildings or other structures already on the lot. 
(3)	The existing and intended use of the lot and of all such structures upon it, including, in residential areas, the number of dwelling units the building is intended to accommodate. 
(4)	The signature of the fee holder of the premises concerned.
(5)	Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed. 
(6)	If the proposed excavation, construction, moving, or alteration of use of land as set forth in the application are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, the director of planning and building shall issue a permit. If any application for such permit is not approved, the director of planning and building shall state in writing on the application, the cause for such disapproval. Issuance of a permit shall in no case be construed as waiving any provisions of this chapter and a permit issued contrary to the terms of this chapter shall be void. 
(7)	The director of planning and building under no circumstances is permitted to grant exceptions to the actual meaning of any clause, order, or regulation contained in this chapter to any person making application to excavate, construct, remove, alter, or use either buildings, structures or land within the township. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 3.02)
Sec. 46-33. - Permits. 
    The following shall apply in the issuance of any permit: 
(1)	Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to commence excavation for, construction of any building or structure, structural changes, or repairs in any existing building or structure, or moving of an existing building, without first obtaining a building permit from the director of planning and building. No permit shall be issued for construction, alteration or remodeling of any building or structure until an application has been submitted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter showing that the construction proposed is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with the state construction code, and with other applicable codes and ordinances. 
a.	No plumbing, electrical, drainage or other permit shall be issued until the director of planning and building has determined that the plans and designated use indicate that the structure and premises, if constructed as planned and proposed, will conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
b.	Alteration or repair of an existing building or structure, shall include any changes in structural member, stairways, basic construction type, kind or class of occupancy, light or ventilation, means of ingress and egress, or any other changes affecting or regulated by the state construction code, or this chapter, except for minor repairs or changes not involving any of the aforesaid provisions. 
(2)	Permits for new use of land. A permit shall also be obtained for the new use of land, whether the land is presently vacant or a change in land use is proposed. 
(3)	Permits for new use of buildings or structures. A permit shall also be obtained for any change in use of an existing building or structure to a different class or type. 
(4)	Single-family construction or additions; potential multiple use; restrictive covenant. In those instances where the director of planning and building determines that because of the nature of the floor plan and construction of a single-family home or an addition to a single-family home, there is a significant potential for multiple use of a property zoned for single-family use, the director may require that the owners of record of the subject property sign a restrictive covenant on a form as developed by the director. The purpose of such covenant shall be to make clear the zoning limitation with regard to the property. The cost of recording such covenant shall be paid by the applicant. 
If it should appear to the director of planning and building that the proposed construction or addition in fact creates a multiple use either by virtue of its size or the division of space within the structure, the director of planning and building shall deny the application. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 3.03)
Sec. 46-34. - Certificates of occupancy. 
    It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any land, building, or structure for which a building permit is required, and to use or permit to be used any building or structure hereafter altered, extended, erected, repaired or moved, until the director of planning and building shall have issued a certificate of occupancy stating that the provisions of this chapter have been complied with. 
(1)	Certificate of occupancy. The certificate of occupancy, is required for occupancy or use of new construction or of renovations to existing buildings and structures as approved by the state construction code. 
(2)	Records of certificates. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept in the office of the director of planning and building, and copies of such certificates of occupancy shall be furnished upon request to a person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the property involved. 
(3)	Certificate for accessory buildings to dwellings. Accessory buildings or structures to dwellings shall not require a separate certificate of occupancy, but rather, may be included in the certificate of occupancy for the principal dwelling, building or structure on the same lot when such accessory buildings or structures are completed at the same time as the principal use. 
(4)	Certificates for parts of buildings. The director of planning and building shall, upon request, issue a certificate of occupancy for a part of a building or structure prior to the completion of the entire building or structure if the director of planning and building shall determine that the occupancy or use of the completed part shall not materially interfere with or be interfered or endangered by the completion of the remainder of the building or structure and that the remainder of the building or structure can reasonably be completed within one year from the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the part and if the person to whom the building permit shall have been issued shall certify that the remainder of the building or structure shall be completed within one year. If, after the issuance of such certificate of occupancy for a portion of a building or structure, the director of planning and building shall determine that the conditions for issuance of such permit no longer subsist or that the building or structure cannot or will not be completed within the time specified above, the director of planning and building shall revoke such certificate of occupancy and the person to whom such revoked permit shall have been issued shall, forthwith upon receipt of notice of such revocation, terminate and abandon or cause the termination or abandonment of such occupancy or use. 
(5)	Application for certificates of occupancy. Any person applying for a building permit shall, at the same time, apply to the director of planning and building in writing for a certificate of occupancy. It shall be the duty of such person to notify the director of planning and building upon completion of the building or structure. The director of planning and building shall, within five business days after actual receipt of such notification, inspect such building or structure, and, if he shall determine that the building or structure, or part thereof, or the proposed use of the premises is in conformity with this and other applicable ordinances and laws, the director of planning and building shall forthwith issue a certificate of occupancy therefor. If the director of planning and building shall determine that a violation exists, he shall not issue a certificate of occupancy and shall forthwith notify the applicant of such refusal and the cause therefor. 
(6)	Certificates for commercial and industrial uses. In all cases where the certificate of occupancy is for a commercial or industrial use, the inspection, as set in subsection (5) of this section, shall be conducted by the director of planning and building. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 3.04)
Sec. 46-35. - Fees, escrow accounts and bonds. 
(a)	Fees shall be assessed and collected in advance of the issuance of permits and the commencement of the work on a project for the purpose of covering the cost of administering the file, inspecting the work and reproducing copies therein as required under the provisions of this chapter. These fees may be set by a resolution of the township board from time to time. 
(b)	A deposit of funds shall be placed in escrow with the planning and building department for the inspection of all site improvements and related reports and recommendations by the township engineer, township planning consultant and/or other designee as may be required to assist in the certification process. The amount of escrow deposit shall be set by a resolution of the township board from time to time and any unused portion of an escrow account shall be refunded to the applicant upon issuance of a final certificate of occupancy. 
(c)	Bond requirements.
(1)	Site improvements. 
a.	Site preparation activities, including without limitation excavations, tree removal, land balancing, top-soil removal, septic installation are prohibited prior to the issuance of all applicable construction permits, and compliance with the bond requirements of this section. 
b.	If all site improvements are not completed prior to the request for a certificate of occupancy, the director of planning and building may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy provided the applicant has filed a site improvement bond, with the township building department or clerk, ensuring completion of site improvements as identified by the director of planning and building. The site improvement bond shall be a cash bond in the form of a cash deposit, certified check or irrevocable bank/title company letter of credit payable to township, or a surety bond acceptable to township, equal to 125 percent of the estimated costs of the incomplete site improvements as determined by the director of planning and building and/or his designated representative. 
(2)	Building construction bond. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall file with the township building department or clerk, a cash bond in the form of a cash deposit, certified check or an irrevocable bank or title company letter of credit made out to township or a surety bond acceptable to township, assuring completion of the construction phase of the project. 
(3)	Private road improvement bond. On any project which requires construction modification or improvement of a private road, no building permit shall be issued until the applicant files with the township building department or clerk, a cash bond in the form of a cash deposit, certified check or an irrevocable bank/title company letter of credit payable to township, or a surety bond acceptable to township in an amount equal to 125 percent of the estimated cost of the completion of the private road as determined by the township's construction engineers. 
(4)	Release of bond. A building permit bond, site improvement bond or private road bond shall not be released until the requirements of the bond have been met and all improvements and/or corrections to work installed incorrectly are complete in accordance with all of the codes and ordinances of the township, provided; however, monies deposited in the form of a cash deposit or a irrevocable bank/title company letter of credit may be released in proportion to a percentage of the work completed as certified by the director of planning and building and approved by township board. Up to 15 percent of any bond may be held for six months after completion of all work covered to apply on any defects that appear after completion. 
(5)	Waiver of bond on single lot residential construction. The director of planning and building may waive or modify bond requirements for construction of a single-family dwelling on any single parcel. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 3.05)
Sec. 46-36. - Municipal civil infraction, nuisance per se; remedies. 
(a)	Any person or anyone acting on behalf said person who should violate the provisions of this chapter, or who fails to comply with the regulatory measures or conditions adopted by the board of appeals, planning commission or the township board, shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(b)	Uses of land, and dwellings, buildings, or structures, including tents, trailer coaches and mobile homes, used, erected, altered, raised, or converted in violation of any provision of this chapter are hereby declared to be a nuisance per se. The court may, in addition to the remedies provided in subsection (a) of this section, order such nuisance abated and the owner and/or agent in charge of such dwelling, building, structure, tent, trailer coach, mobile home, or land may be adjudged guilty of maintaining a nuisance per se. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 3.06)
Sec. 46-37. - Public notification. 
    All requirements for a public hearing shall comply with the Michigan zoning enabling act, Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3101 et seq.). 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 14.01)
Secs. 46-38-46-64. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SITE PLAN REVIEW[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Submission and approval of site plan, MCL 125.3501.

Sec. 46-65. - Intent. 
    The intent of this division is to require site plan review and to provide for consultation and cooperation between the developer and the township so as to realize maximum utilization of land and minimum adverse effects upon the surrounding land uses. Through application of these provisions, compliance with this chapter and the master plan of the township will be assured, and the township will develop in an orderly fashion consistent with public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 7.01)
Sec. 46-66. - Requirements. 
(a)	Preliminary site plans shall be required for all special land uses as set forth in division 3 of this article. An applicant may also elect to submit a preliminary site plan as an optional step to obtain feedback on a proposed development. A preliminary site plan shall meet all of the criteria and standards set forth in section 46-67. 
(b)	Final site plan review and approval as set forth in section 46-68 is required for all proposed uses and structures (including parking lots) within the township, except for one-family detached dwellings and agricultural uses. Site plan review and approval shall also be required for all site condominium projects, as set forth in section 46-248. 
(c)	Final site plan review and approval as set forth in section 46-68 is required for existing principal or accessory structures or uses (including parking lots) where an alteration, addition, expansion, change or conversion: 
(1)	Constitutes an increase to the existing structure or use of 1,000 or more square feet or ten percent, whichever is less; or 
(2)	Would require a variance from the provisions of this chapter, regardless of its size.
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 7.02)
Sec. 46-67. - Preliminary site plan. 
(a)	A preliminary site plan is a generalized site plan required to be submitted for review of special land uses by the township planning commission. An applicant may also elect to submit a preliminary site plan as an optional step in the overall site plan review process to obtain feedback on a proposed development. The purpose of such preliminary review is to confirm compliance with township standards, policies and relationship to the master plan, as well as to suggest changes necessary, if any, for the final site plan approval. 
(b)	Applicants shall file a preliminary site plan in conjunction with a special land use application, as set forth in section 46-108. 
(c)	Information required for review. Every preliminary site plan submitted to the planning commission shall include the following information: 
(1)	The description, location, size and shape of the property involved.
(2)	The shape, size and location of existing and proposed buildings, parking areas and service drives, loading zones, location of existing and proposed public streets serving the property, and natural features including topography and soils. 
(3)	The location of all existing and proposed water and sewage treatment systems serving the property. 
(4)	Any other information deemed necessary to properly illustrate the development concept to the planning commission. 
(d)	The planning commission shall review the preliminary site plan to determine if a conditional land use may be approved, and/or if the overall development concept of an optional preliminary site plan is acceptable. 
(e)	Approval of the special land use and preliminary site plan by the planning commission shall constitute approval of the special use but shall vest no rights in the applicant regarding approval of the final site plan inasmuch as the specific details of a site plan prepared in accordance with section 46-68 serve as the basis for determining that all township standards have been met. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 7.03)
Sec. 46-68. - Final site plan. 
(a)	All final site plans shall be submitted to the director of building and planning at least 21 days prior to the next scheduled meeting of the planning commission and must contain the following: 
(1)	A completed application signed by the owner; if the owner is a corporation, the application must be signed by a corporate office; if the owner is a partnership, the application must be signed by a general partner; if the owner is an individual or individuals, each individual owner must sign the application. 
(2)	Sufficient copies, as determined by the director of building and planning, of the site plan meeting all informational requirements set forth in section 46-70. Incomplete plans will not be accepted. 
(3)	All items as required by section 46-70 shown on the site plan. 
(4)	Required fees.
(5)	Upon receipt of a complete application and site plan, the director of building and planning shall place review of the site plan on the next planning commission agenda. 
(6)	The township may refer the site plan to the township planner and engineer for review as well as other applicable outside agencies. 
(b)	Planning commission review. The planning commission will consider the application and take one of the following actions: 
(1)	Approval. Upon finding that the application and final site plan meet the criteria of site plan review in section 46-69, the planning commission shall recommend approval. 
(2)	Approval with minor revisions. Upon finding that the application and final site plan meet the criteria of site plan review in section 46-69, except for minor revisions which can be made and confirmed without further technical review, the planning commission may recommend approval, conditioned upon said revisions being made and reviewed by appropriate township staff and/or consultants. 
(3)	Tabling. Upon finding that the application and final site plan do not, but could, meet the criteria of site plan review in section 46-69 upon the making of revisions, confirmation of which requires further technical review, the planning commission may table its recommendation until the revised plan is resubmitted to the planning commission. 
(4)	Denial. Upon finding that the application and final site plan do not meet one or more of the criteria of site plan review in section 46-69 and that revisions necessary to meet said criteria are so extensive as to require the preparation of a new site plan, the planning commission shall recommend denial. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 7.04)
Sec. 46-69. - Criteria of final site plan review. 
    The site plan shall be reviewed and approved upon a finding that the following conditions are met: 
(1)	The proposed use will not be injurious to the surrounding neighborhood.
(2)	There is a proper relationship between major thoroughfares and proposed service drives, driveways and parking areas and provisions have been made for acceleration, deceleration and passing lanes or approaches so as to preserve the safety and convenience of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(3)	The location of buildings, outside storage receptacles, parking areas, screen walls and utility areas is such that the adverse effects of such uses will be minimized for the occupants of that use and surrounding areas. 
(4)	It provides for proper development of roads, easements and public utilities and protects the general health, safety, welfare and character of the township. 
(5)	It meets the requirements and standards for grading and surface drainage and for the design and construction of storm sewers, stormwater facilities, parking lots, driveways, water mains, sanitary sewers and for acceleration, deceleration and passing lanes or approaches as determined by the township engineers and as set forth in any township design and construction standards, which may be established. 
(6)	Proper access to all portions of the site and all sides of any structure is provided. All structures or groups of structures shall be so arranged as to permit emergency vehicle access by some practical means to all sides. Site features such as, but not limited to, trees and other plant materials, fences, retaining walls, berms, outdoor furniture, outdoor structures, and natural and artificial water bodies shall be arranged to permit adequate emergency vehicle access. 
(7)	Natural resources will be preserved to the maximum extent possible in the site design by developing in a manner which will not detrimentally affect or destroy natural features such as lakes, ponds, streams, wetlands, steep slopes, groundwater and woodlands. 
(8)	The proposed development respects the natural topography to the maximum extent possible by minimizing the amount of cutting, filling and grading required. 
(9)	The proposed development will not cause soil erosion or sedimentation.
(10)	Stormwater management systems and facilities will preserve the natural drainage characteristics and enhance the aesthetics of the site to the maximum extent possible, and will not substantially reduce or increase the natural retention or storage capacity of any wetland, water body or watercourse, or cause alterations which could increase flooding or water pollution on or off site. 
(11)	Wastewater treatment systems, including on-site septic systems, will be located and designed to minimize any potential degradation of surface water or groundwater quality. 
(12)	Site which include storage of hazardous materials or waste, fuels, salt, or chemicals will be designed to prevent spills and discharges of polluting materials to the surface of the ground, groundwater or nearby water bodies. 
(13)	The location of buildings, parking, drives, landscaping and other improvements on the site is appropriate and consistent with good design standards for the lot size, shape and general location. 
(14)	Landscaping, including grass, trees, shrubs and other vegetation is provided to maintain and improve the aesthetic quality of the site and area. 
(15)	The proposed use is in compliance with all township ordinances and any other applicable laws. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 7.05)
Sec. 46-70. - Information required on final site plan. 
    Final site plans shall consist of an overall plan for the entire development. Sheet size shall be at least 24 inches by 36 inches with plan view drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet for property less than three acres or one inch equals 100 feet for property three or more acres. A final site plan submitted for review and approval shall contain all of the following data prior to its submission to the planning commission for review: 
(1)	General Information. 
a.	Proprietors', applicants, and owners' names, addresses, and telephone numbers.
b.	Date (month, day, year), including revisions.
c.	Title block.
d.	Scale.
e.	North point.
f.	Location map drawn at a scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet with north point indicated.
g.	Architect, engineer, surveyor, landscape architect, or planner's seal.
h.	Existing lot lines, building lines, structures, parking areas, etc., within the site, and within 100 feet of the site. 
i.	Proposed lot lines, property lines and all structures, parking areas, etc. within the site, and within 100 feet of the site. 
j.	Centerline and existing and proposed right-of-way lines of any street.
k.	Zoning classification of petitioner's parcel and all abutting parcels.
l.	Gross acreage figure.
m.	Proximity to major thoroughfares and section corners.
(2)	Physical features. 
a.	Acceleration, deceleration and passing lanes and approaches.
b.	Proposed locations and dimensions of access drives, street intersections, driveway locations, sidewalks, bike paths, curbing and areas for public use. 
c.	Location of existing and proposed service facilities above and below ground, including:
1.	Well sites.
2.	Septic systems and other wastewater treatment systems. The location of the septic tank and the drainfield (soil absorption system) should be clearly identified. 
3.	Chemical and fuel storage tanks and containers.
4.	Storage, loading, and disposal areas for chemicals, hazardous substances, salt and fuels. 
5.	Water mains, hydrants, pump houses, standpipes and building services and sizes, where applicable. 
6.	Sanitary sewers and pumping stations, where applicable.
7.	Stormwater control facilities and structures including storm sewers, swales, retention and detention basins, drainageways, and other facilities, including calculations for sizes. 
8.	Location and dimension of all easements.
d.	Location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures with dimensioned floor plans, setback and yard dimensions, and typical elevation views. 
e.	Dimensioned parking spaces and calculations, drives and method of surfacing.
f.	Exterior lighting locations and illumination patterns.
g.	Location and description of all existing and proposed landscaping, berms, fencing and walls. 
h.	Trash receptacle and transformer pad location and method of screening.
i.	Dedicated road or service drive locations.
j.	Entrance details including sign locations and size.
k.	Designation of fire lanes.
l.	Any other pertinent physical features.
(3)	Natural features. 
a.	Soil characteristics of the parcel to at least the detail provided by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service "Soil Survey of Jackson County, Michigan," 1981. 
b.	Existing topography with a maximum contour interval of two feet, both on the site and beyond the site for a distance of 100 feet in all directions. Grading plan, showing finished contours so as to clearly indicate required cutting, filling ad grading. 
c.	Location of existing drainage courses and associated bodies of water, on and off site, and their elevations. 
d.	Location of existing wetlands.
e.	Location of natural resource features, including woodlands and areas with slopes greater than ten percent (one foot of vertical elevation for every ten feet of horizontal distance). 
f.	An impact assessment pursuant to section 46-392. 
(4)	Additional requirements for residential developments. 
a.	Density calculations by type of unit by bedroom counts.
b.	Designation of units by type and number of units in each building.
c.	Carport locations and details where proposed.
d.	Specific amount and location of recreation spaces.
e.	Type of recreation facilities to be provided in recreation space.
f.	Details of community building and fencing of swimming pool if proposed.
(5)	Additional requirements for commercial and industrial developments. 
a.	Loading/unloading areas.
b.	Total and usable floor area.
c.	Number of employees in peak usage.
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 7.06)
Sec. 46-71. - Notice of action or recommendation. 
    The planning commission shall note on a final site plan any action or recommendation regarding that plan and provide at least one copy of that plan together with any required written findings, conditions or reasons to the clerk. A copy of the planning commission minutes shall be sufficient to satisfy the requirement. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 7.07)
Sec. 46-72. - Building permits and conformity to final site plan. 
    After filing of the approved application and final site plan, satisfaction of any conditions of said approval and compliance with this chapter and other township ordinances, a building permit may be issued. All development and construction shall be in complete conformity with the site plan as approved, together with any conditions imposed. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 7.08)
Sec. 46-73. - Expiration of approval. 
    Final site plan approval is valid for a period of one year from the date of planning commission action within which time all necessary building or construction permits shall be secured and construction recommenced. The planning commission may grant an extension of site plan approval for up to one year. All requests for extensions shall be made in writing and include a statement of why the extension is necessary and confirmation of ability to complete construction in conformity with the final site plan as approved. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 7.09)
Secs. 46-74-46-104. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SPECIAL LAND USES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Special land uses, MCL 125.3502 et seq.

Sec. 46-105. - Need for careful regulation. 
    The formulation and enactment of this chapter is based upon the division of the township into districts in which certain specified uses are permitted by right. In addition to permitted uses, there are certain other special uses which may be necessary or desirable to allow in certain locations but, due to their actual or potential impact on neighboring uses or public facilities, need to be carefully regulated. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 8.01)
Sec. 46-106. - Authority to grant permits. 
    The township planning commission shall have the authority to grant special use permits, subject to such conditions of design and operation, safeguards and time limitation as it may determine for all conditional uses specified in the various provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 8.02)
Sec. 46-107. - Application and fees for special use permit. 
    Application for a special use permit shall be made to the township office, along with the required information and the required fee. After receipt for filing, the director of building and planning shall transmit a copy of the application form and the required information as set forth in section 46-108 to the township planning commission. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 8.03)
Sec. 46-108. - Information required on application for special use permit. 
    Following is the information required for: 
(1)	The applicant's name, address, and telephone number.
(2)	The names and addresses of all owners of record and other parties of interest.
(3)	The applicant's interest in the property, and if the applicant is not the fee-simple owner, the owner's signed authorization for the application. 
(4)	Recorded legal description, address, and tax parcel number of the property.
(5)	A scaled and accurate survey drawing, correlated with the recorded legal description, and showing all existing buildings, drives, and other improvements. 
(6)	A detailed written description of the proposed use, addressing the standards set forth in section 46-112. 
(7)	A preliminary site plan, meeting the requirements as set forth in section 46-67 herein. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 8.04)
Sec. 46-109. - Planning commission public hearing. 
    The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on an application for a conditional use permit within 65 days of the filing date. A public hearing shall be held in accordance with section 46-38. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 8.05)
Sec. 46-110. - Planning commission action. 
    The planning commission shall review the application for a special use permit in reference to the standards and findings required herein and in relation to the information provided at the public hearing. The planning commission may require additional information it deems necessary to make a decision. The planning commission shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the application for a special use permit. The planning commission's decision, the basis for the decision, and all conditions imposed, shall be included in the minutes of the meeting and shall be made a part of the record of the meeting at which action is taken. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 8.06)
Sec. 46-111. - Required standards and findings. 
(a)	The planning commission shall review the particular circumstances and facts of each proposed use in terms of the following standards and required findings, and shall incorporate a statement of findings and conclusions showing that such a use on the proposed site, lot or parcel meets the following standards: 
(1)	Will be harmonious, and in accordance, with the objectives and regulations of this chapter. 
(2)	Will be compatible with the natural environmental and existing land uses in the vicinity.
(3)	That the proposed use will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services, or that the persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to provide adequately any such service. 
(4)	That the proposed use will not be detrimental, hazardous, or disturbing to the existing or future neighboring uses, persons, property or the public welfare. 
(5)	That the proposed use will not create additional requirements at public cost for public facilities and services that will be detrimental to the economic welfare of the community. 
(6)	Will be compatible with the township's adopted Master Plan.
(b)	If the facts do not establish that the findings and standards set forth in this chapter will apply to the proposed use, the planning commission shall not grant a conditional use permit and shall incorporate a statement of findings and conclusions relative to the special land use. 
(c)	No application for a conditional use permit which has been denied as a whole or in part by the township board shall be resubmitted for a period of 365 days from the date of such denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of changed conditions as determined by the director of planning and building. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 8.07)
Sec. 46-112. - Conditions of approval. 
    In granting a conditional use permit, the planning commission may impose conditions it deems necessary to achieve the objectives and standards of this chapter, the standards of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3101 et seq.), and the public health, safety and welfare of township. Failure to comply with any such conditions shall be considered a violation of this chapter. An approved conditional use permit, including all attached conditions, shall run with the parcel in the approval and shall be binding upon all successors and assigns. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 8.08)
Secs. 46-113-46-137. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning board of appeals, MCL 125.3601 et seq.

Sec. 46-138. - Creation of board of appeals. 
    There is hereby established a zoning board of appeals, which shall perform its duties and exercise its powers as provided in Article VI of Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3601 et seq.), in such a way that the objectives of this chapter shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 16.01)
Sec. 46-139. - Meetings. 
(a)	All meetings of the zoning board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman, and at such times as its rules of procedure may specify. All meetings of the zoning board of appeals shall be open to the public. The zoning board of appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member on each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its findings, proceedings at hearings and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of township clerk and shall be a public record. 
(b)	The zoning board of appeals shall have the power to require the attendance of witnesses, administer oaths, compel testimony, and the production of books, papers, files, and other evidence pertinent to the matters before it. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 16.02)
Sec. 46-140. - Appeals to the zoning board of appeals. 
(a)	A claim for a zoning appeal is received by the zoning administrator. Appeals can be filed by: 
(1)	A person aggrieved; or
(2)	An officer, department, board, or bureau of the state or local unit of government.
(b)	The appeals board shall have the authority to hear appeals concerning:
(1)	All questions that arise in the administration of this chapter, including interpretation of the zoning map. 
(2)	All administrative orders, requirements, decision or determinations made by an administrative official charged with enforcement of this chapter can be appealed. 
(3)	All decisions of the zoning administrator.
(4)	The zoning board of appeals shall have no authority to grant use variances or to appeal decisions made by the planning commission or township board. 
(c)	Upon receipt of a demand for appeal, the administrator will review the demand for appeal to ensure it is complete and the fee is paid. 
(1)	If the application is not complete, the administrator will return the application to the applicant with a letter that specifies the additional material requested. 
(2)	If the application is complete, the administrator and chairman of the appeals board shall establish a date to hold a hearing on the appeal. 
(d)	The appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed, unless the body or officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the zoning board of appeals that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would in the opinion of the body or officer cause imminent peril of life or property, in which case proceedings may be stayed by a restraining order issued by the zoning board of appeals or a circuit court. 
(e)	The notices shall be given not less than 15 days before the date of the hearing on a proposed zoning amendment pursuant to section 46-38. 
(f)	The appeals board shall hold a hearing on the demand for appeal.
(1)	Representation at hearing. Upon the hearing, any party or parties may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(2)	Standards for variance decision by the appeals board. The appeals board shall base its decisions on variances from the strict requirements of this chapter so that the spirit of this chapter is derived is observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done based on the following standards: 
a.	For dimensional variances. A dimensional variance may be granted by the zoning board of appeals only in cases where the applicant demonstrates in the official record of the public hearing that practical difficulty exists by showing all of the following: 
1.	That the need for the requested variance is due to unique circumstances or physical conditions of the property involved, such as narrowness, shallowness, shape, water, or topography and is not due to the applicants personal or economic difficulty. 
2.	That the need for the requested variance is not the result of the property owner or previous property owners (self created) based upon current regulations. 
3.	That strict compliance with regulations governing area, setback, frontage, height, bulk, density or other dimensional requirements will unreasonably prevent the property owner from using the property for a permitted purpose, or will render conformity with those regulations unnecessarily burdensome. 
4.	That the requested variance will not cause an adverse impact on surrounding property, property values, or the use and enjoyment of property in the neighborhood or zoning district. 
b.	For use variances. Under no circumstances shall the appeals board grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this chapter in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this chapter in said district. 
(g)	If the demand for appeal is for a variance, the appeals board shall either grant, grant with conditions, or deny the application. The appeals board may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. A majority vote of the membership of the appeals board is necessary to grant a variance and rule on an interpretation of the chapter. The decision shall be in writing and reflect the reasons for the decision. At a minimum, the record of the decision shall include: 
(1)	Formal determination of the facts.
(2)	The conclusion derived from the facts (reason for the decision).
(3)	The decision. Any persons having an interest affected by such decision shall have a right to appeal circuit court within 30 days after the zoning board of appeals approves the minutes of its decision, as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 16.03)
Secs. 46-141-46-163. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - AMENDMENTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning adoption, MCL 125.3401 et seq.

Sec. 46-164. - Initiating amendments. 
    The township board, may from time to time, amend, modify, supplement, or revise the district boundaries or the provisions and regulations of this chapter. Amendments may be initiated by the township board, the township planning commission, by petition of one or more property owners of the township, or by one or more persons acting on behalf of a property owner of the township. All proposed amendments shall be referred to the township planning commission for review, public hearing, and recommendation before action may be taken thereon by the township board. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 17.01)
Sec. 46-165. - Fees. 
    The township board shall establish, by resolution, fees for zoning amendment petitions. Such fee shall be paid in full at the time of application and no part of such fee shall be returnable to the petitioner. Fees shall not be required for amendments proposed or requested by any government agency or body. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 17.02)
Sec. 46-166. - Amendment procedure. 
(a)	The procedure for amending this chapter shall be in accordance with Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3101 et seq.). 
(b)	Application for amendment shall be made by submitting the application, along with required information and the required fee, to the township clerk's office. After receipt of filing, the clerk shall establish a date for a public hearing on the application in accordance with section 46-37. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 17.03; Ord. No. 157-14, 4-7-2014)
Sec. 46-167. - Information required. 
(a)	If an application proposes an amendment to the official zoning map, the petitioner shall submit the following information: 
(1)	A legal description of the property, including a street address and tax code number.
(2)	A scaled map of the property, correlated with the legal description, and clearly showing the property's location. 
(3)	The name and address of the petitioner, the record owner, and all other parties claiming an interest in said property. 
(4)	The petitioner's interest in the property. If the petitioner is not the owner of record, the name and address of the owner of record, and other interested parties signed consent to the petition. The consent of mortgagees, liens, and similar such parties shall not be required. 
(5)	Signature of petition and owner certifying the accuracy of the information.
(6)	Identification of the zoning district requested and the existing zoning classification of property. 
(7)	A vicinity map showing the location of the property, and adjacent land uses and zoning districts. 
(b)	If a petition involves a change in the text of this chapter, the petitioner shall submit the following information: 
(1)	A detailed statement of the proposed amendment, clearly and completely setting forth all proposed provisions and regulations, including all changes in this chapter necessary to accommodate the proposed amendment. 
(2)	Name and address of the petitioner.
(3)	Reasons for the proposed amendment.
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 17.04)
Sec. 46-168. - Review. 
(a)	In reviewing any petition for a zoning amendment, the planning commission shall evaluate all factors relevant to the petition and shall make its recommendations for disposition of the petition, to the township board within a period of 60 days from the date of the public hearing. The time limit may be extended by mutual written agreement between the planning commission and the applicant. 
(b)	The factors to be considered by the planning commission may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)	Whether or not the requested zoning change is justified by a change in conditions since the original ordinance was adopted or by an error in the original ordinance. 
(2)	The precedents and the possible effects of such precedents, which might result from approval or denial of the petition. 
(3)	The capability of the township or other government agencies to provide any services, facilities, and/or programs that might be required if the petition were approved. 
(4)	Effect of approval of the petition on the condition and/or value of property in the township or in adjacent jurisdictions. 
(5)	Effect of approval of the petition on adopted development policies of the township and other government units. 
(c)	All findings shall be made a part of the public records of the meetings of the planning commission and the township board. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 17.05)
Sec. 46-169. - Conditional rezoning of land. 
    As an alternative to a rezoning amendment as described in section 46-164, the township may allow conditional rezoning to help ensure the proper use of land and natural resources and to allow for a more flexible approach to the rezoning process in accordance with Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3101 et seq.). It is recognized that, in certain instances, it would be an advantage to both the township and petitioners seeking rezoning of land if a site plan, along with conditions and limitations that may be relied upon by the township, could be proposed as part of a petition for rezoning. Conditional rezoning of land must follow the standards and procedures as noted below. 
(1)	The amendment procedure for a conditional rezoning shall follow the same procedures as a traditional rezoning amendment pursuant to section 46-166. 
(2)	In addition to the procedures as noted in section 46-166, the following specific procedures, standards, and requirements apply to all proposed conditional rezoning requests. 
a.	A conditional rezoning request must be voluntarily offered by an owner of land within the township. All offers must be made in writing and must provide the specific conditions to be considered by the township as a part of the rezoning request. All offers shall be in the form of a written agreement approvable by the township and property owner, incorporating the conditional rezoning site plan and setting forth any conditions and terms mutually agreed upon by the parties relative to the land for which the conditional rezoning is sought. 
b.	Conditional rezoning shall not allow a use or activity that would not otherwise be allowed in the proposed zoning district. 
c.	Conditional rezoning shall not alter any of the various zoning requirements for the use in question, i.e. parking, landscaping, lot area, lot width, building height, setbacks, lot area coverage, etc. Conditional rezoning shall not grant zoning variances of any kind. Any zoning variance must follow the provisions of article XI of this chapter. 
d.	Conditional rezoning shall not grant special land use approval. The process for review and approval of special land uses must follow the provisions of article II, division 3 of this chapter. 
e.	All conditions offered by a landowner in relation to a rezoning request must have a direct relationship to the rezoning itself. The provisions to allow conditional rezoning shall not be construed to allow rezoning by extraction. 
f.	In addition to the informational requirements provided for in section 46-167, the applicant must provide a conditional rezoning site plan prepared by a licensed professional allowed to prepare such plans under this chapter, that may show the location, size, height or other measures for and/or of building, structures, improvements and features on, and in some cases adjacent to, the property that is the subject of the conditional rezoning of land. The details to be offered or inclusion in the conditional rezoning site plan shall be determined by the applicant, subject to approval of the township. A conditional rezoning site plan shall not replace the requirement under this chapter for site plan review and approval, or subdivision or site condominium approval, as the case may be. 
(3)	Time limits and reversions of land to previous district.
a.	If the proposed conditions of rezonings are acceptable to the township, the township may establish a time period during which the conditions apply to the property and must be met. If the conditions are not satisfied with in the time specified under this section, the property shall revert to its former zoning classification unless an extension is granted as noted below. Reversion of a property back to its former classification must follow the rezoning amendment provisions as provided in section 46-166. 
b.	Unless a reversion of the zoning takes place as described in the action above, the approved conditional rezoning shall be binding upon the subject property owner, their heirs, successors, assigns, and transferees. 
c.	Upon approval of conditional rezoning, a copy of the written agreement between the property owner and the township shall be filed with the county register of deeds, which shall act to provide notice to all subsequent owners of the property of the conditions approved and agreed to by the township and the owner. 
d.	The township may not add to or alter any conditions approved as a part of a rezoning during the time period specified above. 
e.	The time limits specified and approved by the township may be extended upon the application of the landowner and approval of the township. 
(4)	Review procedures. The factors found in section 46-169 of this chapter must be considered in any conditional rezoning request. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 17.06)
Sec. 46-170. - Conformance to court decree. 
    Any amendment to this chapter for the purpose of conforming a provision thereof to the decree of a court of competent jurisdiction shall be adopted by the township board and the amendment published without referring same to any other board agency. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 17.07)
Sec. 46-171. - Publication. 
    Following township board approval of a petition to amend this chapter, notice of the amendment shall be published within 15 days after adoption in a newspaper of general circulation within the township. The notice of adoption shall include the following information: 
(1)	Either a summary of the regulatory effect of the amendment, including the geographic area affected, or the text of the amendment. 
(2)	The effective date of the amendment.
(3)	The place and time where a copy of the ordinance may be purchased or inspected.
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 17.08)
Secs. 46-172-46-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 46-200. - Establishment of districts. 
    The township is hereby divided into zones or districts as shown on the official zoning map and shall include the following: 
RERural EstateR-1A and R-1BSingle-Family ResidentialRMMultiple-Family ResidentialRMHMobile Home ParkC-1Local BusinessC-2General BusinessC-3Planned Shopping CenterC-4Mixed BusinessRECRecreationTIOIndustrial Office ResearchGIIndustrialPUDPlanned Unit Development 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 4.01)
Sec. 46-201. - Map. 
    The boundaries of these districts are shown upon the map attached hereto and made a part of this chapter, which said map is designated as the official zoning map of the township. The zoning map shall be maintained and kept on file with the township clerk, and all notations, references, and other information shown thereon are incorporated herein by reference and have the same force and effect as if the said zoning map and all such notations, references and other information shown thereon were fully set forth or described herein. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 4.02)
Sec. 46-202. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
(a)	Except where referenced on the official zoning map to a street or other designated line by the dimensions shown on said map, the district boundary lines follow lot lines or the centerlines of the street, alleys, railroads, or such lines extended and the corporate limits of the township as they existed at the time of the adoption of this chapter. 
(b)	Where a district boundary line, as established at this section or as shown on said map, divides a lot which was in a single ownership and of record at the time of enactment of this chapter, the use authorized thereon and the other district requirements applying to the least restricted portion of such lot, under this chapter, shall be considered as extending to the entire lot, provided that the more restricted portion of such lot is entirely within 25 feet of said dividing district boundary line. The use so extended shall be deemed to be conforming. 
(c)	Questions concerning the exact location of district boundary lines shall be determined by the zoning board of appeals according to rules and regulations which may be adopted by it. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 4.03)
Sec. 46-203. - Intent, permitted uses and special uses within zoning districts. 
    The following sections set forth the intent, permitted uses and conditional uses within each zoning district. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 4.04)
Sec. 46-204. - Rural estate district (RE). 
(a)	Intent. The following reasons are given in evidence to support the purposes for which the RE rural estate district zoning district is intended to accomplish: 
(1)	Land containing agricultural value should be preserved because it is a vital resource.
(2)	Land with agricultural value justifies a design technique which attempts to support a town-country spatial relationship creating intrinsic suburban-rural values. 
(3)	Rural estate zoning permits the timing of land allotments to suburban purposes in keeping with a theory of maximizing and supporting public utilities so as to achieve the greatest amount of service for each dollar of capital expenditure. 
(4)	Indiscriminate suburbanizing of agricultural lands adversely affects the remaining owners of land pursuing agricultural endeavors, by creating suburban land values. 
(b)	Permitted uses. 
(1)	Farming, farm operation, for the development of farm products.
(2)	Single-family detached dwellings, both farm and nonfarm related.
(3)	Adult foster care family homes, foster family homes, foster family group homes and family child care homes, as required by Section 206 of Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3206). 
(4)	Publicly owned and operated museums, libraries, parks, parkways, recreational facilities and conservation sites. 
(5)	Public, parochial and other private elementary, intermediate and/or high schools subject to section 46-281. 
(6)	Any residential use wherein animals are kept for the use of the owner of the premises and the immediate family subject to section 46-282. 
(7)	Stables subject to the Michigan Right to Farm Act (RTFA), Public Act No. 93 of 1981 (MCL 286.471 et seq.). 
(c)	Special uses. 
(1)	Cluster single-family subdivisions pursuant to requirements of section 46-280. 
(2)	Group child care homes, as required by Section 206 of Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3206), and subject to section 46-286. 
(3)	Churches and other facilities normally incidental thereto subject to section 46-294. 
(4)	Cemeteries subject to section 46-284. 
(5)	Kennels subject to section 46-283. 
(6)	Public utility buildings and uses, but not including service and storage yards, when operating requirements necessitate locating within the district to serve the immediate vicinity. 
(7)	Public or private parks, country clubs, golf courses and driving ranges.
(8)	Roadside stands for the marketing of agricultural products grown on the premises.
(9)	Home occupations.
(10)	Parking of commercial trailers, trucks and/or equipment with a rated capacity exceeding 10,000 pound gross vehicle weight (GVW) as regulated in section 46-285. 
(11)	Extractive operations subject to section 46-302. 
(d)	Accessory structures and uses. 
(1)	Signs as permitted in article X of this chapter.
(2)	Swimming pools, private, within rear or side yards.
(3)	Other accessory land and/or structure uses customarily incidental to principal permitted uses. 
(4)	Child day care facilities maintained in single-family homes, as regulated in section 46-285. 
(5)	Child day care and nursery school facilities maintained in church and other houses of worship. 
(6)	Kennels subject to section 46-285. 
(e)	Restrictions on accessory structures and uses. No accessory structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the time of construction of the principal structure or establishment of the principal use to which it is accessory. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 4.04)
Sec. 46-205. - Single-family residential (R-1A) and (R-1B). 
(a)	Intent. The following reasons are given in evidence to support the purposes for which the R-1A and R-1B single-family residential zoning district is intended to accomplish: 
(1)	To encourage the construction of, and the continued use of the land for single-family dwellings. 
(2)	To prohibit business, commercial or industrial use of the land, and to prohibit any other use which would substantially interfere with development or continuation of single-family dwellings in the district. 
(3)	To encourage the discontinuance of existing uses that would not be permitted as new uses under the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)	To discourage any land use which would generate traffic on minor or local streets other than normal traffic to serve the residences on those streets. 
(5)	To discourage any use which, because of its character or size, would create requirements and costs for public services, such as fire and police protection, water supply, and sewerage, substantially in excess of such requirements and costs if the districts were developed solely for single-family dwellings. 
(b)	Permitted uses. 
(1)	Single-family detached dwellings.
(2)	Adult foster care family homes, foster family homes, foster family group homes and family child care homes, as required by Section 206 of Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3206). 
(3)	Parks and playgrounds, private, for the use of residents in subdivisions and other residential developments. 
(4)	Publicly owned and operated parks, play fields and other recreation facilities.
(c)	Special uses. 
(1)	Cluster single-family subdivisions pursuant to requirements of section 46-280. 
(2)	Group child care homes, as required by section 206 of Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3206), and subject to section 46-286. 
(3)	Public, parochial or other private elementary, intermediate, and/or high schools offering courses in general education provided they are not operated for profit and that the parcel to be developed has a minimum site size of ten acres, and further subject to section 46-281. 
(4)	Cemeteries as subject to section 46-284. 
(5)	Child day care and nursery school facilities (not including dormitories) as subject to section 46-286. 
(6)	Churches and other facilities customarily incidental to principal permitted uses as subject to section 46-294. 
(7)	Colleges, universities, and other such institutions of high learning, public and private, offering courses in general, technical, or religious education as subject to section 46-295. 
(8)	Golf club/golf courses, which may or may not be operated for profit.
(9)	Public utility buildings and uses, but not including service and storage yards, when operating requirements necessitate locating within the district to serve the immediate vicinity. 
(d)	Accessory structures and uses. 
(1)	Signs as subject to article X.
(2)	Swimming pools, private, within rear or side yards.
(3)	Child day care facilities maintained in single-family homes as regulated in section 46-286. 
(4)	Child day care and nursery school facilities maintained in church and other houses of worship. 
(5)	Home occupations subject to section 46-249. 
(6)	Stadiums and sports arenas accessory to schools and colleges and universities.
(7)	Other accessory land and/or structure uses customarily incidental to principal uses permitted as special land uses. 
(e)	Restrictions on accessory structures and uses. No accessory structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the time of construction of the principal structure or establishment of the principal use to which it is accessory. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 4.04(B))
Sec. 46-206. - Multiple-family residential district (RM). 
(a)	Intent. The RM multiple-family residential district is designed to permit a more intensive residential use of land with various types of attached single-family houses, townhouses, and garden apartments. These would be located near major thoroughfares for good accessibility and between single-family residential areas and other nonresidential uses. Various sizes of residential accommodations for ownership or rental, would thereby be provided to meet the needs of the different age and family groups within the community. 
(b)	Permitted uses. 
(1)	All permitted principal uses in the R-1A and R-1B districts subject to the terms and conditions provided therein. 
(2)	Two-family dwellings subject to the conditions provided therein.
(3)	Multiple-family dwelling unit provided that the site directly adjoin a county primary road. 
(c)	Special uses. 
(1)	Convalescent and/or nursing homes.
(2)	Elderly housing.
(3)	Boardinghouses, roominghouses and tourist homes.
(4)	Fraternity and sorority houses.
(5)	Hospitals.
(6)	Day care facilities and group day care homes, as required by Section 206 of Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3206), and subject to section 46-286. 
(d)	Accessory structures and uses. 
(1)	Signs as subject to article X of this chapter.
(2)	Swimming pools, private, within rear or side yards and as regulated in section 46-247. 
(3)	Community and/or club houses.
(4)	Child day care and nursery school facilities maintained in dwelling units or single-family homes and regulated in section 46-286. 
(5)	Home occupation as subject to section 46-249. 
(6)	Other accessory land and/or structure uses customarily incidental to principal uses permitted as special land uses. 
(e)	Restrictions on accessory structures and uses. No accessory structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the time of construction of the principal structure or establishment of the principal use to which it is accessory. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 4.04(C))
Sec. 46-207. - Mobile home park district (RMH). 
(a)	Intent. The RMH mobile home park district is to encourage a suitable environment for persons and families that by preference choose to live in a mobile home rather than a conventional single-family structure. In keeping with the occupancy characteristics of contemporary mobile homes, this section establishes low-density standards and permitted uses that reflect the needs of residents in the district. Development is limited to mobile homes when located in a subdivision designed for that purpose or a mobile home park with recreation facilities, churches, schools and necessary public utility buildings. 
(b)	Permitted uses. 
(1)	Mobile homes.
(2)	Adult foster care family homes, foster family homes, foster family group homes and family child care homes, as required by Section 206 of Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3206). 
(3)	Mobile home parks as subject to section 46-287. 
(4)	Mobile home subdivisions as subject to section 46-288. 
(c)	Special uses. 
(1)	Group child care homes, as required by section 206 of Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3206), and subject to section 46-286. 
(2)	Public, parochial, or other private elementary, intermediate, and/or high schools offering courses in general education subject to section 46-281. 
(3)	Public utility buildings.
(4)	Churches and other facilities normally incidental thereto subject to section 46-294. 
(5)	Sales office for the sale of mobile homes where such mobile homes are located in the park and have been regularly occupied therein subject to section 46-287. 
(d)	Accessory structures and uses. 
(1)	Mobile home park office facilities which are designed and used exclusively for the business operation of the mobile home park in which they are located. 
(2)	Mobile home park community centers, recreation facilities and open spaces which are designed for and used exclusively by the residents of the mobile home park in which they are located. 
(3)	Mobile home park swimming pools which are designed for and used exclusively by the residents of the mobile home park in which they are located. 
(4)	Mobile home park laundry, storage and other utility facilities which are designed for and used exclusively by the residents of the mobile home park in which they are located. 
(5)	Mobile home park maintenance and service facilities which are designed and used exclusively for activities attendant to providing maintenance and other services for the mobile home park in which they are located. 
(6)	Signs as subject to article X of this chapter.
(7)	Other accessory land and/or structure uses customarily incidental to principal uses permitted by right. 
(e)	Restrictions on accessory structures and uses. No accessory structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the time of construction of the principal structure or establishment of the principal use to which it is accessory. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 4.04(D))
Sec. 46-208. - Local business district (C-1). 
(a)	Intent. The C-1 local business district is intended to permit retail business and service uses which are needed to serve the nearby residential areas. In order to promote such business developments so far as is possible and appropriate in each area, uses are prohibited which would create hazards, offensive and loud noises, vibration, smoke, glare, or heavy truck traffic. The intent of this district is also to encourage the concentration of local business areas to the mutual advantage of both the consumers and merchants and thereby to promote the best use of land at certain strategic locations and to avoid the continuance of encouraging multitenant "strip commercial" development along heavily traveled roads. 
(b)	Permitted uses. 
(1)	Office buildings and uses when goods or wares are not commercially created, exchanged or sold. 
(2)	Medical or dental clinics.
(3)	Financial establishments such as banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations.
(4)	Township buildings and uses.
(5)	Public utility buildings and uses but not including storage yards, when operating requirements necessitate locating within the district to serve the immediate vicinity. 
(6)	Business and private schools operated within a completely enclosed building.
(7)	Photographic studios.
(8)	Funeral homes.
(9)	Retail establishment for the sale of alcoholic beverages, baked goods, bicycles, books, confection drugs, flowers, groceries, hardware, hobby equipment, jewelry, music, notions, paints, periodicals, sundry small household articles, tobacco, and similar establishments. 
(10)	Personal service establishments performing services on the premises, such as barber and beauty shops; watch, radio, television, clothing and shoe repair, tailor shops, locksmith and similar establishments. 
(11)	Laundry or dry cleaning customer outlets, coin-operated laundromats, self-serve dry cleaning centers and the like. Dry cleaning or laundry plants serving more than one customer service outlet are prohibited. 
(12)	Eating and drinking establishments when food or beverage is consumed within a completely enclosed building. Establishments with a character of a drive-in or open front store are permitted. 
(13)	Private service clubs, fraternal organizations and lodge halls.
(c)	Special uses. 
(1)	Automobile service station subject to the requirements of section 46-291. 
(2)	Arcades.
(3)	Churches, when bordering residential districts, subject to section 46-294. 
(4)	Open air businesses, subject to section 46-299. 
(5)	Day care facilities and group day care homes subject to section 46-286. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 4.04(E))
Sec. 46-209. - General business district (C-2). 
(a)	Intent. The C-2 general business district is intended to permit a wider range of business and entertainment activities than permitted in the local business district. The permitted uses would not only serve nearby residential area, but also customers farther away for types of business and services usually found in community shopping centers. These uses would generate larger volumes of vehicular traffic, would need more off-street parking and loading, and would require more planning to integrate such a district with adjacent residential areas. Such district reflects existing shopping concentrations, other commercial uses along major highways, and desired future centers, which are needed to serve adequately the future population of the township. 
(b)	Permitted uses. 
(1)	All permitted principal uses in the C-1 district.
(2)	Automobile service stations subject to the requirements of section 46-291. 
(3)	Any retail business whose principal activity is the sale or rental of merchandise within a completely enclosed building. Except those regulated under section 46-299. 
(4)	Business service establishments performing services on the premises such as office machine and typewriter repair; printing. 
(5)	Any service establishment of an office, showroom, or workshop nature within a completely enclosed building of a taxidermist, decorator, upholsterer, caterer, exterminator, building contractor (including electrical, glazing, heating, painting, paper hanging, plumbing, roofing, ventilating and plastering), excluding outside storage yards and similar establishments that require a retail adjunct. 
(6)	Drive-in theaters subject to the requirements of section 46-297. 
(7)	Hotels and motels.
(8)	Photographic film developing and processing.
(9)	Physical culture establishment, including gymnasiums, reducing salons, masseurs and steam baths. 
(10)	Television and radio studio and towers subject to the requirements of section 46-298. 
(11)	Other uses similar to the above, subject to the following restrictions:
a.	All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced.
b.	All business or servicing shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
(12)	Establishments containing indoor facilities similar to and including tennis courts, handball courts, swimming pools, health clubs, ice skating and roller skating rinks and archery ranges. 
(c)	Special uses. 
(1)	Automobile carwash establishments.
(2)	Open air business uses in conformance with section 46-299. 
(3)	Eating and drinking establishments of a drive-in or open front store character in conformance with section 46-296. 
(4)	Day care facilities and group day care homes subject to 46-286. 
(5)	Minor vehicle repair facility.
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 4.04(F))
Sec. 46-210. - Planned shopping center district (C-3). 
(a)	Intent. The C-3 planned shopping center district is intended to provide for a combination of commercial and office uses, together with on-site parking, loading and servicing in a single planned facility. The purpose of this district is to provide large, uniformly planned areas where people may work, shop, and conduct business in an atmosphere which has been created so as to minimize parking and traffic difficulties and dangers, and maximize ease and safety of pedestrian circulation. 
(b)	Permitted uses. 
(1)	Planned shopping centers including retail business or service establishments as subject to section 46-301. 
(2)	Hotels, motels, indoor theaters, if designed as part of the planned shopping center.
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 4.04(G))
Sec. 46-211. - Mixed business district (C-4). 
(a)	Intent. The C-4 mixed business district is created in recognition of the fact that there are certain uses which are a blend of business and industrial uses with some aspects of warehouse use. The purpose of this district is to provided zones wherein there can be located businesses which contribute to such a blend. The zones will, because of the nature of the district, be small in comparison to other business or industrial districts, and combine some aspects of both uses. The zones will require some of the services required in both business and industrial districts, and in creating such zones, the planning commission shall consider the availability of such services, the existing businesses and structures in the proposed zone, the impact on the surrounding uses, as well as all other considerations normal to the creation of zoning districts. 
(b)	Permitted uses. 
(1)	All permitted principal uses in the C-1, local business district.
(2)	All permitted principal uses in the C-2, general business district.
(3)	Minor vehicle repair facility.
(c)	Special uses. 
(1)	All principal uses after special approval in C-1, local business district.
(2)	All permitted principal uses after special approval in the C-2, general business district.
(3)	Warehousing and general storage.
(4)	Light manufacturing, processing or assembling.
(5)	Storage and restoration of antique automobile (antique auto shall be defined as 25 years old or older). 
(6)	Storage and restoration of boats.
(7)	Adult commercial enterprise uses as subject to section 46-300. 
(8)	Major vehicle repair facility.
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 4.04(H))
Sec. 46-212. - Recreation district (REC). 
(a)	Intent. The REC recreation district is intended for those areas oriented towards outdoor recreation uses and at the same time interested in the preservation of the natural features of the land. The uses permitted in this district are very often seasonal in nature and serve large numbers of people. As a result, good accessibility is necessary as is adequate spaces on the site for off-street parking facilities. 
(b)	Permitted uses. 
(1)	Public and private parks, playgrounds, picnic areas and beaches.
(2)	Publicly owned and operated museums, libraries, recreation centers.
(3)	Public, parochial or other private elementary, intermediate, and/or high schools offering courses in general education subject to section 46-281. 
(4)	A single-family detached dwelling.
(5)	Any residential use wherein horses or other bovine animals are kept for the use of the owner and the immediate family subject to section 46-282. 
(6)	Stables, public, in accordance with the Michigan Right to Farm Act (RTFA).
(c)	Special uses. 
(1)	Amphitheaters shall be limited to the open air presentation of musical, theatrical, educational and similar events. The sale of food and beverages may be permitted as an accessory use. 
(2)	Amusement parks and fairgrounds shall be limited to facilities for the commercial operation of midway attractions and motorized rides; and the selling of products consistent with carnival operations and in accordance with health department regulations to midway and ride patrons. 
(3)	Campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks shall be limited to transient recreational purpose. 
(4)	Golf clubs/courses, which may or may not be operated for profit.
(5)	Gun clubs and shooting ranges shall be limited to facilities and activities directly related to recreational outdoor shooting at target with legal sporting fire arms and archery equipment in a controlled environment. 
(6)	Hunt clubs and polo clubs shall be limited to the raising and boarding of horses and dogs. 
(7)	Zoological and botanical gardens shall be limited to facilities for the housing and display of animals and/or plants plus necessary maintenance and related facilities. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 4.04(I))
Sec. 46-213. - TIO industrial office research district. 
(a)	Intent. The TIO industrial office research district is intended to permit new technology office, research and electronic type uses to act as a transition between the residential/commercial/office districts and the general industrial districts. These uses are generally characterized by their need for some service area, light electronic component assembly area and/or research space to service, assemble, test and package small electronic, scientific and business equipment components and products for distribution to outside customers by means of a sales division as well as for the traditional office space for administrative, clerical, design and sales personnel. The outdoor storage of goods or materials shall be prohibited. All uses permitted within the TIO district are subject to the township's industrial performance standards. 
(b)	Permitted uses. 
(1)	Computer, business or scientific equipment sales and service facilities.
(2)	Research or testing facilities for small mechanical, electrical, electronic and industrial components. Chemical, biological and biochemical uses shall be prohibited. 
(3)	Office buildings for any of the following type uses: executive, administrative, accounting, data processing, writing, clerical, graphic, drafting or sales. 
(4)	Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations.
(5)	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above-permitted principal uses except separate warehousing and storage facilities. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 4.04(J))
Sec. 46-214. - GI industrial district. 
(a)	Intent. The intent of the GI industrial district is to permit small and medium scale industrial uses to locate in desirable areas of the township, based upon the township land use plan, which uses are primarily of a wholesaling, manufacturing, assembling and fabricating character. Large-scale or specialized industrial operations may also be located in this district subject to special approval. Reasonable regulations apply to uses in this district so as to permit the location of industries which will not cause adverse effects on residential areas in the township. Certain commercial uses which are desirable to service employees and visitors of the industrial district are also permitted in this district. Outdoor storage may be permitted as noted below. The storage of flammable liquids, liquefied petroleum gasses, and explosives of any kind is prohibited. 
(b)	Permitted uses. 
(1)	Wholesale and warehousing. The sale or warehousing of automotive equipment; dry goods and apparel; groceries and related products; raw farm products except livestock; electrical goods; hardware, plumbing, heating equipment and supplies; machinery and equipment, tobacco products; beer, wine and distilled alcoholic beverages; paper and paper products; furniture and home furnishings, and any commodity the manufacture of which is permitted in this district; truck terminals. 
(2)	Industrial establishments.
a.	The assembly, fabrication, manufacture, packaging or treatment of such products as food products, candy, drugs, cosmetics and toiletries, musical instruments, optical goods, toys novelties, electrical instruments and appliances, radio and phonographs, pottery and figurines or other ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay. 
b.	The assembly, fabrication, manufacture or treatment of such products from the following previously prepared materials: bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, felt, fiber, glass, horn, leather, paper, plastics, precious or semiprecious metals or stones, sheet metal, shell, textiles, wax, wire, wood and yarns. 
c.	Tool and die shops; metal working machine shops involving the use of grinding or cutting tools, manufacturing of tools, dies, jigs and fixtures; publishing, printing or forming of box, carton, and cardboard products. 
d.	Laboratories for research or testing.
e.	Automobile vehicle collision repair facility, undercoating and painting.
f.	The assembly and/or manufacture of automobile parts and accessories, cigar and cigarettes, electrical fixtures, batteries and other electrical apparatus and hardware. 
g.	Processing, refining, or storage of food and foodstuffs.
h.	Breweries, bump shops, distilleries, machine shops, metal buffing, plastering and polishing shops, millwork, cabinet shops, painting and sheet metal shops, undercoating and rust-proofing shops and welding shops 
(3)	Public utility electrical, gas and telephone uses.
(4)	Retail and service establishments.
a.	Eating and drinking establishments when food or beverage is consumed within a completely enclosed building. Establishments with a character of a drive-in or open front store are prohibited. 
b.	Truck tractor and trailer sales, rental and repair.
c.	Dog kennels.
d.	Automobile service stations in accordance with section 46-291. 
(5)	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses in subsection (b) of this section, including living quarters of a watchman or caretaker. 
(c)	Special uses. 
(1)	Open storage yards of construction contractors' equipment and supplies, building material, sand, gravel and lumber. 
a.	Such uses shall have front, side or rear yard of 200 feet wide when adjacent to any residential district. Such spaces shall be maintained as a greenbelt in accordance with section 46-386. 
b.	If it is deemed essential by the planning commission to prevent loose materials from blowing onto adjacent properties, a fence, tarpaulin or obscuring wall of no less than six feet shall be required around the stored material. 
c.	No required yard spaces shall be used for the storage of equipment or material.
(2)	Junkyards.
a.	Junkyards must be entirely enclosed by an eight-foot obscuring wall.
b.	No junk, parts or trash shall be piled higher than the enclosure fence.
c.	An unobstructed hard-surfaced roadway of at least 20 feet wide shall be provided through the entire length of the property to allow access by fire equipment. Other roadways may be required by the fire chief if there is need for fire equipment to have access to other parts of the junkyard. 
d.	A junkyard shall be located at least 200 feet from any residential district. This space shall be maintained as a greenbelt in accordance with section 46-386. 
(3)	Petroleum bulk stations and terminals.
a.	The lot size shall be a minimum of ten acres.
b.	Such uses shall be located at least 500 feet from any residential district.
c.	A minimum front yard setback of 200 feet, a minimum rear yard setback of 100 feet and a minimum side yard setback of 100 feet shall be provided. This space shall be maintained as a greenbelt in accordance with section 46-386. 
(4)	Automobile parts stamping plants, assembly plants, tire vulcanizing and recapping facilities, rough saw lumbering facilities and planing mills. 
a.	Such uses shall have a minimum front, side and rear yard of 200 feet or a greater setback to ensure the proper application of the industrial performance standards. Such space shall be maintained as a greenbelt in accordance with section 46-386. 
b.	All open storage areas shall be completely enclosed with a six- or eight-foot obscuring fence or wall and no material shall be piled higher than the enclosure device. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 4.04(K))
Sec. 46-215. - Schedule of regulations. 

Zoning District 
Minimum Lot Size 
Minimum Lot Width 
Stories 
Feet
Front Yard
Feet
Side Yard
Rear Yard
Max. Lot Coverage
Minimum Floor Area Per Dwelling Unit
RE Rural Estate 2.5 acres 165 2.5 35 50 25 50 25 30 1,200
R-1A Single-Family Residential 1 acre 150 2.5 35 40 20 40 25 30 1,200
R-1B Single-Family Residential 15,000 s.f. 100 2.5 35 35 10 30 25 30 1,200 
R-1B Single-Family 20,000 s.f. 100 2.5 35 35 10 30 25 30 1,200
RM Multiple-Family Residential 40,000 s.f.200 2.5 35 35 25 50 35 30 - 
RM Multiple-Family Unit - - 2.5 35 35 25 50 35 30 -
RMH Mobile Home Park 80,000 s.f.200 1 15 50 25 50 50 30 -
RMH 7,200 s.f. 60 1 15 20 10 20 25 30 600
C-1 Local Business 25,000 s.f. 100 2 35 40 15 30 25 N/A - 
C-2 General Business 25,000 s.f. 100 2 35 40 25 50 25 N/A -
C-3 Planned Shopping Center 10 acres 400 2 35 100 100 200 50 N/A -
C-4 Mixed Business 40,000 s.f. 200 3 35 40 25 50 50 N/A -
REC Recreation Residential - - 1.5 35 50 20 40 50 - -
REC Nonresidential - - - 35 100 100 200 100 0 -
TIO Industrial Office Research 50,000 s.f. 200 2 35 50 40 80 40 N/A -
GI Industrial 60,000 s.f. 200 2 35 50 40 80 40 N/A - 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 4.07; Ord. No. 158-14, 4-7-2014)
Sec. 46-216. - Footnotes to the schedule of regulations. 
(a)	Parking, loading and unloading restrictions.
(1)	In all residential districts, the minimum front yard shall not be used for off-street parking, and shall remain as open space, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground up except for landscaping plant materials or vehicle access drives. All yards abutting upon a public street shall be considered as a front yard for setback purposes. 
(2)	In all nonresidential districts, the front yard shall not be used for off-street loading or unloading purposes. 
(b)	Though the schedule of regulations outlines the requirements for minimum lot sizes and other dimensions, no parcel shall be so deep that it exceeds four times the lot width. 
(c)	In all residential districts, the width of side yards, which abut upon a street on the same side or on the opposite side of the same block, upon which other residential lots front, shall not be less than the required front yard setback for said homes which front upon said side street. If no other residential lots front on the same side or on the opposite side of the same block, the width must meet required side yard setback for the district in which the lot is located. 
(d)	The area, height, bulk and placement requirements of a PUD district are subject to the review and determination of the planning commission per section 46-325 of the zoning ordinance. 
(e)	Required minimum floor area for each dwelling unit shall not include area of basements, breezeways, porches or attached garages. 
(f)	All farm buildings for uses other than those usually incidental to the dwelling, shall be located not less than 100 feet from any dwelling and not less than 25 feet from any lot line or property boundary, and in no case shall the main farm building be less than 150 feet from the front property line. This requirement shall not apply to the alteration or addition to an existing barn and other farm buildings, except dwellings, which are located closer to the road and which existed prior to the adoption of this chapter. 
(g)	Minimum land area required for each dwelling unit in the RM district shall be: 5,500 sq. ft.
(1)	Net lot area in square feet with sewer and water.
Type of UnitArea in Square FeetApartmentRow, Townhouse, Terrace, GardenSingle-Family
Detached1,2 Efficiency or
1-bedroom5,5006,700N/A2-bedroom6,7007,9002 to 4 bedroom homes3-bedroom7,9009,7002 to 4 bedroom homes4-bedroom3 9,70010,00012,0001Deduct 20% of the net parcel area for the complex to represent new rights-of-ways before determining the density of the complex. 2The minimum net lot area of any lot in a RM Multiple-Family, detached residential development shall be 6,600 square feet. 3For every unit with 5 or more bedrooms or rooms that can reasonably be converted to a bedroom add 2,000 square feet to the net lot area of the 4-bedroom unit.  
(2)	Net lot area in square feet without sewer and water. The land area shall be as permitted by the county health department but shall not be more dense than what the following net lot area requirements will permit. 
Type of UnitArea in Square FeetApartmentRow, Townhouse, Terrace, GardenSingle-Family
Detached1, 2 Efficiency or
1-bedroom12,000N/AN/A2-bedroom20,00028,0002 to 4 bedroom homes3-bedroom28,00035,0002 to 4 bedroom homes4-bedroom3 35,00042,00042,0001Deduct 10% of the net lot area for the complex to represent new rights-of-way before determining the density of the complex. 2The minimum net lot area of any lot in a RM Multiple-Family District being designed for a Cluster Single-Family, detached residential development shall be 10,000 square feet. 3For every unit with 5 or more bedrooms or rooms that can reasonably be converted to a bedroom, add 2,000 square feet to the net lot area of the bedroom unit.  
(h)	Side yard requirements may be waived in instances where firewalls are provided between units and when there is adequate access to the rear of the units for fire protection. Where a commercial district borders on a side street and a residential district exists in the same block, there shall be provided a setback of 25 feet for all buildings, parking and loading areas. Where a residential district exists adjacent to a business district and on the same side of the street, there shall be provided a setback of 25 feet for all buildings, parking and loading areas. 
(i)	Loading space shall be provided in the side or rear yard, as specified in section 46-363. This regulation shall not be applicable to loading space provided totally within a building or structure which has door enclosures facing other than the front property line. 
(j)	Cluster subdivisions (see section 46-280) approved in RE, R-1A and R-1B district shall permit lot sizes and width of lesser areas and dimensions as provided for under section 46-215 and as regulated by section 46-281. 
(k)	If the site has frontage on one road, the minimum frontage shall be 400 feet. If the site has frontage on two roads, both frontages may be counted to satisfy this minimum total frontage. In no case may a site have less than 400 feet depth. 
(l)	The maximum coverage of a lot by all buildings shall be subject to providing adequate setbacks, parking, landscaping and other site improvements as required by this chapter. 
(m)	Nonresidential uses may be increased in height over the maximum permitted provided for every foot of height over the maximum, the minimum setback is increased by two feet. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 4.08; Ord. No. 159-14, 4-7-2014)
Secs. 46-217-46-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 46-241. - Applicability. 
    Except as specifically provided, the general of regulations of this article shall apply. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 5.01)
Sec. 46-242. - Accessory buildings and structures. 
    Accessory buildings or structures shall be permitted in all districts and are subject to the following regulations: 
(1)	Accessory buildings and structures in residential districts.
a.	Accessory buildings or structures shall not be permitted in any residential district by themselves on vacant land. Accessory buildings or structures and the principal building or structure may be constructed and occupied simultaneously. 
b.	All accessory buildings and structures which are structurally attached to a main or principal building or structure, and all accessory buildings in RE rural estate district, whether attached or detached from a main or principal building, shall be subject to and must conform to all regulations of this chapter applicable to main or principal buildings or structures, except for square footage requirements as regulated in this section. 
c.	Detached accessory buildings or structures shall not be erected in any residential front yard, except as permitted for farms and farming operations, as outlined in subsection (3) of this section. 
d.	An accessory building or structure or any combination of all accessory buildings or structures on any single lot in township must meet the frequency and area limits as follows: 
1.	There shall be no more than one detached accessory building on any single lot in the R-1A or R-1B zoning district and there shall be no more than two detached accessory buildings on any single lot in the RE zoning district. 
2.	There shall be no more than two accessory structures on any single lot in the R-1A, R-1B, and RE. Additional accessory buildings may be constructed on a parcel in the RE district if such construction is consistent with qualified farming operations conducted in township. 
3.	The total area of any combination of attached and detached accessory building in R-1A and R-1B zoning districts shall not exceed 1,000 square feet. 
4.	Detached accessory buildings in the R-1A and R-1B zoning districts shall cover no more than ten percent of the total area of the rear, even if the area in subsection (1)(d)3 of this section has to be less than 1,000 square feet. 
5.	The total area of all attached accessory buildings in the RE district shall not exceed the total square footage of the living area of the principle building or a maximum of 1,000 square feet. The total area of all detached accessory buildings in the RE district shall not exceed the total square footage of the living area of the principle building less the existing attached accessory building or 1,200 square feet, whichever is greater. The square footage of finished or unfinished basements shall not be considered when determining accessory building area. The area of detached accessory buildings may be increased by 400 square foot for each acre over 2.5 acres where additional acreage is part of a single lot or parcel. 
6.	Restriction. Additional acreage used to increase the size of accessory structures in an RE district cannot be split off from the acres upon which the principal building is located. 
e.	When an accessory building or structure is located on a corner lot, said building or structure shall meet the standards found in section 46-216 (c). 
f.	In the RE district, except as provided under section 46-209, no detached accessory building shall be located closer than 25 feet to any main or principal building, nor shall any detached accessory building or structure be located closer than 25 feet to any side or rear lot line. In the R-1A and R-1B district no detached accessory building or structure shall be located closer than ten feet to any main or principal building or structure nor shall it be located closer than five feet to any side or rear lot lines. 
g.	In the RE district, accessory building or structures shall not exceed 35 feet in height, where such buildings are a part of farmland in the township as defined in section 46-6 of this chapter, and 25 feet for all other nonfarmland uses in the RE district. In all other districts, accessory buildings or structures shall not exceed 18 feet in height. 
h.	Radio and/or television antennas, church steeples, or other accessory features may exceed the maximum height in the district in which the accessory feature is located provided that the distance between the accessory feature and the property lines in equal to the height of such antenna or feature. 
(2)	Accessory buildings and structures in nonresidential districts.
a.	All accessory buildings, structure or apparatus which are structurally attached to main or principal buildings shall be subject to and must conform to all regulations of this chapter applicable to main or principal buildings, except for the square footage requirements. 
b.	Detached accessory structure shall not be erected in any front yard or in any side or rear minimum yard setback area. 
c.	Radio and/or television antennas, chimneys, church steeples, or other accessory features may exceed the maximum height in the district in which the accessory feature is located provided that the distance between the accessory feature and the property lines is equal to the height of such feature. 
d.	Satellite antennas and/or other accessory apparatus shall be so mounted on the ground, on the wall or on the roof to maximize the screening of such apparatus without impeding signal reception or prescribed use. 
e.	Wireless communication facilities may be an accessory use in a nonresidential district provided they meet all of the requirements of section 46-301. Wireless communication facilities located in nonresidential districts shall be located only on parcels of five acres or greater. 
(3)	Accessory structures in RE districts involving farms and farming operations in township. In those cases where the director of building and planning for the township determines that the principal use of the applicant's premises is farming, and not residential, the director may authorize the erection of farm-related buildings on the premises even though such buildings do not conform to the other subsections of this section. 
a.	In reaching such a determination, the director shall consider the occupation of the persons occupying the premises, the source of income for the family occupying the premises, the amount of income produced by the farming occupation, relevant state statutes and rules, and all the like information. 
b.	This subsection is not intended to permit deviation from the standards of this section in the case of parttime farms or farmers, gentlemen farmers or the like situations. This section is intended to promote and protect farms and farmers, and not to encourage deviation or variations based on the allegation of farming where the allegation is not supported by sufficient fact. 
c.	When a farm ceases to operate as a financial use as defined in section 46-6 and the owner requests the land to be split, the nonfarm regulations of this chapter shall be applied to the principal and accessory buildings and structures to determine the total acreage required around the original principal and accessory buildings and structures before the remainder of the land, which is vacant, is divided into parcels to be equal to or greater than what is required pursuant to the zoning district in which the vacant land is located. 
(4)	Wireless communication facilities in RE districts as accessory structures.
a.	Wireless communication facility may be an accessory use in RE districts.
b.	The wireless communication facility shall meet the requirements of section 46-298 related to a permitted use after special approval. 
c.	Any new and unrelated structures being constructed on a site with a wireless communication facility shall be set away a distance equal to the height of the wireless communication facility structure. 
d.	Wireless communication facilities located in the RE district as an accessory use shall be located only on parcels of 40 acres or greater. This regulation shall not prohibit the division of the 40-acre parcel after the wireless communication facility is established as long as all other provisions of this chapter are met. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 5.02; Ord. No. 137-11, 8-1-2011; Ord. No. 138-12, 2-6-2012; Ord. No. 154-14, 4-7-2014; Ord. No. 155-14, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 46-243. - Fence regulations. 
(a)	General requirements. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to construct, or cause to be constructed, any fence on any property within township, except in accordance with these regulations. A permit to construct a fence shall not be required. 
(b)	Location of fences. 
(1)	All fences shall be located entirely on the property of the owner of the fence. Adjoining property owners may jointly install a fence on the common property line. 
(2)	No fence shall be located within a public easement in which public utilities are located or are proposed to be located without first receiving the approval of the public utility responsible. 
(3)	Where stockade or other similar style fencing is proposed, the finished side of the fence must fact outward toward neighboring properties. In the case where a fence abuts a public right-of-way, or private roadway, the finished side must face the public right-of-way, or private roadway. 
(4)	Continuity in the style of fencing shall be maintained along each separate property line. This provision does not require a uniform fence style along each separate property line, but rather prohibits abrupt changes in fence style along a property line. 
(c)	Height regulations. 
(1)	Fences located on residential lots shall comply with the following regulations:
a.	Only ornamental type fences shall be located in a required front setback or in a required side setback adjoining a public or private street and shall not exceed four feet in height. Ornamental fencing includes wrought iron, wood picket fencing and other similar styles. 
b.	Fences located in any required side setback not adjoining a street or in any required rear setback shall not exceed six feet in height. 
(2)	Fences on any commercial or office lot shall not exceed six feet in height. Fences in a front setback or a street setback shall not be permitted in a commercial or office commercial district except where required by the township planning commission. 
(3)	Fences on any industrial lot shall not exceed 12 feet in height.
(4)	Fences enclosing land used for agricultural purposes or the keeping of class II animals, shall be exempt from the regulations of this subsection. 
(5)	Fence height shall be the vertical distance from finished grade to the top of the highest point of the fence structure. When located on or adjacent to a property line, the finished grade shall match the grade on either side of the property line. The mounding of soil shall not be permitted for the purpose of a higher fence height. 
(d)	Safety of fences. 
(1)	No spikes, nails, barbed wire, or other pointed objects or sharp protrusions shall be placed on, attached to, or permitted to remain on, any fence below the height of ten feet, except in the case of fences that enclose farmland, in which case barbed wire may be permitted at any height of the fence. 
(2)	Fences shall not contain any electric charge or current, except fences that enclose land used for agricultural purposes, in which case electrically charged fence wires shall be permitted, provided such wires shall be attached to the inside face of the fence posts. All electrically charged fences shall be of a type and make approved by Underwriters Laboratories. 
(3)	Fences may be constructed of woven wire, metal, wood, plastic, or masonry. Masonry walls shall require a foundation equal to the depth of the frost line, or 42 inches. Posts or anchoring devices for all other fences shall be placed at a depth of not less than 30 inches. 
(e)	Retaining walls. A retaining wall shall be regulated as a fence if the wall projects more than 18 inches above the grade of the ground being retained. 
(f)	Public utility fences. Fences that enclose public utility installations shall not be located in any required setback where the lot is located in a residential zoning district. Such fences may be located in any required setback where the lot is located in any other zoning district. Such fences shall comply with all other provisions of this chapter. 
(g)	Maintenance. Fences shall be maintained so as not to endanger life or property. Any fence which, through lack of repair, type of construction, or otherwise endangers life or property, is hereby deemed a nuisance. If an unsafe condition exists in regard to a fence, the director of building and planning or other authorized person shall serve written notice to the owner, agent, or person in control of the property on which such fence is located. The notice shall describe the unsafe conditions, shall specify the repairs or modifications required to make the fence safe, or shall require an unsafe fence or any portion thereof to be removed. The notice shall provide a time limit for such repairs, modifications, or removal to be made. 
(h)	Exemptions. Fences enclosing land used for agricultural purposes shall be exempt from the regulations and requirements of this section. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 5.03)
Sec. 46-244. - One lot, one principal building in single-family residential districts. 
    In single-family residential districts, only one principal building shall be placed on a lot of record. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 5.04)
Sec. 46-245. - Required street frontage. 
    Any parcel of land which is to be occupied by a use or building, other than an accessory use or building, shall have frontage on and direct access to a public street or private easement which meets one of the following conditions: 
(1)	A public street which has been accepted for maintenance by the road commission for county; 
(2)	A permanent and unobstructed private easement of record at the county register of deeds where said easement is constructed in accordance with the township ordinance regulating the construction of private roads; 
(3)	An access easement of record where said easement had in fact been constructed and in use as a private road prior to May 6, 1974; 
(4)	Frontage on a cul-de-sac in which case said road frontage may be less than the minimum required by the zoning regulations for the zoning district in the parcel is located, so long as the cul-de-sac is constructed in accordance with county or township standards, and so long as the lot width on said lots front building setback line is at least the minimum as set forth in the zoning regulations; or 
(5)	In the case of a single building site, a driveway which serves that single site only, and which accesses a public street or permanent private easement as described in subsection (1) or (2) of this section. Such easement shall be at least 20 feet wide and shall become a recorded easement for ingress and egress, or be owned in fee simple by the parcel served. Such easement or fee simple parcel shall also be for the exclusive use of the parcel served. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 5.05)
Sec. 46-246. - Parking prohibited in residential districts. 
(a)	Automotive vehicles, trailers of any kind, or recreational vehicles that are self-propelled or towed and designed for highway travel, which are not capable of such travel in its existing condition, or any dismantled, partially dismantled, discarded, wrecked, demolished or partially demolished unit or any unit designed for highway travel not bearing a current license plate or license certificate shall not be parked or stored on any residentially zoned property other than in a completely enclosed building. 
(b)	Commercial highway trailers and trucks and equipment with a rated capacity exceeding 10,000 G.V.W. shall not be parked or stored in any R-1B or R-1A zone. 
(c)	Automotive vehicles, trailers or recreational vehicles may only be sold from property where the vehicle for sale is owned by the resident or owner of a property or in an approved new or used car lot. Vehicle(s) for sale in the road right-of-way or in a commercial parking lot is strictly prohibited. Vehicle(s) allowed for sale by this section shall be limited to one vehicle at a time and no more than four vehicles per year. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 5.06; Ord. No. 140-12, 2-6-2012; Ord. No. 142-12, 2-6-2012)
Sec. 46-247. - Construction and operation of swimming pools. 
    The construction and operation of swimming pools shall be subject to the regulations of the state construction code. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 5.07)
Sec. 46-248. - Condominium project regulations. 
    All condominium projects within the township shall comply with the provisions of this chapter with those exceptions as hereinafter set forth. It is recognized that residential condominiums differ from other residential subdivisions in numerous respects, particularly as to development standards in ownership with individual units and jointly held common areas. The purpose of this section is to address the special attributes of condominium projects and to adopt development standards which will protect both the community and the purchasers of condominiums. With that purpose in mind, the planning commission is granted broad power to apply the chapter standards to condominium developments in a manner reasonably consistent with the intent of this chapter in recognition of the fact that specific strict compliance to the letter of the ordinance may not always be obtained. 
(1)	Section 46-244 notwithstanding, site condominium projects are permitted in the township subject to the following: 
a.	The developer of the site condominium projects shall submit to the planning and building department for the township 12 copies of an application for a preliminary approval of the site condominium project. Such applications shall be accompanied by preliminary plans for the project. The preliminary plans shall show the name, location, and position of the project, and the plan shall also show the layout of the project in sufficient detail on the topographic map to enable the township planning commission members to determine whether or not the project meets the requirements for size and shape of units, setbacks, street, roads, highways, and such other requirements as are normally attendant to single-family developments. The preliminary plan shall be drawn to a scale of not more than 200 feet to one inch. The plan shall also identify the developer and the surveyor or engineer. 
b.	The planning and building department, and such consultants as the planning and building department may determine are necessary, shall review the preliminary plan and comment thereon to the developer. Such review and comment shall be completed within 45 days of the submission of the plan. Following such review and comment, the preliminary plan shall be submitted to the planning commission for hearing. Such hearing shall be held at a regular planning commission meeting, but such hearing need not be a public hearing within the meaning of the state enabling act. The planning commission may, by majority vote, determine to have a public hearing on the plan. 
c.	The planning commission shall determine whether or not the plan meets with the setback requirements, unit size requirements, lot or dedicated limited open or common space requirements consistent with the township lot size standards, and such other requirements as are applicable to single-family developments. Following such determination, the planning commission shall advise the developer of its findings and recommendations. 
d.	If the planning commission determines that the plan, or its alternates, conform to this chapter and all other applicable ordinances in all respects, the plan shall be approved. Following approval, the developer shall have one year within which to complete the final plans for the development. All such final plans shall be in the same form and prepared in the same manner as plans for subdivisions, consistent with the township subdivision control ordinance. 
e.	Following submission of the final plans to the township, the planning commission shall likewise determine that all ordinance criteria for the township have been met, and if all such criteria have been met, the final plans shall be approved. Such approval shall confer upon the developer one year within which to make substantial progress toward construction of the condominium project. 
f.	Following final site plan approval, the developer shall forthwith submit engineering plans to the township for review by the planning and building department, and such other consultants as the planning and building department may determine are necessary for the approval of such plans. All engineering shall conform with the standards as set forth in the township subdivision control ordinance. The following special provisions shall apply to single-family site condominium projects within the township: Each building site shall front on and have direct access to a public or private street, which public or private street shall be constructed in compliance with the standards for public roads as promulgated by the county road commission or, in the case of private street, the standards of the county road commission as applicable to a large lot subdivision with asphalt or concrete surface. 
(2)	Multiple-family condominium projects shall be constructed in accordance with the same standards as well as all other multiple housing projects as provided in this chapter and in the state construction code. In addition, the following special provisions shall apply: 
a.	Each single unit in a condominium project shall have locks using combinations which are interchange-free from locks used in all other separate dwellings within the project. This specification is intended to prohibit master keys. 
b.	A minimum of 90 cubic feet of storage space shall be provided outside the dwelling unit for each unit, and such storage space shall have a minimum area of 24 square feet of enclosed, lockable storage space. 
c.	Each utility that is consumed within the individual units shall be separately metered in such a way that the unit owner can be separately billed for its use. All utility meters shall be placed underground or screened architecturally or with landscaping or placed within the buildings. 
d.	Each unit shall have its own circuit breaker panel for all electrical circuits and outlets which serve the unit. Such panel shall be accessible within or close to the unit. 
(3)	Condominiums for all offices shall comply in all respects with all applicable township ordinances, including this chapter, with regard to office buildings. 
(4)	Condominiums for retail establishments or purposes other than residential or office shall comply with all township ordinances applicable to the purposed use and type of building. 
(5)	As an aspect of site plan approval, the developer of any condominium project of any nature whatsoever shall provide 12 copies of the proposed master deed and restrictions to the planning department for distribution to the planning commission members and to such other consultant or experts as the planning department may deem necessary to call upon. 
(6)	It shall be unlawful to develop any condominium project, or record any documents of any nature whatsoever establishing a condominium project, in the township without approval of the township and the manner as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 5.08)
Sec. 46-249. - Home occupation. 
    The following regulations for permitting certain home occupations after special approval are enacted for the purpose of preserving the residential character of the community, to render the area quiet and peaceful for the surrounding residents, to provide for the safety of the adjacent residents and the well-being of all of the residents on the street where such a use may be permitted. The general health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood outweighs any benefit derived from the establishment and/or continuance of any home occupation after special approval. 
(1)	Procedures for obtaining special use approval for a home occupation. Any resident seeking special use approval to conduct a home occupation within a residentially zoned district must file an application with the township planning commission that contains, at a minimum, the following information: 
a.	A description of the property involved, the uses of all properties adjacent to the applicant's property, the distance from the area of the proposed home occupation and any adjacent residential dwelling, the type of activity proposed to be conducted, where the activity is to be conducted on the property and the persons to be involved in the activity. 
b.	The application for a home occupation special use should describe in detail how the use will meet the standards as set forth in this section. 
c.	The application, when completed, shall be submitted to the director of planning and building for township for review as to completeness and accuracy before submission to the planning commission. 
d.	Uses that can be considered as a home occupation shall be submitted to the planning commission and reviewed according to the standards of subsection (2) of this section. 
(2)	Standards for approval. In any building used as a dwelling, small, unobtrusive and unobstructive businesses may be conducted provided that: 
a.	The primary use of the structure is a dwelling unit or approved accessory building.
b.	The proposed use shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit or approved accessory building. 
c.	No person other than resident members of the family occupying the dwelling unit shall be engaged in or employed in the home occupation. 
d.	No alteration of the residential appearance of the premises shall occur, including the creation of a separate entrance to the dwelling or utilization of an existing entrance exclusively for the business. 
e.	The home occupation shall be restricted to 15 percent of the dwelling, and shall be clearly secondary to the use of the house for dwelling purposes. 
f.	No toxic, explosive, flammable, combustible, corrosive, radioactive, or other restricted materials shall be used or stored on the premises. 
g.	The home occupation shall not cause any noise, odor, gas, smoke, dust, dirt, glare, heat, fire hazard or vibration to occur outside of the building in which such activities occur. 
h.	No mechanical or electrical equipment is to be utilized except that which is necessarily, customarily, or ordinarily used for household or leisure purposes. 
i.	There are no outside operations, storage, or display of materials or products.
j.	No process is used which is hazardous to public health, safety, or welfare.
k.	Visitors, customers or deliveries shall not exceed that normal and reasonably occurring for a residence and not more than two deliveries of products or materials per week. 
l.	The home shall not be the gathering point for other employees, nor shall any employee leave vehicles at the home and be transported to other locations. 
m.	One business vehicle may be permitted at the dwelling. Business vehicles larger than a pickup truck or domestic van shall meet the requirements of sections 46-246 and 46-285, if eligible. 
n.	No additional on-site parking associated with the business other that the space available for parking by the resident of the property is permitted. 
o.	No on-street parking associated with the business is permitted.
p.	One nonilluminated nameplate, not more than two square feet in area, may be attached to the building which may contain only the name and/or occupation of the resident. 
(3)	Conditions of approval. Any permitted home occupation use after special approval shall be permitted to continue provided it meets the following conditions: 
a.	The home occupation shall continue to meet the standards as set forth in this section.
b.	The planning commission may stipulate additional specific standards that a particular home occupation must comply with relative to the special circumstances on or adjacent to the subject property. 
c.	The home occupation may be subject to an annual review by the planning commission or more frequently upon presentation of information not previously considered by the planning commission. 
d.	The home occupation may be subject to a time limit such as:
1.	One year;
2.	Five years;
3.	As long as the current owner of the residence is the person conducting the home occupation; or 
4.	Other time limits as may be stipulated by the planning commission.
e.	The planning commission may also stipulate other general conditions that an applicant for a home occupation special approval must abide by in order to maintain their home occupation that the planning commission deems in their best judgment is necessary for the health, safety, and welfare of the township. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 5.09; Ord. No. 139-11, 12-19-2011)
Sec. 46-250. - Scope of provisions. 
(a)	No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereinafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered and maintained, and no new use or change shall be made or maintained of any building, structure or land, or part thereof, except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)	No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally altered, except in conformity with the area and placement regulations of the district in which the building is located. 
(c)	No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally altered to exceed the height limit hereinafter established for the district in which the building is located, except that penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans, or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building, and fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, steeples, stage lofts, and screens, flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, individual domestic radio and television aerials and wireless masts, water tanks, or similar structures may be erected above the height limits herein prescribed. No such structure shall be erected more than 15 feet above the maximum height of the district in which it is located; nor shall such exempt structure have a total area greater than ten percent of the roof area of the building; nor shall such exempt structure be used for any residential purpose or any commercial or industrial purpose other than a use incidental to the main use of the building. 
(d)	Architectural features, as defined, not including vertical projections, may extend or project into a required side yard not more than two inches for each one foot of width of such side yard and may extend or project into a required front yard or rear yard not more than three feet. An open, unenclosed porch or paved terrace may project into a front yard for a distance not exceeding ten feet. 
(e)	Any building requiring yard space shall be located at such an elevation that a sloping grade shall be maintained to cause the flow of surface water to run away from the walls of the building. A slope grade shall be established and maintained from the center of the front or rear lot line to the finished grade line at the front or rear of the building, both grades sloping to the front lot or both. However, this shall not prevent the grading of a yard space to provide sunken or terraced areas, provided proper means are constructed and maintained to prevent the run-off surface water from flowing onto the adjacent properties. Grade elevations shall be determined by using the elevation at the centerline of the road in front of the lot as the established grade or such grade determined by the township engineer or building inspector. 
(f)	When a new building is constructed on a vacant lot between two existing buildings or adjacent to an existing building, the existing established grade shall be used in determining the grade around the new building and the yard around the new building shall be graded in such a manner as to meet existing grades and not to permit run-off of surface water to flow onto the adjacent property. 
(g)	No permit shall be granted for the moving of buildings or structures from without or within the limits of the township to be placed on property within said limits until the applicant provides the building inspector with certification that all applicable building codes have been met and have found that it is structurally safe, will not adversely affect the character of existing buildings in the neighborhood of the new location and will fully comply with all other codes regulating the health, safety and general welfare of the township. 
(h)	Land balancing of any kind on vacant land shall not be permitted without permission of the building official or designee. 
(i)	The construction, maintenance or existence of any unprotected, unbarricaded, open or dangerous excavations, holes, pits, or wells, which constitute or are reasonably likely to constitute a danger or menace to the public health, safety or welfare, are hereby prohibited; provided, however, this section shall not prevent any excavation under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, where such excavations are properly protected and warning signs posted in such a manner as may be approved by the building inspector; and provided further, that this section shall not apply to streams, natural bodies of water or to ditches, reservoirs, or other major bodies of water created or existing by authority of the state. 
(j)	Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoration to a safe condition of any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by the building inspector, or required to comply with his lawful order. 
(k)	The provisions of this chapter shall not be so construed as to interfere with the temporary use of any property as a voting place in connection with a public election. 
(l)	From and after the effective date the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, it shall be unlawful for any person to use land for filling with material of any kind without approval of the township board. 
(m)	Essential services shall be permitted as authorized under any franchise or that may be regulated by any law of the state or any ordinance of the township, are subject to the requirements of this and other applicable chapters. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 5.10)
Secs. 46-251-46-278. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 46-279. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to provide regulations for specific uses, which may be regulated as either a permitted or conditional land use. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 6.01)
Sec. 46-280. - Cluster housing option. 
(a)	Intent. The intent of the cluster housing option is to permit the development of single-family and two-family residential patterns which, through design innovation, will: 
(1)	Allow greater flexibility;
(2)	Encourage a more creative approach to the development of single-family residential areas; 
(3)	Encourage a more efficient aesthetic, and desirable use of the land;
(4)	Provide a more desirable living environment through the preservation and conservation of natural features such as topography, wetlands, woodlands, bodies of water, and other natural assets; 
(5)	Encourage the provision of open space so that benefits may accrue directly to the residents of the development; 
(6)	Provide for optimum setbacks from major thoroughfares;
(7)	Provide for the sound physical development and handling of site situations where a conventional subdivision approach would be unnecessarily restrictive. 
(b)	Applicability. The cluster housing option may be applied for in the RE, R-1A, and R-1B single-family residential districts and in the RM multiple-family residential districts. In the RM district, cluster housing developments shall comply with restrictions applied in the R-1B district. The following additional standards shall determine whether the cluster housing option is treated as a permitted or special land use: 
(1)	As a permitted use. The cluster housing option shall be a permitted use where a minimum of 50 percent of the net site area is permanently preserved in an undeveloped state, subject to all applicable standards set forth herein. Application for cluster housing as a permitted use shall be the option of the applicant. 
(2)	As a special land use. The cluster housing option shall be a special land use in all other circumstances where it is not a permitted use, subject to all applicable standards set forth herein. 
(c)	Criteria. In the review of any proposed development under this section, the township shall make a finding that the intent of the cluster housing option, as set forth in subsection (a) of this section and one or more of the following standards are met: 
(1)	The parcel contains natural assets which would be preserved through the use of cluster development. Such assets may include natural stands of large trees; land which serves as a natural habitat for wildlife; wetlands; bodies of water (i.e., streams, rivers, and lakes); unusual topographic features; or other natural assets which should be preserved. 
(2)	The parcel contains major topographic conditions which make development under the normal subdivision approach impractical. In considering qualification under this subsection, the township shall determine that the following conditions exist: 
a.	The natural land forms are so arranged that the change of elevation within the site includes slopes in excess of 15 percent between these elevations. These elevation changes and slopes shall appear as the predominant feature of the site rather than the exception or infrequent feature of the site. 
b.	Mass grading of the site would be necessary in order to achieve the maximum road grade permitted by the county road commission and the use of cluster housing development will allow for a greater preservation of a desirable natural setting. 
(3)	The parcel contains substantial portions of floodplain and wetlands, as verified by a floodplain and wetlands map, issued by the appropriate federal, state, county or township agency, or prepared by a qualified wetlands consultant. 
(4)	Due to the size and shape of the parcel, utilization of the cluster lot option would result in the more creative and efficient use of the property and would not create a negative impact upon surrounding properties. 
(d)	Procedures for review and approval. A two-part process will be followed in the review and approval of applications for the cluster housing option, as described below: 
(1)	Concept plan review. The application for a cluster housing option shall require the review of concept plans and relevant supportive material by the planning commission. The following procedures shall be followed: 
a.	The applicant shall file a request for a concept review by the planning commission by filing with the township building official, an application, the applicable fee, and the following information, in the number of copies as required by the township: 
1.	Project narrative and site analysis. A summary explanation and graphic illustration of the development concept and the manner in which the criteria in subsection (c) of this section are met. 
2.	Density concept plan. A plan which illustrates achievable development of the property without application of the cluster housing option and with all applicable ordinances and laws observed. The density concept plan shall not rely upon community septic and sewer systems, as defined by this chapter, to justify achievable density. 
3.	Cluster concept plan. A plan which illustrates development of the property with application of the cluster option. 
b.	Both the density and cluster concept plans shall contain the following information:
1.	Evidence of ownership. Location and description of site; dimensions and areas.
2.	General topography, soils information, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains and surface water. 
3.	Scale, north arrow, date of plan.
4.	Existing zoning of site; existing land use and zoning of adjacent parcels; location of existing buildings, drives and streets on the site and within 100 feet of the site. 
5.	Lot and street layout.
6.	Location, size, and uses of open space.
7.	General description of proposed water, sewage disposal, and storm drainage systems.
c.	Upon receipt of an application for concept review, the director of planning and building shall transmit the application and related material to the planning commission, township planner, and township engineer. Concept review shall be scheduled at the first available planning commission meeting. 
d.	The planning commission shall review concept plans and relevant supportive material and shall be entitled to make reasonable inquiries of and receive answers from the applicant. The official minutes shall reflect the recommendations of the planning commission. 
e.	Specific details of the site plan prepared in accordance with article II, division 2 of this chapter shall serve as the basis for determining that all township standards have been met. 
(2)	Final review. Within six months following the township's review of the concept plan, the applicant shall submit a final plan in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 46-68 and conforming with this section. If a final plan is not submitted by the applicant for approval within six months following receipt of township comments, the concept review becomes null and void. 
(e)	Site design requirements. All cluster developments submitted under this option shall conform to the following site design requirements: 
(1)	Type of dwelling unit permitted. Development is restricted to single- and two-family dwelling units. 
(2)	Density. Whether a permitted use or special land use, the number of dwelling units permitted under the cluster housing option shall not exceed the number of dwelling units if the site were developed with a conventional layout and all applicable ordinances and laws observed, as demonstrated by the density concept site plan submittal in accordance with subsection (d)(2) of this section. 
(3)	Open space. Cluster housing treated as a permitted land use shall have a minimum of 50 percent of the net site area devoted to open space, provided such open space is left in an undeveloped state, as defined by this chapter. Cluster housing treated as a special land use shall have significant areas devoted to open space for the use and enjoyment of residents of the development and the preservation of natural features. Designated open space shall remain either in an undeveloped state and/or used for specifically designated recreational purposes. In all cases, designated open space shall be subject to the following standards: 
a.	Designated open space shall include area within any greenbelts pursuant to section 46-386. 
b.	Designated open space shall not include: rights-of-way or easements designated for road purposes; areas within lots; or, land which is under water (lakes, streams, watercourses, and other similar bodies of water). 
c.	Designated open space shall be designed to avoid fragmentation of the natural resources and to include significant native plant communities and habitats located on the site. 
(4)	Setbacks. Minimum setback requirements shall be established in a manner which permits variation in the siting of individual dwelling units in order to encourage creativity in design and compatibility with natural resource features. The following minimum setback requirements for each dwelling unit shall be applied: 
Minimum Setbacks and Lot Width per Dwelling Unit (in Feet)
in Subdivisions and Site CondominiumsSetbacks/DistrictsRER-1AR-1BRMFront & RearFront50503535Rear353525 25 Total Front & Rear1001007575SideLeast20201010Total of Same Lot505025 25 Ordinary High Water Mark50505050 
Minimum Setbacks and Distances between Dwelling Units (in Feet)
in Regular CondominiumsSetbacks/DistrictsRER-1AR-1BRMMinimum Setbacks*Internal/Drives/Streets50503535Ordinary High Water Mark50505050Distance Between Bldg.Side/Side40 40 2020Side/Front, Side/Rear55553535Front/Front, Front/Rear, Rear/Rear70705050*Where the cluster development contains drives or streets without a recorded easement, setbacks shall be measured from a point 30 feet from the center of the drive or street.  
(5)	Required road frontage. All lots shall have frontage on a public road which has been accepted for maintenance by the county road commission, or a road which is part of a condominium development where design, construction, and perpetual maintenance of the road have been approved by the township. The extent of road frontage shall be determined by the township, in its discretion, taking into consideration: the extent and importance of natural resources, topographical conditions, floodplains, and wetlands to be preserved on the property, the size and shape of the development site; public safety, aesthetics; and, impact upon the surrounding developments. 
(6)	Greenbelt adjacent and parallel to county roads. It is the intent of the township that cluster lot developments shall not appear to the more intense than conventional developments as viewed from off site. In addition to any required minimum setback specified in section 46-386, a greenbelt having the minimum width of 100 feet shall be required along any adjacent county road. The greenbelt shall be measured from the future right-of-way line in accordance with the county right-of-way plan. The township at its discretion, may permit variations in width of the greenbelt taking into consideration topographic and/or other natural resource conditions, density of existing vegetation to be preserved, and size and shape of the development site as well as the county future rights-of-way plan. 
(7)	Transition from adjacent parcels. In order to provide an orderly transition of density when a cluster development abuts a single-family residential district of equal or lower density, the township, at its discretion, shall require designation of open space along the common boundaries; screening in accordance with the requirements of section 46-386; and/or an area or row of lots of commensurate size as neighboring residential lots. 
(f)	Grant of approval. Upon the grant of special land use approval under this section, the township shall set forth all conditions imposed as part of the approval. 
(g)	Preservation and maintenance. The effectiveness of any approval of a cluster lot development under this section shall be conditioned upon recording of appropriate conservation easements, restrictive covenants or other instruments for the purpose of providing for long-term maintenance and preservation of common areas, open space areas, wooded areas and/or other areas with natural resources or features to be preserved on the property. Such easement and/or other instrumentation shall be in a form and contain the content approved by the township attorney. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 6.02)
Sec. 46-281. - Public, parochial and other private elementary, intermediate and/or high schools. 
(a)	Intent. It is the intent of this section to establish standards for public, parochial and other private elementary, intermediate and/or high schools which will ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses and maintain the character of the neighborhood. 
(b)	Application of regulations. 
(1)	The schools are offering courses in general education.
(2)	The schools are not for profit.
(3)	The site is not less than ten acres in size.
(4)	Access shall be from a major thoroughfare.
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 6.03)
Sec. 46-282. - Regulation of animals. 
(a)	Intent. It is the intent of this section to establish standards for any residential use wherein animals are kept for the use of the owner of the premises and immediate family which will ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses and maintain the character of the neighborhood. 
(b)	Application of regulations. 
(1)	Class I animals may be maintained in any zoning classification district, subject to specific restrictions herein. 
(2)	Class II animals may be maintained subject to the following conditions:
a.	The minimum lot area required to maintain class II animals is 21/2 acres. One class II animal shall be permitted for the first 21/2 acres. Thereafter, one additional class II animal shall be permitted for each full acre in excess of 21/2 acres. 
b.	There shall be adequate fencing, or other restraining device, for the purpose of maintaining animals within the restricted areas provided for in this chapter. 
c.	Structures housing class II animals shall be located no nearer than 200 feet to any dwelling which exists on an adjacent lot and no nearer than 100 feet to any adjacent lot line. Fenced areas shall be located no nearer than 50 feet from any dwelling which exists on an adjacent lot. 
d.	The refuse and wastes resulting from the maintenance of animals shall be controlled upon the premises, and shall be cared for or disposed of within a reasonable time so as to minimize hazards of health and offensive effects upon neighboring people and uses. 
e.	All feed and other substances and materials on the premises for the maintenance of animals shall be stored so as to not attract rats, mice, or other vermin. 
(3)	Class III Animals may be maintained subject to the following conditions:
a.	The minimum lot area required to maintain class III animals shall be 21/2 acres. Twenty-five class III animals shall be permitted for the first 21/2 acres, thereafter, five additional class III animals shall be permitted for each full one acre in excess of 21/2 acres. A maximum of one rooster shall be permitted for each lot or parcel. Lots or parcels under one ownership shall be considered one lot or parcel. 
b.	There shall be adequate fencing, or other restraining device, for the purpose of maintaining animals within the restricted areas provided for in this chapter. Fenced areas shall be located no nearer than 50 feet from any dwelling which exists on an adjacent lot. 
c.	Structures housing class III animals shall be located no nearer than 100 feet to any dwelling which exists on an adjacent lot and no nearer than 50 feet to any adjacent lot line. 
d.	The refuse and wastes resulting from the maintenance of animals shall be controlled upon the premises, and shall be cared for or disposed of within a reasonable time so as to minimize hazards of health and offensive effects upon neighboring people and uses. 
e.	All feed and other substances and materials on the premises for the maintenance of animals shall be stored so as to not attract rats, mice or other vermin. 
(4)	On any premises upon which animals are situated or maintained in the township, garbage, refuse, offal, and the like shall not be brought upon the premises and fed to animals. 
(5)	A nuisance shall not be created by the maintenance of animals in the township.
a.	A nuisance may be determined upon the inspection by the director of planning and building, or other township official duly designated and authorized by the township board, concerning a premises on which animals are kept. 
b.	If a nuisance is found, a ten-day written notice may be given by said official to the person maintaining animals on said premises, stating in said notice that it appears that a nuisance does in fact exist on said premises, and specifically describing said nuisance. 
c.	If the condition persists, the building inspector may refer the matter to the zoning board of appeals. Due notice shall be given to the person maintaining the animals and due notice being given to individuals residing within 300 feet of the said premises, and other interested parties known to the township, the board of appeals shall conduct a hearing and make a determination as to whether the conditions on the premises in question constitute a nuisance. 
d.	The person maintaining the animals on said premises, or their legal representatives, shall be permitted to present evidence and arguments to the contrary. 
e.	Upon a determination by the board of appeals that a nuisance exists, the board of appeals shall, in writing, apprise the person maintaining the animals on the said premises as to how the nuisance shall be abated, and provide a reasonable time therefor. 
f.	The board of appeals shall order the animals upon the premises removed only in the event that the maintenance of said animals creates an imminent danger to the public health, safety and welfare, and provided that such a removal order shall be limited to a minimum number of animals and minimum time period necessary to abate said danger. 
(6)	Farms and farm operations as defined by this chapter are excepted from this section.
(7)	The care and maintenance of all animals on all property are subject to the regulations in the animal control ordinance. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 6.04; Ord. No. 153-14, 4-7-2014; Ord. No. 165-15, 5-4-2015)
Sec. 46-283. - Hobby and commercial kennels. 
(a)	Intent. It is the intent of this section to establish standards for hobby and commercial kennels and other facilities normally incidental thereto which will ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses and maintain the character of the neighborhood. 
(b)	Application of regulations. 
(1)	Hobby kennels shall be permitted as an accessory use in any zoning district where single-family dwellings are permitted uses. 
(2)	Commercial kennels shall be a conditional use in the RE District subject to the following conditions: 
a.	A minimum lot size of 15 acres shall be maintained.
b.	Any building or fenced area where animals are kept shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from any property line. 
c.	The kennel shall be established and maintained in accordance with all applicable state, county and township sanitation regulations. Odor, dust, noise, drainage or insects shall not constitute a nuisance to adjoining properties. 
d.	A site plan shall be submitted in accordance to article II, division 2 of this chapter.
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 6.05)
Sec. 46-284. - Cemeteries. 
(a)	Intent. It is the intent of this section to establish standards for cemeteries and other facilities normally incidental thereto which will ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses and maintain the character of the neighborhood. 
(b)	Application of regulations. 
(1)	The principal access shall be directly to a county primary road.
(2)	The site shall be a minimum of 20 acres.
(3)	Mausoleum structures, maintenance buildings and similar facilities shall be set back at least 80 feet from any property line. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 6.06)
Sec. 46-285. - Parking and storing of commercial trailers, trucks and equipment. 
(a)	Intent. It is the intent of this section to establish standards for parking and storage of commercial trailers, trucks and/or equipment with a rated capacity exceeding 10,000 gross vehicle weight (GVW) which will ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses and maintain the character of the neighborhood. 
(b)	Application of regulations. 
(1)	Minimum acreage required shall be ten acres.
(2)	Not more than three licensed vehicles, or vehicles and mobile equipment in combination shall be parked or stored on the property. 
(3)	All vehicles and equipment shall be parked or stored in a completely enclosed building.
(4)	The restrictions in this section do not apply to vehicles and equipment that are used on a bona fide farm and in farming operations as defined by section 46-6. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 6.07)
Sec. 46-286. - Child day care facilities. 
(a)	Intent. It is the intent of this section to establish standards for day care facilities which will ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses and maintain the character of the neighborhood. 
(b)	Application of regulations. 
(1)	A state licensed family day care home shall be considered a residential use of property and a permitted use in all residential districts. Family day care homes shall be prohibited in all other districts. 
(2)	The township may, by issuance of a conditional use permit, authorize the establishment of group day care homes and day care centers as specified in district regulations and subject to the standards herein. 
(c)	Standards for group day care homes. Group day care homes shall be considered as a special land use subject to the requirements and standards of article II, division 3 of this chapter and the following additional standards: 
(1)	The subject parcel shall meet the minimum lot area requirements for the zoning district in which it is located. 
(2)	The property is maintained in a manner that is consistent with the visible characteristics of the neighborhood. 
(3)	Fencing shall be provided that is designed to discourage climbing, and is at least four feet in height, but no higher than six feet. The area to be fenced shall be determined by the planning commission. 
(4)	The hours of operation do not exceed 16 hours within a 24-hour period. Activity between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall be limited so that the drop-off and pick-up of children is not disruptive to neighboring residents. 
(5)	One off-street parking space per employee not a member of the group day care home family shall be provided. 
(6)	Appropriate licenses with the state shall be maintained.
(d)	Standards for day care centers. Day care centers shall be considered as a conditional land use subject to the requirements and standards of article II, division 3 of this chapter and the following standards: 
(1)	Frontage on either a principal or minor arterial road shall be required.
(2)	A separate drop-off and pick-up area shall be provided adjacent to the main building entrance, located off of a public street and the parking access lane, and shall be of sufficient size so as to not create congestion on the site or within a public roadway. 
(3)	Off-street parking shall be provided at a rate of one space per employee plus one space for every five children enrolled at the facility. 
(4)	There shall be an outdoor play area of at least 1,000 square feet provided on the premises. Said play area shall not be located within the front setback. This requirement may be waived by the planning commission if public play area is available 500 feet from the subject parcel. 
(5)	Appropriate licenses with the state shall be maintained.
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 6.08)
Sec. 46-287. - Mobile home parks. 
(a)	Intent. It is the intent of this section to establish standards for mobile home parks which will ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses and maintain the character of the neighborhood. 
(b)	Application of regulations. 
(1)	Greenbelt. The park shall have a greenbelt ten feet in width on all sides, and be five feet in height, composed of evergreens such as spruce, pine or ferns. The greenbelt shall be measured from the nearest edge of the road right-of-way to the line of the closest mobile home site. An additional 90 feet of open space shall surround the mobile home park on all sides. 
(2)	Recreation. A minimum of 800 square feet of land per mobile home site shall be left in open space developed for recreation purposes. Such developed area shall not include roads, sidewalks, lands under water or having excessive grades and shall be graded and developed as to have adequate drainage and usability by residents of the park. Such space shall be enclosed with shrubs or hedges placed no further than one foot apart nor more than four feet in height. 
(3)	Spacing. No mobile home shall be located nearer than 30 feet to any other mobile home or building within the mobile home park. 
(4)	Access. Mobile home park shall have direct access to a paved county primary road directly abutting thereon. Acceleration and deceleration lanes shall be provided subject to the approval of the county road commission. 
(5)	Travel lanes. All streets and driveways in every mobile home park shall be constructed and maintained with a bituminous concrete road surface or better, which affords ready means of entrance and exit to the street. All such streets and driveways shall have a minimum pavement width of 30 feet for two-way streets and driveways and 20 feet of pavement for one-way streets and driveways. All roads shall have curbs, with a minimum of six inches and gutters, with a minimum of 18 inches. There shall be no on-street parking permitted within the mobile home park. 
(6)	Sidewalks. Pedestrian walkways shall include 48-inch wide concrete walks from the entrance of each mobile home to all service facilities provided therein. 
(7)	Pads. Each mobile home site shall be provided with a reinforced concrete pad reinforced with six inches by six inches, 11 gauge wire mesh not less than six inches in depth, with suitable anchorage imbedded in the concrete for tie down. Minimum pad dimensions for single mobile homes shall be 12 feet by 60 feet; for double wide mobile homes 24 feet by 50 feet. 
(8)	Patio. An outdoor patio area of not less than 180 square feet shall be provided at each mobile home site, conveniently located to the entrance of the mobile home and appropriately related to open areas of the site and other facilities, for the purpose of providing suitable outdoor living space to supplement the limited interior spaces of a mobile home. 
(9)	Minimum mobile home size. No mobile home shall be less than 50 feet in length and 12 feet in width. 
(10)	Skirting, canopies and awnings. 
a.	Each mobile home must be skirted within 90 days after establishment in a mobile home park. 
b.	Such skirting shall be of 26 gauge metal, aluminum or other noncorrosive metal or material of equal strength and so constructed and attached to the mobile home so as to deter and prevent the entry of rodents, flies, bugs and other pests. 
c.	Canopies and awnings may be attached to any mobile home but they shall not exceed 12 feet in width, or length or the height of the mobile home. 
d.	A permit shall not be required for construction or erection of canopies or awnings which are open on three sides. However, a permit shall be required from the building department before construction or erection of any screened, glassed-in or otherwise enclosed awning or canopy. 
(11)	Utilities and other services. All mobile home parks shall comply with the following requirements for utilities: 
a.	Sewage disposal. Septic tanks and drain fields shall not be permitted. Sewage wastes shall be so treated and disposed of, that there shall be no detectable pollution effects on the surface of the groundwater of township. Plans and specifications for water and sewage facilities shall have the approval of township, the county health department and the state department of health prior to construction. A certificate of approval from each of these agencies must be on file with the township clerk after final inspection of the completed facilities. 
b.	Sanitary sewer and water. All sanitary sewer and water facilities, including connections provided to individual sites, shall meet the requirements of the county health department and the state health department. 
c.	Plumbing. The plumbing connections to each mobile home lot shall be constructed so that all lines are protected from freezing, from accidental bumping or from creating any type of nuisance or health hazard. 
d.	Storm drainage. Storm drainage facilities shall be so constructed as to protect those that will reside in the mobile home park, as well as the property owners adjacent to the park. Such park facilities shall be such capacity to ensure rapid drainage and prevent the accumulation of stagnant pools of water in or adjacent to the park. Storm drainage facilities shall comply with the standards set forth by the county road commission and is subject to the review of the township engineer. 
e.	Electricity and telephone. All electric, telephone and other lines from supply poles shall be underground. Each manufactured home lot shall be provided with underground electrical service. When separate meters are installed each meter shall be located on a uniform post on the lot line of each space. Wiring shall comply with the recommended standards of the local utility company and the state construction code. 
f.	Heating and cooking fuel. All fuel oil and LP gas tanks shall be located on each mobile home site in a uniform manner. All tanks shall be of an approved type to comply with building code standards, equipped with vent pipes and fused valves as required. All such tanks shall be elevated on noncombustible standards, placed on a concrete base and painted a uniform color. 
g.	Garbage repository. Each mobile home lot shall be provided with at least one, ten-gallon metal garbage can with a tightfitting cover. The cans shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all times. It shall be the responsibility of the park owner to ensure that garbage and rubbish shall be collected and properly disposed of outside the mobile home park as frequently as may be necessary to ensure that garbage cans do not overflow. Exterior property areas shall be maintained free of organic and inorganic material that might become a health hazard, accident or fire hazard. Facilities for cleaning refuse receptacles shall be provided in a central location approved by the county health department. 
h.	Street lighting. All streets and walkways in the mobile home park shall be lighted at night with incandescent light of not less than one footcandle, such lighting to be in the form of post-top luminaries or an equivalent lighting method, spaced not less than 100 feet apart, and so placed that the lighting emitted will not be directed onto adjacent residentially zoned or developed areas or create a driving hazard on streets or roads abutting the mobile home park property. 
i.	Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants of a size and pressure to be used by the township fire department shall be placed within said mobile home park so that no mobile home shall be more than 500 feet from a fire hydrant. Fire extinguishing equipment shall be provided as required by state law and shall be in good working order, of such type, size and number and so located within the park as to satisfy applicable regulations of the state fire code. The number of mobile homes connected to a single main emanating from the feeder main line shall not exceed 35 feet. 
(12)	Storage areas. There shall be no storage underneath any mobile home and each mobile home site shall be maintained in a clean and presentable condition at all times. Each mobile home shall be provided with either one metal storage cabinet or a storage cabinet of wood construction meeting the requirements of the state construction code and inspected by the building inspector. These shall be uniform as to size and location throughout the mobile home park site. All cabinets shall be kept clean and shall be maintained in good condition and kept painted and shall be a minimum of eight feet by ten feet, 80 square feet in size. 
(13)	Occupancy. No mobile home site within the mobile home park shall be occupied for dwelling purposes until the construction of all sewer, water and electrical, the pairing of sheets and parking areas and street lighting have been completed and approved by the township building inspector. 
(14)	Approval by building inspector. No mobile home site within the mobile home park shall be occupied for dwelling purposes until the construction of all sewer, water and electricity; the paving of streets and parking area; and street lighting has been completed and approved by the township building inspector. 
(15)	Sales. Mobile homes shall not be moved into the park for the purpose of sale, and except for regularly occupied mobile homes from which the occupants have moved, vacant mobile homes shall not be stored in the park for the purpose of display or sale. 
a.	For the purpose of this section, the term "regularly occupied" means occupied by an owner of such mobile home for a period of no less than three months. 
b.	Such sales office shall be in the mobile home park office or club house, and shall not be in an independent or freestanding building or mobile home. 
c.	The planning commission shall make such other provisions or requirements, including time limitations, as it deems necessary for the maintenance of the standards of this chapter and community. However, in no event shall the commission waive any of the standards of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 6.09)
Sec. 46-288. - Manufactured/modular homes outside of mobile home parks. 
(a)	Intent. It is the intent of this section to establish standards for mobile homes outside of mobile home parks which will ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses and maintain the character of the neighborhood. 
(b)	Application of regulations. 
(1)	Not more than one residential unit shall be permitted per zoning lot.
(2)	The lot on which a mobile home/manufactured home is located shall meet all minimum lot size, setbacks, yard area, parking and all other pertinent requirements of this chapter. The mobile home shall meet the minimum square foot requirements of the zoning district in which is located. 
(3)	It shall comply with all pertinent building and fire codes for single-family dwelling units including but shall not be limited to the state construction code as may be amended from time to time. 
(4)	It shall be firmly and permanently attached to a solid foundation or basement not less in area than the perimeter area of the dwelling. The foundation and/or basement shall be constructed in accordance with the state construction code. 
(5)	It shall not have any exposed wheels, towing mechanism or undercarriage.
(6)	It shall be connected to a public sewer and water supply, if available, or to private facilities approved by the county health department. 
(7)	It shall be aesthetically comparable in design and appearance to conventionally constructed homes found within 2,000 feet of the proposed mobile/manufactured home. It shall be the responsibility of the director of planning and building to determine whether this standard is met. The director of planning and building shall make a determination that this standard has been met if all of the following conditions exist: 
a.	The proposed mobile/manufactured home will have a combination of roof overhang and pitch of conventionally constructed homes typically found within 2,000 feet of the proposed mobile/manufactured home. 
b.	The proposed mobile/manufactured home will have steps and/or porches which provide access to exterior doors, which are permanently attached to the ground and to the mobile/manufactured home structure, and which are comparable to steps and/or porches of conventionally constructed homes typically found within 2,000 feet of the proposed mobile/manufactured home. 
c.	The proposed mobile/manufactured home will be covered with a siding material which is in color, texture, malleability, direction of joist and method of fastening to the structure comparable to siding of conventionally constructed homes typically found within 2,000 feet of the proposed mobile/manufactured home. 
d.	The proposed mobile/manufactured home will have the glass on its windows recessed at least 11/2 inches behind the exterior surface of its siding. 
e.	The proposed mobile/manufactured home will have front and rear or front and side exterior doors or such a combination of doors as is found in a majority of the conventionally constructed homes within 2,000 feet of the proposed mobile/manufactured home. 
f.	The proposed mobile/manufactured home will have a one-car garage or a two-car garage if such a garage is found in a majority of the homes within 2,000 feet of the proposed mobile/manufactured home. Said garage shall be attached to the principal structure if a majority of the garages within 2,000 feet are attached to the principal structure. 
g.	The director of planning and building may approve a mobile/manufactured home as aesthetically comparable in design and appearance to conventionally constructed homes found within 3,000 feet of the proposed mobile home even if all of the above conditions do not exist, provided the director finds that the mobile home and/or its site have other design features which make it aesthetically comparable to conventionally constructed homes within 2,000 feet. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 6.10)
Sec. 46-289. - Motor vehicle amusement facilities. 
(a)	Intent. It is the intent of this section to establish standards for motor vehicle amusement facilities uses which will ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses and maintain the character of the neighborhood. 
(b)	Application of regulations. 
(1)	Motor vehicle amusement facilities shall include tracks and other areas for the concentrated racing and recreational use of go-carts, motorcycles, automobiles, trucks, ATVs and other motorized vehicles. 
(2)	Access and egress requirements. Access and egress shall be provided only from a major arterial or county primary road. 
(3)	Minimum site size: 150 acres.
(4)	Minimum setbacks of buildings, parking and activity areas from land zoned or used for residential purposes: 
a.	Minimum setback of parking areas shall be 50 feet.
b.	Minimum setback of all viewing stands and vehicle activities shall be 1,000 feet.
c.	Minimum setback of other buildings and other activity areas shall be 500 feet.
(5)	Sight barriers. Sight barriers shall be provided in accordance with section 46-386. 
(6)	Noise. Areas where noise-generating activities are located shall be set back and/or screened with walls, berms, depressions or natural topographic features which ensure that the noise generated by site activity will not exceed the noise impact typically generated by the lowest volume county primary road in the township. It will be the responsibility of applicants to prepare appropriate studies to demonstrate that proposed facilities and activities will comply. It will also be the responsibility of the applicant to pay the township's costs for an independent evaluation of the applicant's studies. 
(7)	Design and operational intent.
a.	A design and operations plan shall be prepared by the applicant and subject to approval by the township. The plan shall meet the highest standards of the industry for ensuring the protection of adjacent areas from potential deleterious impacts of the proposed use. The provisions of the approved plan shall be an ongoing responsibility of the owner of the property. The plan shall also meet the highest standards of the sport for ensuring the safety of users and neighbors. Violation of the provisions shall be grounds for revoking the special use approval following a hearing. 
b.	No design and operations plan shall be approved unless and until one or more independent experts have studied the plan and have testified that it meets the standards specified herein. Experts may be retained by the township to fulfill the requirement for the expert testimony required herein. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 6.11)
Sec. 46-290. - Automobile parts stamping plants. 
(a)	Intent. It is the intent of this section to establish standards for automobile parts stamping plants which will ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses and maintain the character of the neighborhood. 
(b)	Application of regulations. 
(1)	Automobile parts stamping plants, assembly plants, rough saw lumbering facilities and planing mills. 
(2)	Such uses shall have a minimum front, side and rear yard of 200 feet or greater setback to ensure the proper application of the "Industrial Performance Standards." Such space shall be maintained as a greenbelt in accordance with section 46-386. 
(3)	All open storage areas shall be completely enclosed with a six-foot obscuring fence or wall and no materials shall be piled higher than the enclosure device. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 6.12)
Sec. 46-291. - Automobile service stations. 
(a)	Intent. It is the intent of this section to establish standards for automobile service stations which will ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses and maintain the character of the neighborhood. 
(b)	Application of regulations. 
(1)	In order to regulate and control the problems of noise, odor, light, fumes, vibration, dust, danger of fire and explosion, and traffic congestion, which results from the unrestricted and unregulated construction and operation of automobile service stations, and to regulate and control the adverse effects which these and other problems incidental to the automobile service may exercise upon adjacent and surrounding areas, the following additional regulations and requirements of this section apply. No station existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be structurally altered so as to provide a lesser degree of conformity with the provisions of this section than existed on the effective date. 
(2)	An automobile service station shall be located on a lot having frontage along a paved public street and having a minimum area of not less than 14,000 square feet. 
(3)	An automobile service station building housing an office and/or facilities for servicing, and/or washing motor vehicles shall be located not less than 40 feet from any street lot line, and not less than 25 feet from any side or rear lot lines adjoining a residentially zoned district. 
(4)	All driveways providing ingress to or egress from an automobile service or gasoline station shall be not more than 30 feet wide at the property line. No more than one curb opening shall be permitted for each 50 feet of frontage or major fraction thereof along any street. No driveway or curb opening shall be located nearer than 20 feet from any intersecting street right-of-way or adjacent residential property. No driveway shall be located nearer than 30 feet, as measured along the property line, to any other driveway giving access to or from the same automobile service station. 
(5)	The entire lot, excluding the area occupied by a building shall be hard-surfaced with concrete or a plant-mixed bituminous material except desirable landscaped areas which shall be separated from all paved areas by a low barrier or curb. 
(6)	All service equipment shall be enclosed entirely within a building. All gasoline pumps and other associated facilities shall meet the required setback of the district in which the facilities are located. In addition to setbacks, all facilities shall be arranged so that motor vehicles shall not be supplied with gasoline or serviced while parked upon or overhanging any public sidewalk, street, right-of-way or required setback. 
(7)	Outdoor storage, parking of wrecked or partially dismantled vehicles shall be limited to no more than five days. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 6.13)
Sec. 46-292. - Boat launching, commercial. 
(a)	Intent. It is the intent of this section to establish standards for commercial boat launching which will ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses and maintain the character of the neighborhood. In addition to these provisions, all boat launching facilities are subject to the rules of the MDEQ regarding marina facilities. 
(b)	Application of regulations. 
(1)	Both commercial boat launching and/or docking facilities, public and private, shall be limited to facilities for or directly related to the launching and docking of recreational power boats, sailboats, row boats, canoes and similar small water craft as regulated by adjacent lake front landowner's association or the township. The dispensing and sale of fuel, oil and parts may be permitted as an accessory use. Retail convenience sales may also be permitted as an accessory use on a limited basis. 
(2)	Access and egress shall be provided only from a major arterial or county primary road.
(3)	Minimum site size shall be three acres per boat launching site for the first six boat slips, plus three acres for each additional set of ten boat slips or part thereof. 
(4)	Minimum setbacks of buildings, parking and activity areas from land zoned or used for residential purposes: 
a.	Minimum setback of parking areas shall be 50 feet.
b.	Minimum setback of boat launching and docking areas shall be 100 feet.
c.	Minimum setback of other buildings and other activity areas shall be 100 feet.
(5)	Sight barriers shall be provided in accordance with section 46-386. 
(6)	Design and operational intent. A design and operations plan shall be prepared by the applicant and subject to approval by the township. The plan shall meet the highest standards of the industry for ensuring the protection of adjacent areas from potential negative impacts of the operation of adjacent properties. Violation of the provisions shall be grounds for revoking the special use approval following a hearing. No design and operations plan shall be approved unless and until one or more independent experts have studied the plan and have testified that it meets the standards specified herein. Experts may be retained by the township to fulfill the requirement for the expert testimony required herein. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 6.14)
Sec. 46-293. - Campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks. 
(a)	Intent. It is the intent of this section to establish standards for campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks which will ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses and maintain the character of the neighborhood. 
(b)	Application of regulations. Campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks shall be limited to transient recreational purposes. Retail, service, and utility uses shall be limited to the accessory provision of goods and services for overnight visitors. Such uses shall not be visible from campground or recreational vehicle park boundaries. 
(1)	Access and egress requirements: Access and egress shall be provided only from a major arterial or county primary road. 
(2)	Minimum site size: 20 acres.
(3)	Minimum setbacks of buildings, campsites and activity areas from land zoned or used for residential purposes: 75 feet. 
(4)	Maximum density:
a.	Not more than 12 campsites shall be permitted per acre of total park size.
b.	Each campsite shall be at least 3,000 square feet.
c.	Recreational vehicles or tents shall not be parked any closer than 15 feet to each other. 
d.	Public stations, housed in all-weather structures, containing adequate water outlets, toilets, waste containers and shower facilities, shall be provided uniformly throughout the development at a ratio of not less than one such station per each 20 sites. 
(5)	Road, pad and parking area surfacing requirements: Roads, recreational vehicle pads and parking areas shall be surfaced with gravel or paving material adequate to remain in good condition throughout at least one operating season without maintenance. 
(6)	Design and operational intent:
a.	A design and operations plan shall be prepared by the applicant and subject to approval by the township. The plan shall meet the highest standards of the industry for ensuring the protection of adjacent areas from potential deleterious impacts of the proposed use. The provisions of the approved plan shall be an ongoing responsibility of the owner of the property. Violation of the provisions shall be grounds for revoking the special use approval following a hearing. 
b.	No design and operations plan shall be approved unless and until one or more independent experts have studied the plan and have testified that it meets the standards specified herein. Experts may be retained by the township to fulfill the requirement for the expert testimony required herein. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 6.15)
Sec. 46-294. - Churches and other facilities for religious activities. 
(a)	Intent. It is the intent of this section to establish standards for churches and other facilities for religious activities which will ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses and maintain the character of the neighborhood. 
(b)	Application of regulations. 
(1)	Lot size shall be a minimum of three acres.
(2)	The site shall be so located as to have at least one property line abutting a road designated as a county primary road. All ingress and egress to the site shall be directly onto said county primary road. 
(3)	There shall be no off-street parking in the required front yard and wherever the off-street parking area is adjacent to the residentially-zoned land. Screening shall be further subject to the provisions of section 46-386. 
(4)	All religious activities shall take place in a fully enclosed building except as may be approved consistent with an approved site plan pursuant to article II, division 2 of this chapter. 
(5)	Operations of activities or other accessory uses shall be consistent with programs, hours of operation and other requirements that have been submitted by the applicant and shall be subject to planning commission review and approval. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 6.16)
Sec. 46-295. - Colleges, universities and similar institutions of higher learning. 
(a)	Intent. It is the intent of this section to establish standards for colleges, universities and similar institutions of higher learning which will ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses and maintain the character of the neighborhood. 
(b)	Application of regulations. Colleges, universities, and other such institutions of higher learning, public and private, offering courses in general, technical, or religious education are subject to the following conditions: 
(1)	Uses developed under the provisions of this section shall be located on sites of at least 20 acres. 
(2)	All ingress and egress from said site shall be directed on to a county primary road or major thoroughfare. 
(3)	No building used for instruction, offices or residences shall be closer than 100 feet to any residential property line. Other buildings and outdoor athletic areas shall be no closer than 200 feet to any residential property line. No parking area shall be closer than 80 feet to any property line. 
(4)	Development plan shall show future construction and projected maximum enrollment.
(5)	The provisions of this section are not intended to permit the establishment of trade schools for the purposes of training operators of motor vehicles or heavy equipment. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 6.17)
Sec. 46-296. - Drive-in restaurants. 
(a)	Intent. It is the intent of this section to establish standards for drive-in restaurants which will ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses and maintain the character of the neighborhood. 
(b)	Application of regulations. Eating and drinking establishments of a drive-in or open front store character are subject to the following regulations: 
(1)	Points of ingress and egress will not be less than 100 feet from the intersection of any two streets. 
(2)	The site will be adjacent to a county primary road and all points of ingress and egress will be directly onto said road. 
(3)	Lighting will be directed away from adjacent residential areas.
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 6.18)
Sec. 46-297. - Drive-in theaters. 
(a)	Intent. It is the intent of this section to establish standards for drive-in theaters which will ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses and maintain the character of the neighborhood. 
(b)	Application of regulations. 
(1)	Outdoor theaters shall abut a major thoroughfare and points of ingress and egress shall be available only from such major thoroughfare. 
(2)	All vehicles, waiting or standing to enter the facility, shall be provided off-street waiting space. No vehicle shall be permitted to wait or stand within a dedicated right-of-way. 
(3)	The area shall be so laid out as to prevent the movie screen from being viewed from residential areas or adjacent major thoroughfares. All lighting used to illuminate the area shall be installed as to be confined within and directed onto the premises of the outdoor theater site. 
(4)	Audio for the outdoor theater shall not be beyond the property lines of the facility.
(5)	Area of property shall be a minimum of 40 acres.
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 6.19)
Sec. 46-298. - Communication television, radio, wireless telephone and public utility. 
(a)	Intent. It is the intent and purpose of the township to carry out the legislative directive of the Federal Communication Commission's authorization of wireless communication facilities needed to operate wireless communication systems throughout the country. It is the further intent and purpose of the township, however, to provide for such authorization in a manner which will retain the integrity of neighborhoods and the character, property values and aesthetic quality of the community as a whole. In fashioning and administering the provisions of this section, the township has endeavored to balance these potentially competing interests within the zoning authority granted to the township. 
(b)	Application of regulations. 
(1)	Facilitate adequate and efficient provision of sites for wireless communication facilities.
(2)	Establish predetermined districts or zones of the number, shape, and in the location considered best for the establishment of wireless communication facilities, subject to applicable standards and conditions. 
(3)	Recognize that operation of a wireless communication system may require the establishment of facilities in locations not within the predetermined districts or zones. In such cases, it has been determined that it is likely that there will be greater adverse impact upon neighborhoods and areas within the community. Consequently, more stringent standards and conditions should apply to the review, approval and use of such facilities. 
(4)	Ensure that wireless communication facilities are situated in appropriate locations and relationships to other land uses, structures and buildings. 
(5)	Limit inappropriate physical and aesthetic overcrowding of land use activities and avoid adverse impacts upon existing population, transportation systems, and other public services and facility needs. 
(6)	Promote the public health, safety and welfare.
(7)	Provide adequate information about plans for wireless communication facilities in order to permit the community to effectively plan for the location of such facilities. 
(8)	Minimize the adverse impacts of technological obsolescence of such facilities, including a requirement to remove unused and/or unnecessary facilities in a timely manner. 
(9)	Minimize the negative visual impact of wireless communication facilities on neighborhoods, community landmarks, historic sites and buildings, natural beauty areas and public rights-of-way. This contemplates the establishment of as few structures as reasonably feasible, and the use of stealth technology structures which are designed for compatibility, including the use of existing structures and the avoidance of lattice structures that are unnecessary. 
(10)	The township board finds that the presence of numerous tower and/or pole structures, particularly if located within residential areas, would decrease the attractiveness, quality of life, and destroy the character and integrity of the community. 
(11)	This, in turn, may have an adverse impact upon property values. Therefore, it is necessary to minimize the adverse impact from the presence of numerous tower and/or pole structures having unreasonably low architectural and other aesthetic appeal, recognizing that the absence of regulation would result in a material impediment to the maintenance and promotion of property values, and further recognizing that this economic component is an important part of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(c)	Authorization as permitted use. Subject to the standards and conditions set forth in subsection (e) of this section, the wireless communication facilities shall be permitted uses in the following circumstances, and in the following overlay zones: 
(1)	Circumstances creating permitted use treatment. In the following circumstances, a proposal to establish a new wireless communication facility shall be deemed a permitted use and be located on an existing lot or parcel which meets the minimum zoning requirements of the district in which it is proposed, with the exception of a public utility tower collocation as noted below: 
a.	An existing structure which will serve as a support structure for an attached wireless communication facility within a nonresidential zoning district, where the existing structure is not, in the discretion of the director of planning and building, proposed to be either materially altered or materially changed in appearance; or an existing structure which will serve as a support structure for an attached wireless communication facility within a residential zoning district if the cabinet or building servicing the wireless communication facility is either not visible from any residence or can be screened in accordance with the standards set forth in sections 46-386 and 46-387 and where the existing structure is not, in the discretion of the director of planning and building, proposed to be either materially altered or materially changed in appearance. 
b.	A proposed collocation upon an attached wireless communication facility which had been pre-approved for such collocation as part of an earlier approval by the township. 
c.	An existing structure which will serve as the support structure for an attached wireless communication facility consisting of a utility pole located within a right-of-way, where the existing pole is not proposed to be modified in a manner which, in the discretion of the director of planning and building, would materially alter the structure and/or result in an impairment of sight lines or other safety interests. 
d.	A public utility tower if the accessory buildings or cabinets serving the wireless communication facility are either not visible from any residence or can be screened in accordance with the standards set forth in sections 46-386 and 46-387 where the existing structure is not, in the discretion of the director of planning and building, proposed to be either materially altered or materially changed in appearance. It is recognized that public utility towers may or may not be located on individual parcels or lots and may be located within an easement area for the utility tower. 
(2)	Permitted use overlay zones. A proposal to establish a new wireless communication facility shall be deemed a permitted use if proposed in a permitted use overlay zone, as shown on the township wireless communication facility overlay map which is incorporated herein by reference. 
(d)	Authorization as a special land use. Subject to the standards and conditions set forth in subsections (e) and (f) of this section, wireless communication facilities shall be permitted as a special land use in the following circumstances and in the following special use overlay zones: 
(1)	If it is demonstrated by an applicant that there is no reasonable means of establishing a wireless communication facility as a permitted use under subsection (b)(3) of this section, and a new wireless communication facility is required in order to operate a wireless communication service, then a wireless communication facility may be authorized as a special land use within a special land use overlay zone, as shown on the township wireless communication facility overlay map which is incorporated herein by reference, with the approval of the planning commission following a public hearing, considering the standards and condition set forth in article II, division 3 of this chapter. 
(2)	If it is demonstrated by an applicant that there is no reasonable means of establishing a wireless communication facility within a permitted use or special land use overlay zone identified in this section, then a wireless communication facility may be permitted elsewhere in the township as a special land use, with the approval of the planning commission, following a public hearing, subject to the criteria and standards of subsections (e) and (f) of this section, and also subject to the following: 
a.	At the time of the submittal, the applicant shall demonstrate that a location within a permitted use or special land use overlay zone cannot meet the need required for operation of a system. 
b.	Wireless communication facilities shall be of a design such as (without limitation) a steeple, bell tower, or other form which is compatible with the existing character of the proposed site, neighborhood and general area, as approved by the township. 
c.	In single-family residential neighborhoods, site locations outside of an overlay zone identified in subsection (c)(1) of this section, shall be considered first on the following sites (not stated in any order of priority), subject to application of all other standards contained in this section: 
1.	Municipally-owned site.
2.	Other governmentally-owned site.
3.	Religious or other institutional site.
4.	Public park and other large permanent open space areas, when unrelated structures are located outside an area equal to the height of any wireless communication facility structure. 
5.	Public or private school site.
6.	Other locations if none of the above is available.
(e)	Standards and conditions applicable to all facilities. All applications for wireless communication facilities shall comply and be reviewed in accordance with the following standards and conditions, and if approved, shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with such standards and conditions. In addition, if the facility is approved, it shall be constructed and maintained with any additional reasonable conditions imposed by the planning commission in its discretion consistent with this section. 
(1)	Facilities shall be located and designed to be harmonious with the surrounding area. Among other things, all reasonable attempts shall be made and thoroughly explored to utilize existing structures on which to place facilities, i.e., to utilize attached wireless communications facilities. 
(2)	Facilities shall be located and designed to be reasonably harmonious with the surrounding areas. 
(3)	Wireless communication facilities shall comply with applicable federal and state standards relative to the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions, as confirmed by submission of a certification of compliance by the applicant's licensed engineer. 
(4)	Applicants shall demonstrate a justification for the proposed height of the structures and an evaluation of alternative designs which might result in lower heights. Structures which require or are proposed to have high intensity (strobe) lighting shall be permitted in daylight hours only and blinking (not strobe), red light at night. 
(5)	New wireless communication facilities located in nonresidential zoning districts must be located on a minimum five-acre parcel. New wireless communication facilities located in residential zoning districts must be located on a minimum 40-acre parcel. Wireless communication facilities may be permitted as accessory uses in either nonresidential or residential zoning districts. 
(6)	The following additional standards shall be met:
a.	The maximum height of the new or modified support structure and antenna shall be the minimum height demonstrated to be necessary for reasonable communication by the applicant (and by other entities to collocate on the structure). In no case shall the height of a new or modified support structure and antenna exceed the standard contained in subsection (f)(3) of this section. The accessory building contemplated to enclose such things as switching equipment shall be limited to the maximum height for accessory structures within the respective district. 
b.	The setback of a new or materially modified support structure from any lot line shall be at least the height of the highest point of any structure on the premises. 
c.	There shall be unobstructed access to the support structure, for operation, maintenance, repair and inspection purposes, which may be provided through or over an easement. This access shall have a width and location determined by such factors as: the location of adjacent thoroughfares and traffic and circulation within the site; utilities needed to service the tower and any attendant facilities; the location of buildings and parking facilities; proximity to residential districts and minimizing the disturbance to the natural landscape; and the type of equipment which will need to access the site. 
d.	The design and appearance of the support structure and all accessory buildings shall minimize distraction, reduce visibility, maximize aesthetic appearance; and ensure compatibility with surroundings. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to maintain the wireless communication facility in a neat and orderly condition. 
e.	The support system shall be constructed in accordance with the state construction code and shall include the submission of a soils report from a geotechnical engineer, licensed in the state. This soils report shall include soil borings and statements confirming the suitability of soil conditions for the proposed use. The requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communication Commission, and Michigan Aeronautics Commission shall be noted. 
f.	Applications made which do not include the signature of the licensed operator of a wireless communication service at the time of community processing may be tentatively approved, but shall not receive final approval unless and until the application has been amended to include a signature on behalf of a licensed operator. A tentative approval shall be valid for 90 days. If, during a 90-day tentative approval period, final approval is granted to authorize a wireless communication facility within two miles of the property on which a facility has been tentatively approved, such tentative approval shall thereupon expire unless the applicant granted tentative approval demonstrates that it would not be feasible for it to collocate on the facility that has been newly granted final approval. 
g.	The antenna and other attachments on a wireless communication facility shall be designed and constructed to include the minimum attachments required to operate the facility at the site, both in terms of number and size of such attachments and shall be designed and constructed to maximize aesthetic quality. 
(f)	Standards and conditions applicable to special land use facilities. Applications for wireless communication facilities which may be approved as special land uses, shall be reviewed, and if approved, constructed and maintained in accordance with the standards and conditions in and in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)	The applicant shall demonstrate the need for the proposed facility to be located as proposed based upon the presence of one or more of the following factors: 
a.	Areas of population concentration.
b.	Concentration of communication, industrial, and/or other business centers.
c.	Areas where signal interference has occurred due to masses of trees, or other obstructions.
d.	Topography of the proposed facility location in relation to other facilities with which the proposed facility is to operate. 
e.	Other specifically identified reason creating facility need.
(2)	The antennas shall be covered in such a manner that they will be hidden from view by the pole or other aesthetically pleasing element. 
(3)	The pole shall not exceed 190 feet in height or, if a tree-like structure, it shall not exceed the tallest tree in the area around the wireless communication facility by more than 25 percent, whichever is shorter. 
(4)	The proposal shall be reviewed in conformity with the collocation requirements of subsection (h) of this section and removal requirements of subsection (i) of this section. 
(g)	Application requirements. 
(1)	A site plan prepared in accordance with section 46-67 shall be submitted, showing the location, size, screening and design of all buildings and structures, including fences, and the location and size of outdoor equipment, and the location, number, and species of proposed landscaping. 
(2)	The site plan shall also include a detailed landscaping plan where the support structure is being placed at a location which is not otherwise developed or where a developed area will be disturbed. The purpose of landscaping is to provide screening and aesthetic enhancement for the structure base, accessory buildings and enclosure. 
(3)	The application shall include a signed certification by a state licensed professional engineer with regard to the manner in which the proposed structure will fall, which certification will be utilized along with other criteria such as applicable regulations for the district in question, in determining the appropriate setback to be required for the structure and other facilities. 
(4)	The application shall include a description of security to be posted with the township at the time of receiving a building permit for the facility to ensure removal of the facility when it has been abandoned or is no longer needed, as provided in below. In this regard, the security shall, at the election of the applicant, be in the form of cash, surety bond, letter of credit, or an agreement in a form approved by the attorney for the township and recordable at the office of the register of deeds, establishing security for the promise of the applicant and owner of the property to remove the facility in a timely manner as required under this section, with the further provision that the applicant and owner shall be responsible for the payment of any costs and attorneys fees incurred by the community in securing removal. Further, the recordable instrument will include a right of entry for removal and an administrative fee to the township. 
(5)	The application shall include a map showing existing and known proposed wireless communication facilities within the township and further showing existing and known proposed wireless communication facilities within areas surrounding the borders of the township in the location, and in the area, which are relevant in term of potential collocation or in demonstrating the need for the proposed facility. If and to the extent the information in question is on file with the township, the applicant shall be required only to update as needed. Any such information which is trade secret and/or other confidential communication information which, if released would compromise said information and would ultimately be detrimental to the applicant, may be submitted with a request for confidentiality in connection with appropriate provisions of the Michigan Freedom of Information Act. This chapter shall serve as the promise to maintain confidentiality to the extent permitted by law. The request for confidentiality must be made in writing to the township. 
(6)	The name, address and phone number of the person to contact for engineering, maintenance and other notice purposes. This information shall be continuously updated during all times the facility is on the premises. 
(7)	The application fee in the amount specified by township board resolution.
(8)	The owner or duly authorized representative of all ownership interest in the land on which the wireless communication facility is proposed to be located shall sign the application. In addition, if a licensed entity intended to be the operator on the facility does not sign the application, approval shall be restricted as provided in the general regulations. 
(h)	Collocation requirements. 
(1)	Statement of policy. It is the policy of the township to minimize the overall number of newly established locations for wireless communication facilities and wireless communication support structures within the community, and encourage the use of existing structures for attached wireless communication facility purposes, consistent with the statement of purpose and intent, set forth in subsection (a) of this section. Each licensed provider of a wireless communication facility must, by law, be permitted to locate sufficient facilities in order to achieve the objectives promulgated by the United States Congress. However, particularly in light of the dramatic increase in the number of wireless communication facilities reasonably anticipated to occur as a result of the change of federal law and policy in and relating to the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, it is the policy of the township that all users should collocate on attached wireless communication facilities and wireless communication support structures in the interest of achieving the purposes and intent of this section, as stated above, and as stated in subsection (a) of this section. If a provider fails or refuses to permit collocation on a facility owned or otherwise controlled by it, where collocation is feasible, the result will be that an additional structure will be compelled in direct violation of and in direct contradiction to the basic policy, intent and purpose of the township. The provisions of this subsection are designed to carry out and encourage conformity with the policy of the township. 
(2)	Feasibility of collocation. Collocation shall be deemed to be feasible for purposes of this section where all of the following are met: 
a.	The wireless communication provider entity under consideration for collocation will undertake to pay market rent or other market compensation for collocation. 
b.	The site on which collocation is being considered, taking into consideration reasonable modification or replacement of a facility, is able to provide structural support. 
c.	The collocation being considered is technologically reasonable, e.g., the collocation will not result in unreasonable interference, given appropriate physical and other adjustment in relation to the structure, antennas, and the like. 
d.	The height of the structure necessary for collocation will not be increased beyond a point deemed to be permissible by the township, taking into consideration the intent and purpose of this chapter and the several standards contained above. 
(3)	Requirements for collocation. 
a.	A special land use permit for the construction and use of a new wireless communication facility shall not be granted unless and until the applicant demonstrates that a feasible collocation is not available for the coverage area and capacity needs. 
b.	All new and modified wireless communication facilities shall be designed and constructed so as to accommodate collocation. 
c.	The policy of the township is for collocation. Thus, if a party who owns or otherwise controls a wireless communication facility shall fail or refuse to alter a structure so as to accommodate a proposed and otherwise feasible collocation, such facility shall thereupon and thereafter be deemed to be a nonconforming structure and use, and shall not be altered, expanded or extended in any respect. 
d.	If a party who owns or otherwise controls a wireless communication facility shall fail or refuse to permit a feasible collocation, and this requires the construction and/or use of a new wireless communication support structure, the party failing or refusing to permit a feasible collocation shall be deemed to be in direct violation of this chapter and contradiction of the policy, intent and purpose of this section, and consequently such party shall be prohibited from receiving approval for a new wireless communication facility within the township for a period of five years. Such a party may seek and obtain a variance from the zoning board of appeals if and to the limited extent the applicant demonstrates entitlement to variance relief which, in this context, means a demonstration that enforcement of the five-year prohibition would unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent wireless communication services, or that such enforcement would have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless communication services. 
(4)	Incentive. Review of an application for collocation, and review of an application for a permit for use of a facility permitted under subsection (h)(3)a of this section shall be expedited by the township. 
(i)	Removal requirements. 
(1)	A condition of every approval of a wireless communication facility shall be adequate provision for removal of all or part of the facility by users and owners upon the occurrence of one or more of the following events: 
a.	When the facility has not been used for 180 days or more. For purposes of this section, the removal of antennas or other equipment from the facility, or the cessation of operations (transmission and/or reception of radio signals) shall be considered as the beginning of a period of nonuse. 
b.	Six months after new technology is available at reasonable costs as determined by the municipal legislative body, which permits the operation of the communication system without the requirement of the support structure or with a support structure which is lower and/or more compatible with the area. 
(2)	The situations in which removal of a facility is required, as set forth in subsection (i)(1) of this section, may be applied and limited to portions of a facility. 
(3)	Upon the occurrence of one or more of the events requiring removal, specified in subsection (i)(1) of this section, the property owner or persons who had used the facility shall immediately apply or secure the application for any required demolition or removal permits, and immediately proceed with the complete demolition, removal, and restoration of the premises to compliant condition as reasonably determined by the director of planning and building. 
(4)	If the required removal of a facility or a portion thereof has not been lawfully completed within 60 days of the applicable deadline, and after at least 30 days' written notice, the township may remove or secure the removal of the facility or required portions thereof with its actual cost and reasonable administrative charge to be drawn, collected and/or enforced from or under the security posted at the time application was made for establishing the facility. 
(5)	The person who had used the facility shall immediately notify the township clerk in writing if and as soon as use of a facility ceases. 
(j)	Effect and approval. 
(1)	Subject to the following subsection (j)(2) of this section, final approval shall be effective for a period of six months. 
(2)	If construction of a wireless communication facility is commenced within two miles of the land on which a facility has been approved, but on which construction has not been commenced during the six-month period of effectiveness, the approval for the facility that has not been commenced shall be void following notice from the township of the commencement of the other facility, unless the applicant granted approval for the facility which has not been commenced demonstrates that it would not be feasible for it to collocate on the new facility. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 6.20)
Sec. 46-299. - Open air business uses. 
(a)	Intent. It is the intent of this section to establish standards for open air business uses, which will ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses and maintain the character of the neighborhood. 
(b)	Application of regulations. 
(1)	The minimum area of the site shall be 10,000 square feet.
(2)	The minimum street frontage shall be 100 feet.
(3)	There shall be provision for the interception of wind-blown trash and other debris by appropriate fence along interior lot lines. 
(4)	Off-street parking areas and aisles shall be paved in accordance with the requirements of section 46-361, unless an acceptable substitute is approved by the board of zoning appeals. 
(5)	Lighting shall be installed in a manner which will not create a driving hazard on abutting streets or which will cause direct illumination of adjacent properties. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 6.21)
Sec. 46-300. - Adult entertainment. 
(a)	Adult entertainment uses which can be permitted under certain conditions when all of the requirements for these uses have been met. It has been demonstrated that the establishment of adult businesses in C-4 districts which are immediately adjacent to and which serve residential neighborhoods, has deleterious effects on both businesses and residential segments of the neighborhood, causing blight and a downgrading of property values. A prohibition against the establishment of more than two regulated uses within 1,000 feet of each other serves to avoid clustering of certain businesses, which when located in close proximity to each other, tend to create a negative atmosphere. The concern for and pride in the orderly planning and development of a neighborhood should be encouraged and fostered in those persons who comprise the business and residential segments of that neighborhood. The planning commission and the township board should be guided by the expressed will of those businesses and residences, which are immediately adjacent to the proposed locations of, and therefore, most affected by the existence of any adult oriented businesses. 
(b)	For the purpose of this section, the following shall control:
(1)	Definitions. 
a.	Adult entertainment use means any use of land, whether vacant or combined with structures or vehicles thereon by which said property is devoted to displaying or exhibiting material for entertainment, a significant portion of which includes matter of actions depicting, describing or presenting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Adult entertainment uses shall include but not be limited to the following: 
1.	Adult motion picture theater.
2.	Adult mini-motion picture theater.
3.	Adult motion picture arcade.
4.	Adult bookstore.
5.	Adult cabaret, nightclub, topless lounge, etc.
6.	Adult motel.
7.	Adult massage parlor.
8.	Adult model studio.
9.	Adult retail store.
b.	Adults only means businesses that prohibit or exclude entry to those persons who are under 18 years of age. 
c.	Significant portion means any one or more portions of the display having continuous duration in excess of five minutes; and/or the aggregate of portions of the display having a duration equal to ten percent or more of the display: and/or the aggregate portion of the collection of any materials or exhibits composing the display equal to ten percent or more of the display. 
d.	Display means as used in the above definition, the word display means any single motion or still picture, presentation, dance, or exhibition, live act, or collection of visual materials such as books, films, slides, paraphernalia, periodicals, pictures, videocassettes or any other printed or recorded matter which is open to view or available to the general population whether for free or otherwise. 
e.	Specified sexual activities means, as used in the above definition, human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and/or fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast. 
f.	Specified anatomical areas means, as used in the above definition, less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, human genitals, female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, and human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(2)	Dispersal regulations. No adult entertainment use/adults only businesses shall be located within 1,000 feet of any other adult entertainment use/adults only businesses nor within 600 feet of, but not limited to, any of the following uses: 
a.	All class "C" establishments licensed by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission.
b.	Pool or billiard halls.
c.	Coin-operated amusement centers.
d.	Teenage discos or dancehalls.
e.	Ice or roller skating rinks.
f.	Pawnshops.
g.	Indoor or drive-in movie theatres.
h.	Any established business catering to children under the age of 18, and generally attracting patrons in such age group. 
i.	Any public park.
j.	Any church or church related property.
k.	Any public or private school having a curriculum including kindergarten or any one or more of the grades, one through 12. 
l.	Any property zoned or used for residential purposes.
m.	Any other regulated uses as defined herein. Such distance shall be measured along the centerline of the street or address between two fixed points on the centerlines determined by projecting straight lines at right angles from the part of the above-listed uses nearest to the contemplated location of the structure containing the adult entertainment use/adults only business use and from the contemplated location of the structure containing the adult entertainment use/adults only business use nearest to a use listed. 
(3)	Display content. No adult entertainment use/adults only business use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observance or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" from any public way or from any property not regulated as an adult entertainment use/adults only business use. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window, or other opening. 
(4)	Variance requirements. In addition to all other requirements for the obtaining of a variance from the provisions herein, as set forth in other portions of this chapter, the zoning board of appeals may waive the limiting regulations of this section only if all of the following findings are made: 
a.	That the proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or injurious to the nearby properties, and that the spirit and intent of this chapter will be observed. 
b.	Vehicular ingress and egress shall be directly onto a major thoroughfare having an existing or planned right-of-way of at least 120 feet in width and shall have one property line abutting said thoroughfare. 
c.	The use shall not be in a planned shopping center.
d.	The proposed use will not affect adjacent areas by enhancing or promoting blight, cause a negative effect upon any other adult entertainment use/adult only businesses nor within 600 feet of, but not limited to, any of the following uses: 
1.	All class "C" establishments licensed by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission.
2.	Pool or billiard halls.
3.	Coin-operated amusement centers.
4.	Teenage discos or dancehalls.
5.	Ice or roller skating rinks.
6.	Pawnshops.
7.	Indoor or drive-in movie theatres.
8.	Any established business catering to children under the age of 18, and generally attracting patrons in such age group. 
9.	Any public park.
10.	Any church related property.
11.	Any public or private school having a curriculum including kindergarten or any one or more of the grades, one through 12. 
12.	Any property zoned or used for residential purposes.
13.	Any other regulated uses as defined herein. Such distance shall be measured along the centerline of the street or address between two fixed points on the centerlines determined by projecting straight lines at right angles from the part of the above-listed uses nearest to the contemplated location of the structure containing the adult entertainment use/adults only business use and from the contemplated location of the structure containing the adult entertainment use/adults only business use nearest to a use listed. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 6.22)
Sec. 46-301. - Planned shopping center. 
(a)	Market analysis. All developers of proposed planned shopping centers shall submit a market analysis suitable for the size center proposed, showing the need for a planned shopping center in the location requested and the inadequacy of existing shopping facilities to meet demands. For these purposes, the market analysis shall contain the following determinations: 
(1)	Determination of the trade area of the proposed planned shopping center.
(2)	Determination of trade area population, present and future.
(3)	Determination of effective buying power in the trade area.
(4)	Determination of net potential customer buying power for stores in the proposed planned shopping center. 
(b)	Minimum size. A planned shopping center when used in this context means a commercial development which has been designed, developed and operated as a unit and has the following: 
(1)	A site of at least ten acres.
(2)	At least five stores.
(3)	A gross floor area of at least 40,000 square feet.
(c)	Conceptual development plan. Together with, and in addition to, other submissions required for site plan review in accordance with section 46-67, a general conceptual development plan drawn to scale shall be submitted which shows the coordinated design of, and relationship of the proposed use to the entire district. 
(d)	Greenbelt. A greenbelt as required in section 46-386 of dimensions and plant materials as determined by the planning commission shall be provided around the entire perimeter of the site except openings for access onto the public street system. A wall or barrier of suitable material as determined by the planning commission not less than six feet high shall be constructed along those property lines which abut a residential district in accordance with section 46-386. 
(e)	Landscape plan. A landscape plan which includes the entire site shall be submitted for approval to determine compliance with screening and planting requirements. 
(f)	Circulation plan. An internal system of roads and walks shall separate pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and, as required by the township, necessary marginal roads shall be provided. In approving the site plan, the planning commission may recommend that marginal access drives be provided. Points of ingress and egress, shall be placed no closer than 500 feet apart. In the case of a lot with narrow frontage which will require a single outlet, the planning commission may recommend that funds be placed in escrow with the county road commission in order to provide, when necessary, for a marginal service drive equal in length to the frontage of the property involved. Should a portion of the C-3 district be initially developed then an overall area-wide road system must be first agreed upon by the township and the developer so that the initial development will fit in suitable with later stages of development. 
(g)	Off-street parking and loading. Off-street parking and loading must comply with the requirements of article VII of this chapter. 
(h)	Outside storage. The outside storage or display of goods or materials shall be prohibited irrespective of whether or not they are for sale. 
(i)	Warehousing, indoor storage. Warehousing or indoor storage of goods or materials in quantity greater than normally incident to the above-permitted uses, shall be prohibited. 
(j)	Financial responsibility. A statement of financial responsibility, including the posting of bonds or cash to assure the installation of the improvements required by the township as a condition to the development shall be provided in an amount as determined by the township board. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 6.23)
Sec. 46-302. - Extractive operations. 
(a)	Intent. It is the intent of this section to establish standards for extractive operations which will ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses and maintain the character of the area in which the facility is located. 
(b)	Application of regulations. 
(1)	A separate application shall be required for each excavation site as contained within a zoning lot as defined in section 46-6. The application shall be made in writing to the township planning and building department and shall contain names and addresses of the applicants and of all parties of interest in said premises setting forth their legal interest in said premises, as well as the information required in subsection (b)(2) through (b)(6) of this section. 
(2)	Vertical aerial photograph enlarged to a scale of one inch equals 200 feet from original photography flown at negative scale no smaller than one inch equals 1,000 feet, and certified as flown not earlier than two months prior to date of application. The vertical aerial photograph shall cover: 
a.	All land included in the permit application.
b.	All contiguous land which is or has been used by the owner or leaseholder applicant for sand and gravel extraction, processing, storage or other permitted use. Contiguous means within one mile of site. 
c.	All lands within one-half mile of proposed planned mining areas.
d.	All public or private roads which provide access to property.
e.	Boundary of the entire planned mining area by courses and distances.
(3)	Maps. Maps, in the number prescribed by the township, drawn to the scale of 200 feet equals one inch or larger and with two-foot contour intervals. Maps shall include, as a minimum, the following information: 
a.	Property boundaries and boundaries of areas to be mined.
b.	Site topography and natural features including location of watercourses within the planned mining area. 
c.	Access road location.
d.	Proposed traffic patterns.
e.	Location of fencing.
f.	Location of weighing facilities, if applicable.
g.	Location of existing and proposed utilities.
h.	Indication of use of adjoining land within one mile of the site boundaries, including zoning classifications. 
i.	Borrow and soil storage areas.
j.	Location of public and private water supplies, wells, springs, streams, swamps or other bodies of water within one-quarter mile of the proposed excavation site property lines. 
k.	Location of gas and oil wells within one-quarter mile of the property lines.
l.	Location of fuel transmission pipeline rights-of-way within one-quarter mile of property lines. 
m.	Location of mining operations within one-quarter mile of property lines.
n.	All railroad rights-of-way within one-quarter mile of property lines.
o.	Any additional information required by the township planning commission.
(4)	Plan of operations. A plan of operations prepared by licensed engineers and geologists which shall be written and submitted which is specific as to areas to be mined, schedule of mining, site preparations, source and types of materials to be mined. The plan shall include details relative to: 
a.	Elevation and grade of final restoration.
b.	Average thickness of overburden in the area of proposed operations.
c.	Management of groundwater.
d.	Management of surface water.
e.	Erosion control.
f.	Revegation procedures to be used.
g.	Quality of material to be excavated.
h.	Depth of water table throughout the planned mining area for which permit is sought.
i.	Details of similar operations carried on by the applicant.
j.	The type and daily number of vehicles to be used in the proposed operations.
k.	Identification of access roads, on-site roads, grades for proper drainage and any special draining devices, if necessary, fencing, and structures on site, existing or proposed, existing and proposed utilities, and any explanation of any on-site testing or other reliable survey data, including soil surveys, water tables and subsurface characteristics. 
l.	Presentation of an environmental impact statement and a statement concerning trees and/or other vegetation, which statement shall address the township woodlands and wetlands regulations. 
m.	A soils, geologic and groundwater report of the characteristics of the proposed site, prepared by a competent hydrogeologist, shall be based on a geological investigation showing a sufficient number of borings and wells drilled to a depth necessary to determine the soil, geology and seasonal groundwater flow conditions. These may be supplemented by excavations where appropriate. 
n.	Such other information and material as the board shall require.
(5)	A transparent overlay at the same scale as the vertical aerial photograph and delineating:
a.	Area of active excavation.
b.	Area requested for excavation.
c.	Area of active settling ponds and washing plant facilities.
d.	Area requested for settling ponds and washing facilities.
e.	Area of existing treatment facilities and sand and gravel storage.
f.	Area requested for treatment facilities and sand and gravel storage.
g.	Area of production facilities for resource-related industry.
h.	Area requested for production facilities for resource-related industry.
(6)	Restoration plan. The applicant shall submit a restoration plan providing for an orderly continuing restoration of all land permitted to be excavated for its resources. The plan for restoration shall be submitted in three parts: a general plan as an overlay for the vertical aerial photograph, a restoration contour plat, and a description of restoration methods, and materials proposed for renewal of topsoil and replanting. A general plan for restoration shall be presented on a transparent overlay at the same scale as the vertical aerial showing the following: 
a.	General area of land as completely restored.
b.	General area of restoration stages.
c.	General area currently used for topsoil and overburden storage.
d.	General area proposed for topsoil and overburden storage.
e.	The acreage for each item shown on the overlay shall be indicated on plan.
f.	Restoration contour plat shall be prepared on the same base as the identification plat required above, to indicate the general grades and slopes to which excavated areas are to be backfilled. 
g.	A description of the methods and materials proposed for restoration of topsoil to the required fertility and the amount and type of planting shall be filed as part of the restoration plan, subject to approval of appropriate county and state agencies. 
h.	The objectives of the plan shall be:
1.	To prevent soil erosion which may menace life or limb, endanger property or affect the safety, usability or stability of any public property. 
2.	To prepare the mined land, by grading fertilizing and planting on approximately an annual basis, for its ultimate reuse at the expiration of the time limits set forth in the permit. 
(7)	Special land use review. All standards contained in article II, division 3 of this chapter shall be followed including all public hearing requirements. 
(8)	The following requirements shall be mandatory:
a.	Surety bond. The applicant shall post a surety bond or some other equitable security satisfactory to the township naming the township as the beneficiary thereof in an amount determined by the township to be reasonably necessary to ensure compliance hereunder. The bonds shall guarantee compliance with this chapter, the permit requirements and conditions, and that the operation will be carried out according to the approved plans and specifications. Upon the lack of timely compliance with the requirements for which the bond guaranteed, the township may use the bond proceeds to the extent necessary. By filing an application, every applicant shall be deemed to have granted a license to the township and its agents and contractors to go onto a property under permit to use the bond proceeds for the purposes allowed by the bond, for which there has been noncompliance. In fixing the amount of such bond, the township shall take into account: 
1.	The size and scope of the proposed operation.
2.	Current prevailing cost of rehabilitating the premises upon default of the operator.
3.	Other such conditions and factors as might be relevant in determining the sum reasonable in light of all facts and circumstances surrounding each application. 
b.	Minimum bond. In no case will the sum of the surety bond be less than as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the township board from time to time. The applicant shall provide proof that the township will be notified in the event of any lapse in the effectiveness of the bond. 
c.	Maximum size of active operation. No more than 30 acres, excluding land used for processing, weighing, and administration may be under excavation at any one time; subject, however, the following limitations: 
1.	No more than ten acres for mining.
2.	No more than ten acres for stripping or future mining preparation.
3.	No more than ten acres for rehabilitation.
(9)	Debris on public roads. The owner and/or permit holder of any site where there is soil removal, shall take whatever steps are necessary to avoid any motor vehicle carrying or tracking onto any public right-of-way from the site, any mud, dirt, clay, refuse, etc. 
a.	Obligation to clean. If mud, dirt, clay, refuse, etc., is carried or tracked onto a public right-of-way, and it does or might constitute a nuisance or hazard to public safety, the owner and/or permit holder shall clean the said right-of-way when and as often as is necessary, presuming weather conditions permit. In any case, an owner and/or permit holder shall not leave any such debris on a public right-of-way after the end of any working day. 
b.	Notice from township. If notified during a working day by the township of a condition which requires cleaning, the matter shall be taken care of within one hour, weather permitting. 
c.	Violations. If a nuisance or hazardous condition is left after a working day, or not cleaned up within one hour after receiving a request from the township, and weather does not prevent the clean-up, the township may issue a citation for the violation of this subsection, due to the allowance of said condition to remain on the highway, and/or clean the right-of-way and charge the owner and/or permit holder with the cost thereof, which may be collected in any court having general jurisdiction. Repeat violations of three or more may result in a revocation of the permit by the township board. 
(10)	Drainage. Natural drainage shall not be blocked, or diverted, or altered in such a manner as to cause the natural water to flow back up onto adjacent property, or to flow in a different course or rate of flow upon leaving the property upon which the blocking, diversion, or alteration occurs, unless an application is made and a permit is issued by the building department pursuant to plans which provide for a drainage flow which will not be detrimental to surrounding properties. 
a.	Retention areas. No area designated for, and/or used as a drainage retention area shall be altered, filled in, abandoned or used for other purposes, unless it is done pursuant to a permit issued under this subsection. 
b.	Permit. A permit shall be required under this subsection notwithstanding a permit is not otherwise required by this chapter. Permit requirements and procedure shall be adopted by the township board, from time to time, by resolution. 
(11)	Drifting and blowing material. The drifting or air-borne transmission beyond the property line of dust, particles or debris from any open stockpile, working areas or unplanted areas, shall be unlawful and may be summarily caused to be abated. 
(12)	Electromagnetic radiation. Applicable rules and regulations of the Federal Communication Commission in regard to propagation of electromagnetic radiation are hereby made part of this Code and shall be on file in the office of the building department. 
(13)	Floodplain, watercourse and wetlands. There shall be no excavation or soil removal in any floodplain, watercourse and/or wetlands, unless permitted by the appropriate state agency and by the township pursuant to chapter 14, article V. 
(14)	Light. Exterior lighting shall be so installed that the surface of the source of light shall not be visible from any bedroom window, and shall be so arranged as far as practical to reflect light away from any residential use, and in no case shall more than one footcandle power of light cross a lot line five feet above the ground in a residential district. 
(15)	Sound. The pressure level of sounds shall not exceed the following decibel levels when adjacent to the following types of uses: 
Sound LevelAdjacent UseWhere Measured75 dBAResidentialCommon property line85 dBACommercialCommon property line90 dBAIndustrial and otherCommon property line 
The sound levels shall be measured using a weighted decibel measurements (referenced to 20 micropascals) and with a type of audio output meter approved by the U.S. Bureaus of Standards. Objectionable noises due to intermittence, beat, frequency, or shrillness shall be muffled so as not be become a nuisance to adjacent uses. 
(16)	Vibration. All machinery shall be so mounted and operated as to prevent transmission of ground vibration exceeding a displacement of .003 of one inch measured at any property line of its source. 
(17)	Roads on landfill and soil excavation sites shall be designed and constructed so that traffic will flow smoothly and will not be interrupted by inclement weather. Nonpaved roads between the site and the nearest paved roads, paved roads off of site within one-quarter mile of the site entrance which are used by vehicles and/or equipment traveling to or from the site, and all roads on site shall not be used unless they are treated by sufficient water and/or chemical substance, whichever would be appropriate for the surface, and frequent enough so that they are dust free whenever used by vehicles and/or equipment. 
(18)	Soil erosion. If a soil erosion permit is required by Part 91 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.9101 et seq.), no operation shall take place until a permit has been obtained. There shall be compliance at all times with the requirement of the soil erosion permit. 
(19)	Hours of operation. Maximum hours of operation shall be 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., unless otherwise specified by the township planning commission. No operation shall be permitted on Sundays and legal holidays. In emergency situations, this time period may be modified by the township building department provided such emergency order shall not be effective for more than 72 hours. 
(20)	Soil excavation operational regulations.
a.	Limits of perimeter. No cut or excavation shall be closer than 100 feet from the nearest street, highway, or alley right-of-way, nor from the nearest perimeter property line; provided, however, that the planning commission may prescribe more strict requirements in order to give sub-lateral support to surrounding property where swell or geographic conditions warrant it. 
b.	Surface water drainage. The premises shall at all times be graded to prevent interference with surface water drainage. 
c.	Standing water. No soil, sand, clay, gravel or other similar materials shall be removed in such a manner as to cause water to stand or accumulate, or to result in a place of danger or a menace to the public health or safety. 
d.	Slopes. The slopes of the banks of the excavation shall in no event exceed a minimum ratio of three feet horizontal to one foot vertical, and where ponded water results from the operation, the slope must be maintained and extended into the water to a depth of five feet. Suitable vegetation shall be planted on all finished slopes to deter erosion. 
e.	Fence. Where there is an excavation in excess of five feet, the permit holder shall erect a fence, of at least six feet in height, of wire mesh, or such other suitable materials as shall be approved by the planning commission to afford protection to persons and property. Any gates required shall be kept locked when operations are not carried on. 
f.	Signs. Where removal or grading operations result in a body of water forming, the owner or operator of said quarry shall erect "KEEP OUT-DANGER" signs on the required fence around the excavation not more than 200 feet apart, or as otherwise required by the township planning commission. 
g.	Processing. Processing of materials mined from any property shall be permitted only in an industrial zoned district. Processing means altering the material. 
(21)	Restoration.
a.	Requirement established. All areas within any excavation site operating under a single permit shall be restored progressively. Restoration shall be in accordance with the plan approved by the planning commission. Restoration shall be to a condition which blends with the general surrounding terrain so as to appear reasonable and natural. 
b.	Topsoil. 
1.	Stockpiling. Whenever topsoil exists, suitable for growing turf or for other land use, at the time the operations begin, a sufficient quantity of the existing topsoil shall be stockpiled on said site so that the entire site, when stripping or removal operations are completed, may be recovered with a minimum of four inches of topsoil. 
2.	Replacement. The replacement of the topsoil shall be in a manner suitable for growing turf and it shall be seeded. 
c.	Inspections. The building department shall conduct inspections hereunder, and shall notify the owner and/or operator by regular mail of any portions of the site that it deems abandoned and/or ready for restoration. 
d.	Completion dates. Upon receipt of such notification, the owner and/or operator shall have said areas restored within 30 days, or within said 30 days supply the planning commission with a written reply indicating the dates of anticipated restoration. The planning commission may accept or reject said dates. If said dates are accepted, they shall be binding on both parties. If rejected, the planning commission shall set new dates which shall be final. 
e.	Release of surety bond. 
1.	Completion. Upon completion of the restoration, or upon completion of a part thereof, the person posting the bond may make application to the township building department for refund or reduction of the bond or its pro rata share. Upon examination by the building department and upon its notice in keeping with the plan, requirement, or agreement as set forth by the planning commission and that said restoration is in keeping with the general surrounding terrain so as to appear reasonably natural, the township shall refund or reduce the bond pro rata. 
2.	Additional remedies. Should the cost of said restoration exceed the amount of the bond, the permittee shall pay the township the amount of such excess. The amount due may be assessed against the property if not timely paid and collected with general property taxes. 
f.	Revocation. 
1.	Notice of violation. The building department may, in its discretion, notify the owner and/or operator of any violation or complaint of violation of the permit and/or this chapter. 
2.	Failure to abate violation. Upon failure, of the owner and/or operator to abate said violation within five days after mailing or delivery of said notice, said operation site may be summarily closed, and the permit therefor suspended or revoked, and resort had to the bond for restoration. 
3.	Hearing request. Any owner and/or operator aggrieved of any notice sent pursuant to this subsection, may request a hearing before the planning commission, if the request is in writing and delivered to the township. The request should set forth why the operation site should not be summarily closed, the permit suspended or revoked, and resort had to the bond. 
4.	Action pending hearing. In any case, if the planning commission determines the operation of the excavation would be detrimental to the health and/or safety of persons and/or property, the board may summarily suspend or revoke the permit, but shall grant a hearing upon request as provided herein. 
5.	Hearing. If a request for a hearing is received, the planning commission shall hold a hearing at the next scheduled planning commission meeting and may after the hearing continue the suspension or revocation of the permit, or take such other action as appears appropriate under the circumstances. 
g.	Fees and/or costs. An applicant for a permit shall deposit such fees and/or costs in an amount as follows: 
1.	Permit fee. The permit fee for land balancing, land filling and earth extraction operations shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the township board from time to time. Said permit fee shall be paid before issuance of the permit. The cost of inspections by the township director of planning and building, regardless of the number of inspections required throughout the year, shall be covered by the fee. 
2.	Engineering costs. In addition to the permit fee, there shall be placed in an escrow account, to cover any engineering costs incurred during the permit year, an amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the township board from time to time. As funds are incurred, the permit holder shall be notified and additional deposits will be required to maintain a minimum escrow account as currently required or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the township board from time to time at all times. 
(22)	No permit hereunder shall be required for those operations permitted by section 46-249. 
(23)	Area, height, bulk and placement requirements, unless otherwise specified, are as provided in section 46-215, schedule of regulations. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 6.24)
Sec. 46-303. - Wind energy conversion systems. 
(a)	Intent. It is the intent of the township to permit the effective and efficient use of wind energy conversion systems (WECS) by regulating the siting, design, and installation of such systems to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and to ensure compatibility of land uses in the vicinity of WECS. 
(b)	Approval required. It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, install, alter, or locate any WECS within the township except in compliance with the section. A building permit is required for any WECS pursuant to section 46-33 and this section. 
(c)	Permitted accessory use. On-site WECSs less than 70 feet in height shall be considered a lawful accessory use in the RE and R-1A zoning districts pursuant to this section. 
(d)	Conditional use, on-site-RE and R-1A districts. On-site WECSs of 70 feet or more in height shall be considered a conditional use in the RE and R-1A zoning districts and shall be subject to the provisions of this section and article II, division 3 of this chapter. 
(e)	Same-Other districts. On-site WECS towers of any height shall be considered a conditional use in the following zoning districts and shall be subject to the provisions of article II, division 3 of this chapter: R-1B, RM, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, REC, TIO, GI, EI. 
(f)	Conditional use, commercial. Commercial WECS shall be considered a conditional use in the following districts and shall subject to the provisions of this section and Article 8, Special Land Use: RE, REC, EI. 
(g)	Application-Accessory use. The application for an on-site WECS when permitted as an accessory use shall include the following: 
(1)	Applicant information. Name, address and contact information. 
(2)	Project description. A general description of the proposed project as well as a legal description (property identification number) of the property on which the project would be located. 
(3)	Plot plan and documentation. The plot plan shall include maps showing the physical features and land uses of the project area, both before and after construction of the proposed project. The plot plan shall include: 
a.	The project area boundaries.
b.	The location, height and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures and fencing.
c.	Distance of proposed structure from all property lines and permanent structures.
d.	The location, grades and dimensions of all temporary and permanent on-site access roads. 
e.	Existing topography.
f.	Water bodies, waterways, wetlands, and drainage ditches (county drains).
g.	All new infrastructure above ground related to the project.
h.	The location of all overhead utility wires.
(4)	Additional documentation. 
a.	Insurance. Proof of the applicant's liability insurance covering the WECS. 
b.	Sound pressure level. Documentation of the manufacturer's designed sound pressure levels (decibels) for unit to be installed. 
c.	Grant of authority. The applicant shall provide evidence of ownership of the land which the WECS is to be located and the written consent of the land owner if different from the applicant. If the applicant is leasing land the applicant shall provide a copy of the lease agreement and the land owner's written authorization for the applicant to construct the structure. 
(h)	Same-On-site WECS conditional use. The application for an on-site WECS when permitted as a conditional use shall meet all of the requirements for a conditional use permit application, except that a complete site plan shall not be required unless the proposed WECS involves changes to the site outside the footprint of the WECS, or the planning commission finds that the scale or character of the project or other factors, including the nature of the surrounding area warrant a complete site plan. If a complete site plan is not required by the planning commission, the applicant shall submit the information described in subsection (i)(3) of this section or such other information as the planning commission may determine. 
(i)	Same-Commercial WECS conditional use. The application for a commercial WECS shall meet all of the requirements for a conditional use permit application and shall include a complete site plan in accordance with article II, division 2 of this chapter. 
(j)	Standards and requirements. All on-site WECSs and commercial WECSs shall meet the standards and findings of section 46-11 and the following additional standards and requirements: 
(1)	Property setbacks. 
a.	The distance between a WECS and the nearest property line shall be at least 1.5 times the height of the WECS. 
b.	No part of the WECS structure, including guy wire anchors, may extend closer than ten feet to the owner's property line. 
(2)	Height. On-site WECSs shall be less than 150 feet in height. Commercial WECSs shall be less than 275 feet in height. Height shall be measured from the existing grade to the tip of the turbine blade at its highest point. The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with all FAA lighting regulations and the Michigan Tall Structures Act as part of the approval process, if applicable. 
(3)	Other required setbacks. 
a.	The distance between a WECS and a road or a public right-of-way shall be at least 1.5 times the height of the WESC. 
b.	Distance between. The distance between a WECS and any other on-site or commercial WECS shall be at least 1.5 times the height of the taller of the two WECSs. 
(4)	Noise; sound pressure level. 
a.	Audible noise or the sound pressure level of an on-site WECS or commercial WECS shall not exceed 55 dB(A) (A-weighted decibels) at the property line closest to the WECS. For commercial WECSs, modeling and analysis of sound pressure shall be required in accordance with the provisions outlined below. 
b.	This sound pressure level may be exceeded during short-term events such as utility outages and/or severe wind storms. 
(5)	Shadow flicker. The applicant shall conduct an analysis of potential shadow flicker. The analysis shall identify the locations of shadow flicker that may be caused by the project and the expected durations of the flicker at these locations from sunrise to sunset over the course of a year. The analysis shall identify impacted areas where shadow flicker may affect occupants or users of the structures or properties in the impacted area. The analysis shall describe measures that will be taken to eliminate or mitigate negative impacts. 
(k)	Construction codes, towers and interconnections standards. 
(1)	Every WECS shall comply with all applicable state construction codes and local building permit requirements. 
(2)	Every WECS shall comply with Federal Aviation Administration requirements, the Michigan airport zoning act (Public Act 23 of 1950), the Michigan tall structures act (Public Act 259 of 1959), and any other applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(3)	An on-site WECS or commercial WECS that is tied to the electrical grid shall comply with state public service commission and utility interconnection requirements. Off-grid WECSs are exempt from this requirement. 
(l)	Safety. 
(1)	Design safety certification. The safety of the design of every WECS shall be certified by the applicant's professional engineer registered in the state and reviewed by the township. If WECS construction is approved, the professional engineer shall certify that the construction and installation of the WECS meets or exceeds the manufacturer's construction and installation standards, and any applicable state and federal laws and regulations prior to operation. 
(2)	Controls and brakes. Every WECS shall be equipped with manual and automatic controls to limit rotation of blades to a speed not to exceed the designed limits of the WECS. The applicant's professional engineer must certify that the rotor and overspeed control design and fabrication conform to applicable design standards. No changes or alterations from certified design shall be permitted unless accompanied by a professional engineer's statement of certification approved by the township. 
(3)	Lightning. Every WECS shall have lightning protection. 
(4)	Guy wires. If an on-site WECS is supported by guy wires, the wires shall be clearly visible to a height of a least six feet above the guy wire anchors. Every commercial WECS must be of a freestanding monopole design and guy wires shall not be used. 
(5)	Grade clearance. The minimum vertical blade tip clearance from grade shall be 25 feet for any WECS employing a horizontal axis rotor. 
(6)	Interference. Every WECS shall be designed and operated to minimize or mitigate interference with existing electromagnetic communications, such as radio, telephone, microwave or television signals. 
(7)	Color. Towers and blades shall be painted a non-reflective neutral color designated on the application and approved by the township or as otherwise required by law. 
(8)	Climb prevention. Every WECS must be protected by anti-climbing devices such as: 
a.	Fences with locking portals at least eight feet high;
b.	Anti-climbing devices 12 feet from base of pole including anti-climb panels, anti-climb brackets, and other similar devices. 
(m)	Removal of abandoned on-site WECS. In the event an on-site WECS is abandoned or unused for a period of 180 days, or if a WECS is damaged, the owner of the tower or the land shall promptly remove the tower and all related equipment. Failure to remove the tower and related equipment in accordance with the foregoing shall subject the tower owner and land owner to fines established by the township board. In addition, by accepting a permit for the on-site WECS, the applicant and land owner agree that in the event the tower and equipment is not removed as required, after 30 days' notice from the township, the township may undertake such removal and bill the costs to the applicant and land owner plus an administrative fee of 15 percent which, if not paid within 30 days, shall be assessed against the land on which the tower and equipment is located and collected in the same manner as delinquent taxes. 
(n)	Additional requirements for commercial WECS. The following standards and requirement shall apply to every commercial WECS: 
(1)	Warnings. A visible warning sign of high voltage shall be placed at the base of every commercial WECS. The sign must have at least six inch letters with three-quarter-inch stroke. Such signs shall be located a maximum of 300 feet apart and at all points of site ingress and egress. 
(2)	Signage. In addition to warning signs and signs required by law, every commercial WECS shall be equipped with a sign containing owner identification and contact information. No other signs or advertising are permitted. 
(3)	Liability insurance. The owner or operator of a commercial WECS shall maintain a current commercial liability and property damage insurance policy with coverage limits acceptable to the township pertaining to installation and operation of the commercial WECS. The amount and terms of the policy shall be established as a condition of conditional use permit approval. The township and land owner shall be named as additional insureds. Certificates of insurance shall be provided to the township annually. 
(4)	Security. The application shall include a description of security to be posted at the time of receiving a building permit for the WECS to ensure removal of the WECS when it has been abandoned or is no longer needed, as provided in subsection (n)(9) of this section. The security shall be the form of cash, letter of credit, or an escrow agreement, in an amount approved by the township engineer and in a form approved by the township attorney providing for timely removal of the commercial WECS as required under this section, and payment of any costs and attorney fees incurred by the township in connection with such removal. 
(5)	Visual appearance; lighting; powerlines. The design of the WECS buildings and related structures shall, to the extent reasonably possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend WECS components with the natural setting and existing environment. For commercial WECSs exceeding minimum FAA height requirements for lighting, minimum FAA lighting standards shall not be exceeded. All tower lighting required by the FAA shall be shielded to the extent possible to reduce glare and visibility from the ground. The tower shaft shall not be illuminated unless required by the FAA. The electrical collection system shall be placed underground within the interior of each parcel at a depth designed to accommodate any existing land use to the maximum extent practicable. The collection system may be place overhead adjacent to public roadways, at points of interconnection to the electric grid or in other areas as necessary. 
(6)	Wildlife impact. The applicant shall submit an avian study by a qualified professional, such as an ornithologist or wildlife biologist, describing the potential impact of the commercial WECS on migratory birds or bats and threatened or endangered species. 
(7)	Annual inspection; maintenance. The WECS and surrounding area shall be maintained in accordance with industry standards including painting and landscaping. Every commercial WECS must be inspected annually by an authorized factory representative or professional engineer to certify that the WECS is in good working condition and is not a hazard to persons or property. Certification records shall be submitted annually to the township. 
(8)	Sound pressure level. As part of the application and prior to installation of any commercial WECS, the applicant shall provide modeling and analysis that will confirm that the commercial WECS will not exceed the maximum permitted sound pressure levels. Modeling and analysis shall conform to IEC 61400 and ISO 9613. After installation of the commercial WECS, sound pressure level measurements shall be done by a third party, qualified professional according to the procedures in the most current version of ANSI S12.18. All sound pressure levels shall be measured with a sound meter that meets or exceeds the most current version of ANSI S1.4 specifications for a Type II sound meter. Documentation of the sound pressure level measurements shall be provided to the local government within 60 days of the operation of the project. 
(9)	Removal. A commercial WECS shall be removed by the owner of the WECS or land when the commercial WECS has been abandoned or unused for 180 days ("non-use period"). For purposes of this section, the damage, destruction or removal of any part of WECS equipment, or the cessation of operations shall be considered as the beginning of a non-use period. The WECS owner or applicant shall notify the township of the beginning of any non-use period or any removal of equipment. The end of the non-use period may be sooner than 180 days after commencement if the WECS or any portion of the facility becomes a nuisance or is dangerous to the public health, safety and welfare. 
a.	At the end of the non-use period, the owner of the WECS or the land shall immediately apply for and obtain any applicable demolition or removal permit, and shall immediately proceed with and complete the demolition and removal of the WECS and restoration of the land to the condition existing prior to installation, to the extent reasonably feasible. 
b.	If the required demolition, removal and restoration of the WECS has not been lawfully completed within 60 days after the end of the non-use period, then after 15 days' prior written notice to the land owner and the WECS owner, the township may remove or secure the removal of the WECS and related equipment and the township's costs, expenses, attorneys fees and consultants fees, plus a 15 percent administrative charge may be drawn and collected from the security described in subsection (n)(4) of this section, and any costs and fees in excess of the amount of the security shall constitute a lien on the land on which the WECS is located and may be collected in the same manner as delinquent taxes. 
(Ord. No. 129, § 6.25, 2-1-2010)
Sec. 46-304. - Architectural design requirements. 
    The purpose of this section is to provide a consistent and equitable set of exterior architectural design standards, the intent of which is to create, enhance and promote the qualitative visual environment of Brandon Township. Also, the intent is to encourage developers and their architects to explore the design implication of their project to the context of the site, surrounding area and the township, and to provide the planning commission with a sense and appreciation for the design process. This section is not intended to regulate the quality, workmanship and requirements for materials relative to strength, durability and endurance, maintenance, performance, load capacity, or fire resistance characteristics. 
Building design and location shall contribute to the uniqueness of the commercial zoned areas within the township with predominant material, elements, features, color range and activity areas tailored specifically to the site and its content. In the case of projects which contain more than one building, each individual building shall include predominant characteristics shared by all buildings in the development so that the development forms a cohesive place within the M-15 corridor and other commercial zoned properties. In projects containing more than one building, a distinct visual link shall be established among various buildings by using architectural site design elements such as courtyards, plaza(s), landscaping and walkways to unify the project. A standardized prototype design shall be modified if necessary to meet the provisions of subsection (1) of this section. Emphasis shall be placed on providing a pedestrian circulation system which promotes safety and social interaction, connecting neighborhoods with open space, recreational and community facilities while offering commercial, office and mixed use areas. 
(1)	Design theme. Within each project, buildings shall be designed with an overall architectural theme consistent with or complementary to the Federal, Georgian, Italianate, or Greek Revival or other early American periods. Pre-existing buildings on adjoining tracts shall not be a factor in the design of new buildings unless they are consistent with the architectural objectives defined herein. Transition shall be developed between projects with different uses and intensities on adjacent parcels to provide an effective visual and functional shift. Transition may be created through appropriate building setback, height and landscape buffers. 
(2)	Open space and community design feature. 
a.	Residential uses (not in single family residential districts). An active and passive recreation/open space shall demonstrate that at least ten percent of the gross land area is maintained for recreation/open space amenities which accurately reflect the intended demographics of the development not withstanding other ordinance requirements for cluster housing options, planned unit development or other residential development standards. 
b.	All non-residential uses. Each non-residential establishment shall contribute to the establishment or enhancement of community and public spaces by providing at least two of the examples but not limited to any of the following: patio/seating area, pedestrian plaza with benches, window shopping walkway, outdoor playground area, water feature, clock tower, flag poles and shall include other such deliberately shaped area and/or focal feature or amenity that, in the sole discretion of the planning commission, is determined to adequately enhance such community and public spaces. 
(3)	Building proportion. A building within a development should generally avoid long, monotonous, uninterrupted walls or roof planes. The design and placement of building facades, doors, windows, and architectural design details shall be used to accomplish this task. 
(4)	Building facades. 
a.	Facades shall have a defined base or foundation, a middle or modulated wall, and a top formed by a pitched roof or articulated cornice, in each instance appropriate to the building style. Buildings with continuous facades that are 90 feet or greater in width shall be designed with offsets (projecting or recessed) along at least 20 percent of the length of the facade. Windows, awnings, and arcades must total at least 60 percent of a facade length abutting a public street. 
b.	Facades constructed of more than one material shall only change materials along a horizontal line or along vertical line of an architectural element (not a diagonal line) unless it is an integral part of the design feature. The material that appears to be heavier shall always be placed beneath the lighter material. All facades of building shall be of the same material and similarly detailed. One dominant material shall be selected, with a preference towards stone or brickwork. Wood or wood appearing materials (vinyl siding, hardy board) are allowed however it shall be of a type that is installed as individual pieces and not of large panels. Buildings that are located at the termination of a view or vista shall be considered a more significant structure and will be required to have special architectural treatment. Block or metal sheet panel walls are strictly prohibited. 
c.	Design elements of the elevations shall be organized such that openings line up horizontally and vertically with other openings. Openings in a facade shall be arranged in a balanced, relatively uniform fashion. Openings of varying sizes are often centered vertically along the center line of the openings above or below. 
(5)	Roofs. 
a.	Roofs shall be simply and symmetrically pitched and only in the configuration of gables and hips, with pitches ranging from 4:12 to 14:12. Shed roofs are permitted only when the ridge is attached to an exterior wall of a building, and shall conform to pitch between 14:12 and 4:12. Flat roofs are permitted when consistent with the historic style or architecture, if edged by a railing or parapet, and if rooftop mechanical equipment is either camouflaged on all sides or visually integrated into the overall design of the building. All roofing materials shall be compatible with the style, materials, color, details and proportion of the building. In no case shall rooftop mechanical equipment be visible from adjoining streets or residential zones or uses. 
b.	Modulating of the roof and/or roof line will be required in order to eliminate box-shaped buildings. Parapets must be fully integrated into the architectural design of the building and provide seamless design transitions, including exterior materials between the main building mass, mechanical penthouses and other roof structures. Should they be used, partial parapets shall have a return that extends inward to at least the first structural bay, or 25 feet, whichever is greater. 
c.	Dormers shall be designed with correct details, proportion and type consistent with the overall building composition and roofed with symmetrical gables, hip or barrel roofs. Belvederes, cupolas, and pergolas are permitted if appropriate to the type, well proportioned, and fully detailed. 
d.	In instances where roof vents, roof mounted mechanical equipment, pipes, and other projections and equipment on the roof can be viewed from above, they shall be grouped together and painted to match the roof color to reduce their appearance, and screened from view. In instances where roof areas or mechanical equipment can be viewed from below, all roof vents, roof mounted mechanical equipment, pipes, and other projections and equipment on the roof shall be painted to match the roof color or screened from view. There shall be variations in roof lines to add visual interest. 
(6)	Entrances. Primary building entrances shall be clearly defined and recessed or framed by a sheltering element such as an awning, arcade or portico in order to provide shelter from the summer sun or winter weather. The location, orientation, proportion and style of the doors must faithfully reflect the chosen style of the building. 
(7)	Windows. All window designs shall be compatible with the style, materials, color, details and proportion of the building. The number window of panes, the way it opens, the trim around it and whether it is embellished with shutters must be consistent with the architectural style of the structure 
(8)	Awnings. Fixed or retractable awnings are permitted if they complement a building's architectural style, material, colors, and details; do not conceal architectural features (such as cornices, columns, pilasters, or decorative details); do not impair facade composition; and are designed as an integral part of the facade. Metal or aluminum awnings are prohibited unless they are matching and compatible to the roofing material. 
(9)	Storefronts. Storefronts shall be integrally designed with overall facade character. Ground floor retail, service and restaurant uses should generally have large pane window displays, however, they shall not exceed 75 percent of the total ground level (first floor) facade area. Buildings with multiple storefronts shall be of unified design through the use of common materials, architectural details, signage and lighting consistent with the overall building style. 
(10)	Drive-thru windows. Drive-thru windows shall be designed as a related, integrated architectural element and part of the overall design composition of the building. 
(11)	Pedestrian pathways and sidewalks. Vehicular access and circulation shall be planned to ensure safe pedestrian movement within the development. Pedestrian systems shall provide safe, all weather, efficient, and aesthetically pleasing means of on-site movement and shall be an integral part of the overall design concept. Pedestrian pathway connections to parking areas, buildings and other amenities between on-site and perimeter pedestrian systems and paths shall be planned and installed when feasible. Pedestrian pathways shall also be provided to accommodate neighboring properties and connect to other pathway systems. The pathways are to be a minimum of five feet in width and constructed of approved hard surface materials. 
(12)	Signage. All signs permitted within the township shall be subject to the provisions of article X of this chapter (Signs) unless a stricter provision is provided below. All signs with in a specific development shall be subject to the following requirements and standards: 
a.	All signs shall be designed so as to be integral and compatible with the architecture and landscape component of the development. 
b.	A comprehensive sign plan shall be submitted with each development project.
(13)	Lighting. All lighting shall conform to the requirements of section 46-421, in order to maintain vehicle and pedestrian safety, site security and accentuate architectural details. 
(14)	Landscape, greenbelts, buffers and screening elements. All landscape features of the site shall conform to the requirements detailed in Article VIII (Natural Resource Protections and Enhancement). 
(15)	Utilities and communication devices. All exterior on-site utilities, including but not limited to drainage systems, sewers, gas lines, water lines, electrical, telephone and communications wires and equipment, shall be installed and maintained underground wherever possible. On site underground utilities shall be designed and installed to minimize disruption of off-site utilities, paving and landscape during construction and maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 144-12, 3-5-2012)
Secs. 46-305-46-322. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Planned unit development, MCL 125.3503.

Sec. 46-323. - Statement of purpose. 
(a)	The PUD, planned unit development district, is intended for those areas of the township where a multifunctional development or a creative reuse of an old, large existing facility is necessary in order to protect the surrounding area, protect the environment and/or protect the health, safety and welfare of the community as a whole. The regulations outlined in this article allow for the establishment of PUDs in all zoning districts or in all land use plan designations as a viable land use development alternative for the purpose of the following: 
(1)	Preserving a natural resource.
(2)	Encouraging innovation in land use development planning.
(3)	Creating a unique combination of land uses that would be a benefit to the township as well as to the applicant. 
(4)	Encouraging the development of lands that are compatible with its character and adaptability.
(5)	Providing for quality housing, new local employment, special shopping opportunities, safe traffic patterns and better recreational facilities for the residents of the township. 
(b)	The provisions of this section, therefore, provide the regulatory authority and outline the standards for the submission, review and approval of a PUD. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 9.01)
Sec. 46-324. - Application of regulations. 
    The following regulations are applicable to all PUDs and they will become the basis for reviewing PUDs in all steps of the review and approval process. 
(1)	Applications for planned unit developments may be submitted for review in all zoning districts. 
(2)	Any land use or a combination of land uses authorized in this chapter may be included in a planned unit development provided adequate site improvements are incorporated into the plan to protect the occupants in one land use from the effects of adjacent land uses within the PUD or in land uses adjacent to the PUD so that public health, safety and general welfare are protected. 
(3)	The PUD shall be under single ownership or under the control of a single entity until the project is completed in conformity with this chapter. If any landownership interests change, notice shall be given to the township within ten days of such change. 
(4)	The PUD must demonstrate that one or more of the following conditions will occur:
a.	That a local, state or national resource and/or natural feature of a substantial quantity and/or a significant quality will be protected or preserved; 
b.	That some clearly defined, unique benefit or innovative planning pattern will accrue to the users of the PUD and/or to the township as a whole that would not be otherwise feasible or not likely to be achieved without the use of the PUD designation; 
c.	That a higher quality of living, working and/or leisure activity will be acknowledged within the township; or 
d.	That an existing nonconforming use of the land in the zoning district in which it is situated at the time of an application for a PUD, will be transformed into a more conforming or less offensive situation in some significant way. 
(5)	The proposed type and density of the use incorporated in the PUD shall not cause an undue burden upon public services, facilities and utilities than what would otherwise occur under separate land use situations that would have been permitted by other sections of this chapter. 
(6)	The proposed PUD shall not place an undue burden on the natural environment within the development or on the surrounding parcels. 
(7)	The proposed PUD shall not result in excessive noise or traffic in the surrounding area nor shall it result in a reduction in pedestrian safety within or around the development. 
(8)	The proposed PUD shall not result in an unreasonable and quantifiable negative economic impact upon surrounding properties and, in fact, the applicant should demonstrate how properties and property values are protected or are possibly increased in value and how the quality of the life in the surrounding properties are protected or enhanced. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 9.02)
Sec. 46-325. - Designs standards for a PUD. 
    The following regulations are applicable to all PUDs based upon the types of uses to be incorporated into a PUD and the intensity of the development of a PUD: 
(1)	Residential use and density.
a.	Residential density shall not be greater than the maximum density permitted in the zoning district in which the property is situated immediately prior to classification under this article. If the parcel is not zoned for residential use immediately prior to classification under this article, the township shall make a determination as to appropriate density based upon existing and planned residential densities in the surrounding area, the availability of utilities and services, and the natural features and resources of the subject parcel. 
b.	Project density shall be demonstrated by a preliminary site plan with a conventional layout and with all applicable ordinances and laws observed, including proof of water supply and sewage disposal as set forth in this section. 
c.	An applicant shall demonstrate that all dwelling units proposed within a planned unit development are capable of meeting applicable county and/or state agency approvals for on-site water supply and sewage disposal where such on-site systems are proposed. Inasmuch as the capability of the parcel for on-site water supply and sewage disposal is material to the determination of potential development density, the township shall require percolation tests, soil borings and other information to determine suitability of soils for on-site sewage disposal. These tests must be conducted under the supervision of a registered engineer, certified sanitarian, or other competent licensed professional in accordance with uniform procedures established by the state department of environmental quality and this chapter. A preliminary site plan with a conventional layout is required in order to demonstrate project density. The planning commission may recommend to the township board to waive the requirement for percolation tests, soil borings, and other information on each individual lot of the preliminary site plan with a conventional layout, when it can be demonstrated by the applicant that one or more of the following conditions exist: 
1.	Conducting the necessary testing would result in unreasonable damage to significant natural resources and features that are intended to be preserved. 
2.	Previous studies acceptable to the planning commission have been conducted on the site which verify the suitability of soils and sub-surface conditions for on-site water supply and sewage disposal. 
3.	Other evidence and data exists which, in the opinion of a registered engineer, certified sanitarian, or other competent licensed professional and such evidence is acceptable to the planning commission, verifies the suitability of soils and sub-surface conditions for on-site water supply and sewage disposal. 
d.	Additional density for residential uses may be allowed by the discretion of the township board upon the recommendation of the planning commission and based upon a demonstration by the applicant of consistency with the master plan and of planning and design excellence resulting in a material benefit to the township, adjacent land uses, and/or the ultimate users of the project, where such benefit would otherwise be unlikely to be achieved without the application of the PUD regulations. In the determination whether a project warrants additional density, the township board may also consider the following factors including, without limitation: innovative design; pedestrian or vehicular safety; longterm aesthetic beauty; protection and preservation of natural resources and features; preservation of open space which avoids fragmentation of the resources base and contributes to an area wide open space network; and improvements to the township's infrastructure. 
(2)	Mixed use projects. For planned unit development projects which contain a residential component, the township shall make a determination as to appropriate residential density based upon existing and planned residential densities in the surrounding area, the availability of utilities and service and the natural features and resource of the subject parcel. 
(3)	In the case of any ambiguities as to applicable regulations that may apply to a proposed PUD, the planning commission shall recommend to the township board, and the township board, in its discretion, shall resolve such ambiguities. 
(4)	There shall be a landscaped greenbelt and berm around the PUD as shall be recommended by the planning commission and may be approved by the township board to mitigate any negative effects of the development on surrounding properties. Such a greenbelt shall be an integral part of a PUD that includes nonresidential uses and it may be up to 100 feet wide once the planning commission and the township board have taken into consideration the use of the proposed development and of the adjacent uses. The width of the greenbelt, however, does not have to be uniform at all points around the perimeter of the PUD but in no case shall it be less than 50 feet. 
(5)	Public roads, internal roads and drives, site drainage and other engineering components of a development plan shall meet or exceed the standards set forth in the township ordinances and regulations that are applicable in connection with each of the proposed uses to be incorporated into the PUD. 
(6)	Where feasible, all public utilities shall be installed underground.
(7)	Where feasible, without significantly reducing the kind and density of uses in a PUD, pedestrian circulation paths shall be separated from vehicular drives or roads by a minimum landscape separation of five feet. 
(8)	Signage, exterior lighting, parking, the design of the buildings and other features of the project shall be consistent with the character of the community, surrounding development or developments, and natural features of the area. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 9.03)
Sec. 46-326. - Procedures for review and approval of a PUD. 
(a)	All applications for a PUD must go through a three-step process for review and approval. The third step shall constitute an application to rezone the property to a PUD district only if the applicant has received an approval or a conditional approval of a PUD in steps one and two of this review and approval process. The steps for review and approval are as follows: 
(1)	Step one; preliminary review and concept approval. 
a.	Prior to the submission of an application for a PUD, the applicant shall meet with the director of planning and building and with any consultants the director deems appropriate. The applicant shall present at such preapplication conference, at least a sketch plan of the proposed PUD which shall include the following information: total number of acres in the project; the number of residential units, if any; the number and type of nonresidential units; the number of acres to be occupied by each type of use; the number of acres to be preserved as open or recreational space; and all natural resources and natural features to be preserved. 
b.	After a preliminary meeting or meetings the director of planning and building shall inform the applicant of regulations that will most likely apply to the development and a list of initial concerns that should be addressed by the applicant in their formal preliminary PUD submittal to the planning commission. 
c.	Ten copies of the preliminary information and such other information the applicant wishes to submit shall be filed with the planning and building department within 90 days of the preapplication conference. Preliminary plans shall include the information outlined in article II, division 2 of this chapter. 
d.	The preliminary information and application for a PUD shall be presented to the planning commission within a reasonable amount of time for review, but no more than 60 days after submission to the planning and building department. 
e.	The planning commission shall review the preliminary plan information and shall be entitled to make reasonable inquiries of the applicant about issues relevant to the preliminary plan. 
f.	The planning commission shall also proceed to set the subject over to a second meeting wherein the planning commission may receive answers to the questions posted by the commission, to receive preliminary reports from the township's consultants and to receive comments from the surrounding property owners. 
g.	Based upon the information presented by the applicant, based upon information presented by the administrative staff and consultants, and based on the public's comments and concerns, the planning commission shall make a motion to give tentative approval to the concept of the PUD, to give tentative approval to the concept subject to certain conditions, or to deny the concept of a PUD based upon certain mitigating circumstances. If the motion is to deny the PUD completely, the application process shall be terminated and the applicant shall be entitled to a refund of the unused portion of their fee and escrow deposit. 
(2)	Step two; planning commission approval or denial of the PUD. 
a.	Upon a favorable motion for concept approval by the planning commission to consider the proposed development of a PUD in more detail, the applicant may proceed to prepare the final documentation for the PUD. The applicant may prepare a more in-depth site development engineering and architectural plan with models, graphics and written narratives conforming to section 46-327. These materials shall be submitted to the planning and building department within 90 days of the planning commissions tentative approval of the PUD concept. 
b.	The planning commission shall review the updated plans. They shall be entitled to make reasonable inquiries of and receive answers from the applicant on issues relevant to the PUD. Following their review, the planning commission shall provide the applicant with written comments, which shall be a part of the official minutes of the planning commission meeting. An integral part of these comments shall be a motion to approve or deny in whole or in part the PUD and/or the materials presented in the PUD package. If the motion is to deny the PUD in part, the applicant shall be advised to revise their plan consistent with the planning commission's recommendations. If the motion is to deny the PUD completely, the application process shall be terminated and the applicant shall be entitled to a refund of the unused portion of their fee and escrow deposit. 
(3)	Step three: final approval of a PUD. 
a.	Within six months following receipt of the planning commission's comments and final approval of the PUD, the applicant shall submit to the director of planning and building, ten copies of a final PUD conforming with section 46-327 and all of the requirements cited during previous meetings with the planning commission. If the final plan has not been submitted within the six-month period, the final plan approval shall lapse and the applicant must start the review process again. The township board may extend the time for submission of the final plan upon a showing by the applicant that no material change of circumstances has occurred. 
b.	This plan shall constitute an application to amend the zoning map and shall be set for public hearing before the planning commission and otherwise acted upon by the planning commission, the county, and the township board, as and to the extent provided for by state law and article II, division 5 of this chapter. 
c.	With and in addition to the regular report submitted by the planning commission in connection with a rezoning application, the planning commission shall submit detailed recommendations to the township board relative to the PUD project, including recommendations with respect to matters on which the township board must exercise discretion and approval. 
d.	The final step in the rezoning process is the publication of the action to rezone the property to a PUD district by the township board. The publication of the ordinance to rezone the property will be conditioned upon the action of the applicant to apply for a building permit within six months of the date of the second reading of the ordinance to rezone. If the applicant fails to obtain a building permit or show reasonable cause for one six-month extension of the time period, the action to rezone shall be declared null and void and any subsequent application for a PUD shall be reviewed as if it has been submitted for the first time. The justification for the expiration of a PUD district classification, after such a long time is three-fold: 
1.	The circumstances surrounding the approval of the PUD may have changed;
2.	The conditions, use and character of the surrounding properties may have changed; and 
3.	This chapter and/or the township's master land use plan of the township may have changed.
In all of these circumstances, there may be good reason to modify or deny several developmental aspects of the PUD as they may impact on the surrounding properties. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 9.04)
Sec. 46-327. - Application and submission requirements. 
    Plans being submitted for review and approval shall be made a part of an application for a PUD on a form approved by the planning commission and obtainable through the department of planning and building. The basic information that needs to be submitted includes: 
(1)	Plans being submitted for step one under procedures for review and approval of a PUD may be preliminary in nature, sufficient to describe the proposed development of the PUD and complete enough to represent all aspects of the requirements outlined in article II, division 2 of this chapter. 
(2)	Plans being submitted for step two or step three under procedures for review and approval of a PUD shall include: 
a.	All of the requirements of article II, division 2 of this chapter in full detail.
b.	A plan showing the type, location and density of all uses.
c.	The plan should include open spaces, natural preserves, recreational areas and other like areas as well as an indication of the proposed use of such areas. 
d.	A separate document shall describe any deviations from this chapter which would otherwise be applicable to the uses. This document should include ordinance provisions from which deviations are sought, and the reasons and methods to be utilized for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare in lieu of the original regulations. 
e.	If the property on which the project is located is less than five acres, it shall be at the discretion of the planning commission to require an impact statement per section 46-392. If the property on which the project is to be situated consists of five acres or more, an impact statement per section 46-392 shall be submitted along with definite statements on how the PUD meets all of the issues presented in the design standards for a PUD which is a part of this chapter. 
f.	A detailed landscape plan.
g.	A construction schedule for the PUD, including phasing if applicable of all general improvements such as exterior lighting, signage, and the elements designed to reduce noise and establish visual screening features. 
h.	A preliminary drawing of the exterior of the building and preliminary floor plans.
i.	The application shall be signed by all parties having an interest in the property.
j.	A draft development agreement. The development agreement shall outline the responsibilities for the construction of the various elements of the project as well as outlining any conditions that will run with the subject development. The draft development agreement shall be reviewed by the township attorney. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 9.05)
Sec. 46-328. - Performance guarantees and conditions. 
(a)	Guarantees. The township board, after reviewing the recommendation from the planning commission, may require a performance bond. The amount of such bond shall be set as a percent of the total value of the project and shall be established by resolution of the township board. Said bond may be either a cash bond, a performance bond, or a letter of credit and the value of such bonds need not exceed ten percent of the value of the project in cash or 75 percent of the value of the project in a performance bond. 
(b)	Conditions. Reasonable conditions may also be required for the approval of a PUD to the extent authorized by law, for the purpose of ensuring that public services and facilities affected by a proposed PUD will be capable of accommodating the anticipated increases. All conditions imposed shall be made a part of the record of the approved planned unit development. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 9.06)
Secs. 46-329-46-359. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 

Sec. 46-360. - Off-street parking requirements. 
    Developed and reserved off-street parking facilities for the parking of self-propelled motor vehicles for the use of occupants, employees and patrons of the buildings hereafter erected, altered or extended after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, shall be provided as herein prescribed in all zoning districts. Such space shall be maintained and shall not be encroached upon so long as said main building or structure remains, unless an equivalent number of such spaces are provided elsewhere in conformance with this chapter. 
(1)	Fractional requirements. When units or measurements determining number of required parking spaces result in requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half shall be disregarded, and fractions over one-half require one parking space. 
(2)	Location of parking space for one- and two-family dwellings. The off-street parking facilities required for one- and two-family dwellings shall be located on the same lot or plot of ground as the building they are intended to serve, and shall consist of a parking strip, parking apron, and/or garage. 
(3)	Location of parking spaces for other land uses. The off-street parking facilities required for all other uses shall be located on the lot or within 300 feet of the permitted uses requiring such off-street parking, such distance to be measured along lines of public access to the property between the nearest point of the parking facility to the building to be served. 
(4)	Units and methods of measurement. For the purpose of determining off-street parking requirements, the following units of measurement shall apply: 
a.	Floor area. Where floor area is the unit for determining the required number of off-street parking spaces, said unit means the gross floor area, excluding such floor area within the principal building used for parking, incidental service and storage, housing of mechanical equipment, heating systems and similar uses. 
b.	Employees. For requirements stated in terms of employees, the calculation shall be based upon the maximum number of employees likely to be on the premises during the largest shift. 
c.	Places of assembly. In stadiums, sports arenas, churches and other places of assembly in which those in attendance occupy benches, pews, or other similar seating facilities, each 24 inches of such shall be counted as one seat. In cases where a place of assembly has both fixed seats and open assembly area, requirements shall be computed separately for each type and added together. 
(5)	Similar uses and requirements. In the case of a use not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking facilities for a use which is so mentioned, and which said use is similar, shall apply. 
(6)	Existing off-street parking at effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. Off-street parking existing at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived which serves an existing building or use shall not be reduced in size less than that required under the terms of this chapter. 
(7)	Collective provisions. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent collective provisions of off-street parking facilities for two or more buildings or uses, provided such facilities collectively shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the various individual uses computed separately in accordance with this section. 
(8)	General use conditions. Except when land is used as storage space in connection with the business of a repair or service garage, a 24-hour time limit for parking in off-street parking areas shall prevail, it being the purpose and intention of the foregoing that the requirements of maintaining vehicle storage or parking space is to provide for the public safety in keeping parked cars off the streets, but such requirement is not designed to or intended to provide the storage or parking on such open land of wrecked or junked cars, or for creating a junkyard or a nuisance in such area. 
(9)	Joint use. Parking spaces already provided to meet off-street parking requirements for theater, stadiums, auditoriums, and other places of public assembly, stores, office buildings, and industrial establishments, lying within 300 feet of a church or measured along lines of public access, and that are not normally used between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Sundays and that are made available for other parking, may be used to meet not more than 50 percent of the off-street parking requirements of a church. 
(10)	Required greenbelt, setbacks, and screening. 
a.	Off-street parking facilities, including maneuvering lanes, shall not be located within the front greenbelt required in accordance with section 46-386. Off-street parking shall be permitted within the required side or rear yard setbacks, provided a minimum ten-foot setback is maintained between off-street parking and the abutting side and rear lot lines. 
b.	Off-street parking shall be landscaped and screened in accordance with section 46-386. 
(11)	Table of off-street parking requirements. 
a.	The amount of required off-street parking space for new uses or building, additions thereto, and additions to existing buildings, additions thereto, as specified above shall be determined in accordance with the following table. 
b.	Flexibility in application. The township recognizes that, due to the specific requirements of any given development, inflexible application of the parking standards set forth in this section may result in development with inadequate parking or parking far in excess of that which is needed. The former situation may lead to traffic congestion or unauthorized parking on adjacent streets or neighboring sites. The latter situation may result in excessive paving and stormwater runoff and a waste of space which could be left as open space. The planning commission may permit deviations from the requirements of this section and may require more or allow less parking whenever it finds that such deviations are more likely to provide a sufficient number of parking spaces to accommodate the specific characteristics of the use in question. The planning commission may attach conditions to the approval of a deviation from the requirement of this section that bind such approval to the specific use in question. Where a deviation results in a reduction of parking, the planning commission may further impose conditions which ensure that adequate reserve area is set aside for future parking, if needed. Where an area is set aside for reserve parking, it shall be easily developed, not devoted to a use other than open space, and shall be designed to accommodate attendant facilities such as maneuvering lanes and drainage. 
c.	Schedule of off-street parking regulations.
Required No. of Parking Spaces
Use Per Each Unit of Measure as Follows:RESIDENTIAL USESSingle- or two-family dwelling2 per each dwelling unitMultiple-family dwelling2 per each dwelling unit1 per each ten dwelling unitsSenior citizen housing1 per each dwelling unitPLACES OF ASSEMBLY/INSTITUTIONAL USESChurches1 per each three seats based on maximum seating capacity in the main place of assembly therein Private clubs and lodges1 per five individual members allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by fire and/or building codes Hospitals1 per each two bedsConvalescent homes, homes for the aged, nursing homes, children homes1 per three bedsHigh schools, trade schools,8 per each classroom colleges, and universitiesElementary and middle schools5 per each classroomChild care center, day nursery schools1 per each ten children plus1 per each employeeStadiums, sports arenas, auditoriums, banquet halls and meeting facilities1 per each four seats, based on maximum seating capacityLibraries and museums1 per each 500 sq. ft. of floor areaGENERAL COMMERCIAL USESRetail stores, except as otherwise specified herein1 per 200 sq. ft. of floor areaSupermarkets, drugstores, and other self-serve retail establishments1 per 250 sq. ft. of floor areaPlanned shopping center1 per 200 sq. ft. of floor areaFurniture, appliances, hardware and household equipment sales1 per each 600 sq. ft. of floor areaLodging1 per each guest bedroom, plus amount required for accessory uses, such as a restaurant or cocktail lounge Fast food restaurant1 per each 75 sq. ft. of floor areaSit-down restaurant1 per each three seats, based on maximum seating capacityTaverns and cocktail lounges (other than fast food restaurants)1 per each three persons allowed within maximum occupancy load as established by fire and/or building codes Garden stores and building material sales1 per each 800 sq. ft. of floor areaOpen air business, not otherwise provided for herein1 per each 800 sq. ft. of lot area used for said businessMovie theaters1 per each three seats based on the maximum seating capacityWholesale stores, machinery sales1 per each 1,000 sq. ft. of floor areaAUTOMOTIVE USESAuto sales1 per each 200 sq. ft. of showroom floor area plus3 per each service stallAutomobile repair facilities3 per each service stall1 per each service vehicleGasoline stations without convenience store1 per pump unit, plus3 per each service stallGasoline stations with convenience store1 per pump unit, plus3 per each service stall, plus1 per each 200 sq. ft. of floor area devoted to retail sales and customer retail sales and customer service Carwashes (self-serve)2 per each wash stall, plus1 per each vacuum stationCarwashes (automatic)1 per 200 sq. ft. of floor area of customer waiting and service area, plus1 per vacuum stationCollision or bump shop, and other2 per each stall or service areaOFFICE AND SERVICE USESMedical and dental office1 per each 200 sq. ft. of floor areaBusiness and professional offices1 per each 300 sq. ft. of floor areaBanks1 per each 250 sq. ft. of floor areaBarbershops and beauty shops3 per each chairRECREATIONAL USESBowling alleys3 per bowling lane, plus amount required for accessory uses such as a restaurant or cocktail lounge Private tennis, swim or golf clubs or other similar uses1 per each two memberships, plus amount required for accessory uses such as a restaurant or cocktail lounge Golf course, open to the general public5 per each hole, plus amount required for accessory uses such as a restaurant or cocktail lounge INDUSTRIAL USESIndustrial, manufacturing or research establishments1 per each 500 sq. ft. of floor areaWarehouse and storage buildings1 per each 1,500 sq. ft. of floor areaContractor's office1 per 300 sq. ft. of floor area 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 10.01)
Sec. 46-361. - Off-street parking space layout, standards, construction and maintenance. 
    Whenever the off-street parking requirements of section 46-360 require the building of an off-street parking facility, such off-street parking lots shall be laid out, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards and regulations: 
(1)	The construction of any parking lot shall be in accordance with the requirements and provisions of this chapter and such construction shall be completed and approved by the director of planning and building or his designee before actual use of property as a parking lot commences. Plans for the development of any parking lot must be submitted to the director of planning and building, drawn at a scale of not less than 50 feet equals one inch and indicating existing and proposed grades, drainage, water mains and sewers, surfacing and base materials to be used and the layout of the proposed parking lot. The building inspector shall transmit the development plans to the township engineer for review. The plans are to be prepared by a licensed civil engineer with the state. 
(2)	All such lots shall be hard-surfaced with a pavement having an asphalt or concrete binder, and shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of surface water which might accumulate within or upon such area. 
(3)	No surface water from such parking area shall be permitted to drain onto adjoining property, except through public drain. 
(4)	The planning commission shall have the discretion of waiving certain hard surface paving requirements provided the following conditions are met: 
a.	The proposed driveways, loading, turn-around, or storage areas will receive only limited use and are not used for employee parking, customer parking, or primary access. 
b.	Gravel surfacing and potential problems arising from dust or scattered gravel will not impact neighboring properties. 
(5)	All illumination for or on such parking lots shall be directed away from adjacent residential areas and shall be installed in such manner as to allow the reduction of the amount of light in other than normal parking hours each day. The source of illumination in all parking lots abutting a residential area shall not be more than 16 feet above the parking lot surface. 
(6)	Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot by means of clearly limited and defined drives shall be provided for vehicles. 
(7)	Bumper block or curbing shall be provided.
(8)	Plans for the layout of off-street parking facilities shall be in accordance with the following minimum requirements: 
ABCDParking PatternManeuvering Lane WidthParking Space Width
(feet) Parking Space Length
(feet)One-way (feet)Two-way (feet)0;deg; (parallel parking)
(Fig. 6)12209.02430;deg; to 53;deg; (Fig. 7)16 22 9.01854;deg; to 74;deg; (Fig. 8)16 22 9.01875;deg; to 90;deg; (Fig. 9)2022 9.018 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 10.02)
Sec. 46-362. - Off-street waiting area for drive-thru facilities. 
    All businesses which provide drive-thru facilities for serving customers within their automobile shall provide adequate off-street stacking space within a defined stacking lane which meets the following requirements. 
(1)	Each stacking lane shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width. Each stacking space shall be computed on the basis of 20 feet in length. 
(2)	Clear identification and delineation between the drive-thru facility and parking lot shall be provided. Drive-thru facilities shall be designed in a manner which promotes pedestrian and vehicular safety, and do not interfere with access to parking and maneuvering lanes. 
(3)	For all drive-thru facilities which have a single stacking lane, an escape lane shall be provided which allows other vehicles to pass those waiting to be served. 
(4)	The number of stacking spaces per service lane shall be provided for the following uses. When a use is not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street stacking space for the similar use shall apply. 
UseStacking Spaces
per Service LaneBanks4Photo service4Dry-cleaning4Fast-food restaurants8Carwashes (self-service)Entry3Exit1Carwashes (Automatic)Entry6Exit3 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 10.03)
Sec. 46-363. - Off-street loading requirements. 
(a)	On the same premises with every building, structure, or part thereof, erected and occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehouse, goods display, department store, wholesale, market, hotel, hospital, convalescent home, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning, or other uses similarly involving the receipt and distribution of vehicles, materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot, adequate space for standing, loading, and unloading services in order to avoid undue interference with public use of the streets, alleys, or any required access for off-street parking area. 
(b)	Such loading and unloading space, unless adequately provided for within a building, shall be an area ten feet by 50 feet, with 14-foot height clearance, and shall be provided according to the following schedule: 
Gross Floor Area
In Square FeetLoading and Unloading Spaces Required In Terms of Square Feet of Gross Floor Area0-2,000None2,000-20,000One space20,000-100,000One space plus one space for each 20,000 square feet100,000-500,000Five spaces plus one space for each 40,000 square feet in excess of 500,000 square feet  
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 10.04)
Secs. 46-364-46-384. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION AND ENHANCEMENT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Natural resources and environmental protection act, MCL 324.101 et seq.

Sec. 46-385. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to ensure that property is used in a manner which is consistent with the goals and objectives of the master plan and designed in a manner that protects natural resources and features. The regulations of this article are intended to achieve the mutually compatible objectives of reasonable use of land and protection of the township natural resources and features. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 11.01)
Sec. 46-386. - Landscaping, greenbelt, buffers and screening. 
(a)	The intent of these landscape standards to promote the public's health, safety, and general welfare by: counteracting noise, improving air quality and counteracting visual blight; improving the appearance of off-street parking and other vehicular use areas; requiring buffering between noncompatible land uses; regulating the appearance of property abutting public rights-of-way; protecting and preserving the appearance, character, and value of the community and its residential neighborhood areas; preventing soil erosion and soil depletion; and promoting soil water retention. 
(b)	To the greatest extent possible, applicants are encouraged to satisfy ordinance requirements through the preservation of existing trees and natural vegetation. Where appropriate, the use of landscape materials native to the county is encouraged. 
(1)	Application. These requirements shall apply to all uses for which site plan review is required under article II, division 2 of this chapter. No site plan shall be approved unless it shows landscaping, greenbelt buffers, and screening consistent with the requirements set forth in this section. 
(2)	Landscape plan required. A separate detailed landscape plan shall be submitted as part of the site plan review process. On sites of greater than one acre, landscape plans shall be prepared and sealed by a registered landscape architect, licensed in the state. The landscape plan shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following items: 
a.	Location, spacing, size, root type and descriptions for each plant and type proposed for use within the required landscape area. 
b.	Minimum scale: one inch equals 40 feet for property less than five acres, or one inch equals 100 feet for property five acres or more. A different scale may be used provided it is sufficient to properly illustrate the landscape plan concept and that Ordinance requirements are met. 
c.	On parcels of more than one acre, existing and proposed contours onsite and 50 feet beyond the site at intervals not to exceed two feet. 
d.	Significant construction details to resolve specific site conditions, such as tree wells to preserve existing trees or culverts to maintain natural drainage patterns. 
e.	Planting and staking details in either text or drawing form to ensure proper installation of proposed plant materials. 
f.	Identification of existing wetlands, forested areas, trees and vegetative cover to be preserved. 
g.	Identification of grass and other ground cover and method of planting.
h.	Identification of mulch in planting beds.
i.	Typical straight cross section including slope, height and width of berms.
(3)	Buffering between land uses. 
a.	Upon any improvement for which a site plan is required, a landscape buffer shall be required to create a visual screen at least six feet in height along all adjoining boundaries whenever a nonresidential use or a residential use of higher density abuts residentially zoned property. A landscape buffer may consist of earthen berms and plant materials, or plant materials only, so as to maintain a minimum opacity of at least 80 percent. Opacity shall be measured by observation of any two square yard area of landscape screen between one foot above the established grade of the area to be concealed and the top or the highest point of the required screen. Incorporating the minimum size of plant material as set forth in section 46-387 at the time of installation, the opacity standard shall be met based upon reasonably anticipated growth over a period of three years. The applicant shall agree in writing to install additional plantings after the expiration of three years, in the event that the landscaping has not screened the view of areas as required. 
b.	Where there is a need to provide a greater visual, noise or dust barrier or to screen more intense development, a solid wall or fence may be required. Such wall or fence shall be a minimum of six feet in height as measured on the side of the proposed wall having the higher grade, and shall be constructed on both sides with textured concrete, split-face concrete block, wood, brick or stone. Precast panels and formed concrete structures may be used if they provide surface detail and texture equal to or greater than, the materials just named. In addition, a minimum of one tree and six shrubs meeting the minimum size requirements set forth in section 46-387 shall be planted adjacent to and for each 30 lineal feet of wall or fence. 
(4)	Parking lot landscaping. 
a.	Interior areas. Each separate landscaped area within a parking lot shall be adequately planted and maintained and shall be located in such a manner as to promote the following: divide and break up the expanse of pavement; define parking areas; and designate vehicular circulation. The following specific standards shall apply: 
1.	Separate landscaped islands shall be required within parking lots of 16 spaces or greater. No more than a row of 24 spaces are permitted without an island. Where size and configuration of a parking lot would prevent maintenance or impede traffic flow as a result of requiring landscaped areas within parking lots, the planning commission may approve alternative landscaping along the perimeter of the parking lots. 
2.	There shall be one canopy tree meeting the minimum size requirements set forth in section 46-387 for every eight parking spaces, landscaped islands within a designated parking area shall be a minimum of 150 square feet in area and nine feet in width. 
3.	A minimum distance of three feet shall be established between proposed tree or shrub plantings and the backside of the curb or edge of the pavement. 
b.	Perimeter areas. In order to reduce the visual impact, minimize conflicts between neighboring uses and reduce the effect of headlight glare and parking lot lighting on adjacent uses and public roadways, the perimeter of parking lots shall be screened in accordance with the following standards: 
1.	Parking lots which are adjacent to residentially zoned or used property, which serve a nonresidential use or a residential use of higher density, shall be screened from that residential use in accordance with the standards set forth in this section. 
2.	Parking lots which are visible from a public road shall be screened from view with a landscaped berm varied in height from between two to three feet along the perimeter of those sides which are visible. The berm shall be planted with a minimum of one deciduous or evergreen tree and six deciduous or evergreen shrubs, meeting the minimum size requirements set forth in section 46-387 for every 30 lineal feet, or major portion thereof. The planning commission, at its discretion, may approve alternative landscape plantings, such as a solid hedge, or a solid wall in lieu of a landscape berm. 
3.	Minimum of three-foot-wide landscape strips (not including vehicle overhangs) should be provided between paved parking surfaces and buildings, fences, and property lines wherever possible. Trees and shrubs shall be planted clear of the vehicle overhang area. 
(5)	Front greenbelt landscaping. A landscaped greenbelt equivalent in depth to the required front yard setback shall be required for any lot or any portion of a lot fronting on a public or private road, and shall be landscaped with a minimum of one deciduous tree or one evergreen tree, plus six deciduous and/or evergreen shrubs meeting the minimum size requirements set forth in section 46-387 for each 30 lineal feet, or major portion thereof, of frontage abutting said public right-of-way. The remainder of the greenbelt shall be landscaped in grass, ground cover, shrubs and/or other living plant material. Accessways from public rights-of-way through required landscape strips shall be permitted, but such accessways shall not be subtracted from the lineal dimension used to determine the minimum number of trees required unless such calculation would result in a spacing arrangement which is detrimental to plant development. 
(6)	Subdivision and site condominium landscaping. Landscaping for subdivisions and site condominiums, which shall include, but not be limited to, residential, office commercial, and industrial development, shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements: 
a.	Street trees. The frontage of all internal public or private streets shall be landscaped on both sides with the equivalent of one tree for every 40 lineal feet, or fraction thereof. Such street trees shall meet the minimum size requirements set forth in section 46-387 and shall be an appropriate species for a street environment. The planning commission may determine that existing trees which are preserved within the road right-of-way or easement may meet all or part of the street tree requirement. 
b.	Screening from public roads. Where a subdivision or site condominium abuts a public right-of-way located outside of the proposed subdivision or site condominium, the screening requirements set forth in section 46-387 shall be met. 
c.	Other site improvements. A landscape plan for a subdivision or site condominium development shall also include landscaping details of the entrance to the development, stormwater retention and/or detention areas, community buildings and other recreational areas, and any other site improvement which would be enhanced through the addition of landscaping. 
(7)	General site landscaping. In addition to any required screening, front greenbelt, foundation landscaping and/or parking lot landscaping required by this section, ten percent of the site area, excluding existing public road right-of-way, or private road easement shall be landscaped. Such site landscaping shall include preservation of existing plant material, grass, ground cover, trees, shrubs and/or other living plant material, but shall not be solely grass. In meeting general site landscaping requirements, particular attention shall be paid to such site elements as transformers, mechanical equipment, ground sign bases, entryways, and/or retention and detention areas. In particular, the integration of stormwater retention and detention ponds in the overall landscape concept is recommended. Ponds with a natural, rather than square or rectangular, design and appearance shall be encouraged. Fenced retention/detention ponds within a front yard shall be strictly prohibited. 
(8)	Refuse containers. Refuse containers shall be required for all uses other than single-family uses subject to the following standards: 
a.	Outside trash disposal containers shall be screened on all sides with an opaque masonry wall, and gate at least as high as the container, but not less than six feet in height, and shall be constructed of material which is compatible with the architectural materials used in the site development. 
b.	Containers shall be consolidated to minimize the number of collection sites.
c.	Containers and enclosures shall meet all required setbacks, shall be located behind the front face of the building, and shall be located away from public view insofar as possible. 
d.	Containers and enclosures shall be situated so that they do not cause excessive nuisance or offense to occupants of nearby buildings. 
e.	Concrete pads of appropriate size and construction shall be provided for containers or groups of containers having a capacity of size 30 gallon cans or more. Aprons shall be provided for loading of bins with capacity of 1.5 cubic yards or more. The minimum size of an enclosure shall be eight feet in depth and 12 feet in width to accommodate a single container and eight feet in depth and 20 feet in width to accommodate two containers. 
f.	For storage of recyclable materials, the enclosure area and pad size shall be increased to amply accommodate the extra materials and their containers. 
g.	Screening and gates shall be of a durable construction. Gates shall be constructed of heavy-gauge metal or of a heavy-gauge metal frame with covering of wood or other suitable material. Gates shall be secured with sturdy hinges or sliders, and latches. If the enclosure is situated directly adjacent to parking spaces or drives, it shall be protected at its base by concrete curb blocks. 
(9)	Miscellaneous landscape requirements. The following minimum standards shall apply: 
a.	Quality. Plant materials and grasses shall be of generally acceptable varieties and species, free of insects and diseases, hardy to county, shall conform to the current minimum standard of the American Association of Nurserymen, and shall have proof of any required governmental regulations and/or inspections. 
b.	Composition. A mixture of plant material, such as evergreen, deciduous trees and shrubs, is recommended to discourage insect and disease infestation; however, a limited mixture of hardy species is recommended in order to unify the design and visually blend with neighboring plants. Where plantings are adjacent to a road right-of-way, selection of plant materials that are tolerant of road salt spray and air pollutants are recommended. 
c.	Berms. Berms shall be constructed with slopes not to exceed a 1:3 gradient and shall be planted to prevent erosion. Berm slopes shall be protected with grass, shrubs or other form of natural ground cover. The highest point of the berm, extending along the length of the berm, shall be sufficiently rounded to avoid scalping by maintenance equipment. 
d.	Existing trees. If existing plant material is labeled "To Remain" on site plans by the applicant or required by the township, protective techniques, such as, but not limited to, fencing or barriers placed at the dripline around the perimeter of the plant material, shall be installed prior to construction. No vehicle or other construction equipment shall be parked or stored within the dripline of any plant material intended to be saved. Other protective techniques may be used provided such techniques are approved by the township. In the event that healthy trees which are used to meet the minimum requirements of this chapter, or those labeled "to remain," are cut down, destroyed, damaged, or excavated at the dripline, as determined by the township, the property owner shall replace them with trees which meet ordinance requirements. 
e.	Installation, maintenance, and completion. All landscaping required by this chapter shall be planted prior to obtaining a certificate of occupancy. In the alternative, a surety bond, letter of credit, and/or certified check shall be placed in escrow in the amount of the cost of landscaping, to be released only after landscaping is completed. All landscape elements shall be installed, and earth moving or grading performed according to accepted good planting and grading procedures. The owner of property required to be landscaped by this chapter shall maintain such landscaping in a reasonably healthy condition, free from refuse and debris. All unhealthy and dead material shall be replaced within one year of damage or death or the next appropriate planting period, whichever comes first. 
f.	Prohibited trees. Installation of the following trees to satisfy landscape ordinance requirements shall be strictly prohibited: 
All willow speciesSalix sp.Silver Maple (pure species only)Acer SacharinumBoxelderAcer negundoRussian OliveElaeagnus angustifoliaBuckthornRhamnus catharticaSiberian ElmUlmus pumilaBlack LocustRobinia psuedoacaciaPrickly AshZanthoxylum americanumTree of HeavenAilanthus altissimaMulberryMorus spNorway MapleAcer platanoides 
In addition to the trees noted above, other plants, shrubs and trees as may be determined by the township board by resolution from time to time to be inconsistent with the purpose of this chapter may also be prohibited. 
(10)	Minimum size and spacing requirements. Where landscaping is required, the schedule in section 46-387 sets forth minimum size and spacing requirements; for representative landscape materials. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 11.02(intro., (A)-(J)))
Sec. 46-387. - Size and spacing requirements. 
The following trees are representative:Minimum Size AllowableHeightCaliperTREES 6' 3'-4' 1.75" 2.5" Evergreen Trees Fir?Spruce?Pine?Hemlock?Douglas Fir?Narrow Evergreen Trees Red Cedar?Arborvitae?Juniper (selected varieties)?Large Deciduous Canopy Trees Oak?Maple?Beech?Linden?Ginko (male only)?Honeylocust (seedless, thornless)?Birch?Sycamore?Small Deciduous Ornamental Trees Flowering Dogwood?Flowering Cherry, Pear?Hawthorn?Redbud?Magnolia?Flowering Crabapple?Serviceberry?Hornbeam? 
The following shrubs are representative:Minimum Size AllowableHeight/SpreadSHRUBS 6' 3'-4' 24"-36" 18"-24" Evergreen Shrubs Pyramidal Yew?Hicks Yew?Brown and Wards Yew?Alberta Spruce?Chinensis Juniper Varieties?Sabina Juniper?Mugho Pine?Horizontal Juniper Varieties?Boxwood?Euonymous varieties?Deciduous Shrubs Honeysuckle?Lilac?Sumac?Pyracantha?Weigela?Flowering Quince?Dogwood?Viburnum varieties?Spirea?Fragrant Sumac?Potentilla? 
    Exceptions to requirements. 
(1)	Buildings abutting property lines. Required screening may be omitted along any lot line where a building wall exists immediately abutting the lot line. 
(2)	Location adjustments. Where property line screening is required, the location may be adjusted at the discretion of the planning commission so that the screening may be constructed at or within the setback line, provided the areas between the screening and the property lines are landscaped, or, in rural areas, retain their natural vegetative state. 
(3)	Existing screening. Any fence, screen, wall or hedge which does not conform to the provisions of this section and legally exists at the effective date of this chapter may be continued and maintained, provided there is no physical change other than necessary maintenance and repair in such fence, screen, wall, or hedge except as permitted in other sections of this chapter. 
(4)	Planning commission modification. Any of the requirements of this section may be waived or modified through site plan approval, provided the planning commission first makes a finding: 
a.	That the topographic features or special characteristics of the site create conditions so that the strict application of the provisions of this section will result in less effective screening and landscaping than alternative landscape designs. 
b.	That the public benefit intended to be secured by this section will exist with less than the required landscaping or screening. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 11.02(K))
Sec. 46-388. - Lake privileges. 
(a)	In all instances where any person is being extended the right to cross, use, share in the ownership of, or otherwise benefit from a parcel of land which is contiguous to a body of water whether said parcel is a common lot within a subdivision, a lot owned by a subdivision association, a recreational park bordering on said body of water, such parcel shall have at least 20 lineal feet of water frontage and 150 feet in depth for each single-family residence however, in no event shall any such parcel so created have less than 300 feet of water frontage. Further, and in no event, shall the launching of boats from any such parcel of land be permitted nor shall boats be allowed to dock on any such parcel. 
(b)	This section shall be constructed to apply to all uses of land abutting bodies of water other than those uses wherein the user the sole occupant of a structure on said parcel abutting said land, and/or those uses specifically permitted within districts other than residential within this chapter, for example, boat liveries or marinas, where permitted by the MDEQ. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 11.03)
Sec. 46-389. - Wetlands protection. 
(a)	No structure, septic tank, septic tank field, drain field, earth berm, earth structure, earth obstruction, or similar object or facility will be placed within 25 feet of any wetland as defined by Part 303 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.30301 et seq.). 
(b)	In addition, no earth movement, excavation, land balancing or earth disruption of any kind shall take place within 25 feet of any wetlands as defined by such Act as described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(1)	This prohibition shall not apply to boat docks, swimming docks, boathouses, boat lifts, or similar objects or facilities used to gain normal boating and swimming access to lakes, rivers or streams such structures shall be regulated by the MDEQ. 
(2)	This section shall not be construed so as to prevent normal lawn care, landscaping and maintenance within the prohibited setback area. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 11.04)
Sec. 46-390. - Drainage. 
    No person shall erect any dike, structure, building, earth berm, dam or other blockage which restricts or otherwise impairs the flow of water in any drainage ditch or along any normal surface course, nor shall any person remove any dam, dike, or preexisting structure, which structure precedes the passage of this chapter, so as to cause flooding, substantial diminution in lake level, or like effects, without a permit therefore from the department of building and planning. 
(1)	In the event an obstruction as defined above should be constructed or maintained which obstruction in the opinion of the director of planning and building causes or will cause flooding or damage, the director of planning and building shall order such obstruction removed by the owner of the land so as to provide free water flow therein, and should such owner deny or refuse removal, the director of planning and building may forthwith cause such obstruction to be removed. 
(2)	In the event any person should remove an existing dam or structure thereby allowing flooding or the diminution of lake levels or like effects, the director of planning and building shall order the dam or structure restored and should the owner deny or refuse such restoration, the director of planning and building may cause the dam or structure to be restored. 
(3)	This section shall not apply to the construction of platted subdivisions, site condominiums, commercial construction, or other like construction where there have been site plan approvals, plat approvals or like approval rendered by the township, which approvals include plans for grading and contouring the soil. 
(4)	An application for permit pursuant to this section shall be on a form prepared by the department of planning and building, and shall include the name of the owner in fee of the real estate, names of any persons holding any other interest in the real property, names of the persons in possession of the real property, and identification of the site and the planned construction, alteration or repair as well as the reason therefore, construction plans, and where required by the director of planning and building, a site plan, as well as a topographical map. The fee shall be in an amount as determined from time to time by the township board. 
(5)	Redirection or modification of existing natural or manmade drainage courses or drainage patterns that result in increased rates of flow and/or volume of water run-off onto neighboring properties or public and private roads, without the expressed written consent of the neighboring property owner and township is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 11.05)
Sec. 46-391. - Woodlands preservation. 
(a)	This section is enacted in recognition of the fact that flora and fauna are necessary to the ecological system within which we all live, and that, as a result, the protection of flora and fauna, and their maintenance or replacement are necessary to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of township, and further that such flora and fauna are natural resources, the protection of which is likewise necessary to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of township, this section is enacted. 
(b)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Develop or development means any timbering operation, tree removal or the removal of flora from any undeveloped parcel, other than as permitted by the exceptions contained in this section. Topographical change on any undeveloped parcel, earth moving on any undeveloped parcel, or like activity of any kind with regard to any undeveloped parcel, shall also be considered to be development. 
    Flora means the trees and plant life characteristic to the township. 
    Survey or woodlands survey means a review of the extent and nature of the flora on a parcel in the township, with recommendations concerning the maintenance, removal or replacement of such flora, as performed by a landscape architect registered by the state. 
    Tree means a woody perennial plant having a single elongated main stem generally with few or no branches on its lower part and over six feet tall, measured from the ground immediately adjacent the trunk or main stem. 
    Undeveloped means any parcel of land which is substantially unimproved. With respect to land which, on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, is partially improved by virtue of a building or buildings or other improvements located on a portion of the land, the portion of the land which does not contain the building or buildings or other improvements shall be considered undeveloped. Farmland, whether or not it is being currently farmed, shall be considered undeveloped. 
    Woodlands means any tree or stand of trees of any nature whatsoever and the flora naturally attendant to such tree or stand of trees. 
(c)	No person of any nature whatsoever shall develop any parcel in township without first providing a survey of the woodlands located on such parcel pursuant to this section. 
(d)	When any person of any nature whatsoever makes application for subdivision plat approval, site condominium approval, multiple housing approval (whether for apartments or condominiums), commercial development, or any other development, such application shall include an application to the township, for a woodlands survey. Such application shall contain an aerial photograph, a topographical map, a boundary survey, and one inch equals 200 feet scale, together with such other information as may be required by the director of planning and building, and the applicant shall escrow an amount estimated by such director to be the fee that will be charged by the township landscape architect for the compilation of such survey, as well as for the balance of the work on the project. 
(e)	Upon receiving the application, the director shall forthwith forward such application to the township's designated landscape architect, together with such support material as the director has received, and together with a request directed to such landscape architect to conduct such survey. The director shall be excused from making such request of the landscape architect until all materials requested by the director has been provided by the developer. The landscape architect shall complete such survey which shall contain the landscape architect's recommendations, within 30 days of such request. 
(f)	In developments involving four or less single-family homesites, or involving less than 11 acres, whichever is the smaller, or in developments in which there are less than 20 trees within the boundaries of the development, the developer may, at the developer's option, prepare a survey of the woodlands at developer's expense and submit the same to the director of planning and building. Such survey shall be in a form satisfactory to the director. Upon receipt, the director of planning and building may, at the director's option, review the survey and view the parcel in question and make a determination concerning whether or not a more comprehensive survey should be required. The director may, in the director's discretion, accept the developer's survey in such instances, and permit the development to proceed. The director shall, however, have the absolute discretion to determine that additional survey information is needed, and the director may, in that instance, require that participation of the township landscape architect in the same manner as required in subsections (d) and (e) of this section. 
(g)	In conducting the survey of the woodlands, the landscape architect shall determine whether or not there are any unique trees, unique stands of trees, specimen trees or unique woodland characteristics. The landscape architect shall determine how the project can best proceed in accordance with the development plans of the developer, while at the same time preserving to the maximum possible extent the existing woodlands, and other flora. The landscape architect shall then recommend a program of development to the township, which program shall be designed so as to permit the developer to develop the project in accordance with the developer's plans, so long as such plan is reasonable, and so long as a reasonable preservation of the flora can be obtained. In making such recommendation, the landscape architect may recommend the new plantings or the creation of additional sites of enhanced or improved flora be used to replace flora that will be removed through the course of the development. In the case of mitigation, the landscape architect shall recommend the type, location and manner of planting and maintenance of the replacement. 
(1)	It is not intended that the survey required by this section be a tree count. Rather, it is intended that the survey be of a more general nature, intended to maintain, and where possible improve the ecological balance. 
(2)	It is not intended that emphasis be placed on the preservation of mature trees. Rather, it is recognized that the evolutionary characteristics of the environment require that mature trees eventually be replaced by new growth. Accordingly, in the landscape architect's recommendations, mature trees shall be treated on balance with the rest of the eco-system and the landscape architect may recommend the harvesting of such trees and their replacement. 
(3)	In those instances where it is determined by the landscape architect that the application is for tree harvesting, and that the harvesting is in keeping with good forestry management practice, the harvesting shall be permitted with or without mitigation as recommended by the landscape architect and determined by the planning commission. Later applications for the development of such parcel may be denied contingent upon tree replacement. 
(4)	In providing for mitigation, the landscape architect may recommend the replacement of mature trees with new plantings or young trees. He also may recommend more or less than a one for one mitigation ratio, depending on the particular facts. He may also recommend off-site mitigation with the approval of the developer. Any such recommendation must be explained and justified in the report. 
(5)	In conducting the survey, the landscape architect shall apply the following general standards; such standards shall be general in nature and the application of the standards shall not require counting or measuring trees: 
a.	Desirable species: Hard Maple, Red Maple, Soft Maple, Elm, Oak species, Hickory, Sycamore, Walnut, Butternut, Beech, Birch, Basswood, Chestnut, Tulip, Pine, Hemlock, Cedar, Balsam, Spruce. 
b.	Undesirable species: Boxelder, Poplar, Catalpa, Willow, Domestic Fruit Trees, Ailanthus, Black Locust, Wild Cherry. 
c.	Desirable species in good condition save if possible, or require mitigation.
d.	Undesirable species or desirable species in only fair condition require partial mitigation.
e.	Desirable or undesirable species that are in poor condition or dead remove under any condition. 
(h)	When the survey has been completed, the landscape architect shall forward it to the director, and the director shall in turn forward the survey to the developer, and to the planning commission. The planning commission shall, at its next meeting, review the landscape architect's recommendations, and determine whether or not to accept or reject such recommendations. The developer may, in the developer's sole discretion, be present at such meeting. A public hearing shall not be necessary but may be called by the planning commission upon majority vote. If it is determined to hold a public hearing, it shall be held at the next available planning commission meeting. The planning commission may either adopt the survey or return the survey to the landscape architect for additional input, modification or comment. In the event of such referral, the landscape architect shall return the survey to the commission with such additions within 15 days of the date of referral. 
(i)	Once the planning commission has adopted a survey, the survey shall become a requirement of the development subject to the right of the developer to object. If a developer determines to object to the survey the developer shall have 30 days, which 30 days may be extended at the request of the developer only, within which to submit the basis for objection to the planning commission. The planning commission shall not consider opinions or objections that are not supported by substantial material and competent evidence as supplied by landscape architects, engineers, or like professionals within the field of environmental development, maintenance and control. 
(j)	Should the planning commission determine to adopt recommendations as made by the developer, the planning commission shall then forward such recommendations to the township landscape architect for adoption and inclusion in the survey as developed by the township landscape architect. The township landscape architect shall then rewrite the survey including the changes as adopted as a result of the developer's objections, and including such additional comments or recommendations as the landscape architect may have, and return the survey to the planning commission. The township landscape architect shall complete such additions, modifications, and the like, within 30 days of the submission to him of the changes by the planning commission. The amended survey when received by the planning commission shall then be the woodlands survey which shall be applicable to the parcel. The cost of such amendments shall be paid by the developer. 
(k)	Prior to the development of the parcel, the planning commission shall determine what, if any, escrow or letter of credit shall be deposited with the township to assure compliance with the forestry plan. Development shall not begin until any such requirement has been complied with. 
(l)	The following are exempt from the application of this section:
(1)	Single-family residences, or lots which are intended to house one single residence only, except when part of a larger development. 
(2)	Commercial nurseries or tree farms when such commercial nurseries or tree farms have been properly licensed by the state. 
(3)	Responses to flooding, fire or like emergency.
(4)	The normal tree trimming, removal, and the like, when performed by governmental agencies and public utilities. 
(5)	The removal of dead or damaged trees or normal cleaning and pruning activity within a wooded area when such activity does not include the removal of healthy trees other than year old saplings or the like. 
(6)	Tree management programs, and like programs, including park development, on lands owned by the state, or one of its agencies. 
(7)	Farming, when such farming is the normal pursuit of agricultural endeavors as typically carried on in township. 
(8)	Classified wetlands that are to be left undisturbed.
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 11.06)
State Law reference- Municipal forests, MCL 324.52701 et seq. 
Sec. 46-392. - Impact assessment. 
    Impact assessments shall be required as provided as follows: 
(1)	Purpose and scope. For the purpose of promoting and protecting the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants and land resources of the township, provision is made herein prior to submission of a rezoning petition, plat application, or site plan review request for any office, commercial, industrial, multiple-family residential use; an applicant shall file with the township for his review and acceptance, an assessment of the economic, public service, public facility and ecological impact. 
(2)	Procedures for making application. All submissions of the impact assessments for any lands or uses shall be submitted in accordance with this section 
(3)	Impact assessments submitted to planning commission. All impact assessments shall be submitted through the township director of the planning and building department or designee to the planning commission. 
(4)	Data required in impact assessment. All assessments shall be accompanied by the required information and data as noted as follows: 
a.	Full legal and environmental description of the proposed site prior to development.
b.	Impact of the development on the environment including impact on human life or other ecosystems such as wildlife, fish, aquatic life and air, water, or land resources. 
c.	Possible adverse environmental effects of the development, which cannot be avoided, such as air or water pollution, damage to life systems, urban congestion, threats to health or other adverse effects on human life. 
d.	Evaluation of alternatives to the proposed action of the development that might avoid some or all of the environmental effects indicated in subsection (4)b. and c of this section. This shall include a full explanation of the reasons why the developer decided to pursue the action in its contemplated form rather than an alternative course of action. 
e.	Possible modifications to the project which would eliminate or minimize the adverse environmental effects, including a discussion of the additional costs involved in the modifications. 
(5)	The impact assessment shall include a full description of the development carried to completion including: 
a.	A number of people to be housed (or employed) and the amount of acreage involved in the development. 
b.	The level of public services and public facilities required including estimated costs for the availability of sanitary sewers and treatment facilities, water services, storm sewers, and new agricultural drains, public sewers, recreational facilities, public access, solid waste disposal, schools, police and fire protection and other public facilities and services. 
c.	The amount of pedestrian or vehicular traffic likely to be generated.
d.	The likelihood that additional or subsidiary development will be generated.
(6)	The impact assessment shall include a sketch plan, drawn to scale, depicting the project carried to completion showing existing and proposed features of a site and its surroundings. The sketch plan shall include at least the following: 
a.	General topographic conditions at two-foot contours.
b.	Soil conditions.
c.	Water level and drainage information.
d.	Existing and proposed manmade features (park, lake, pond, etc.).
e.	Natural features to be retained and/or modified.
f.	Phases of the development.
g.	General site conditions.
(7)	The impact assessment shall include supporting documentation that the proposed development is consistent with local, township and county master plans and zoning. 
(8)	The impact assessment shall include supporting documentation of the proposed developments probable impact on the economy of the region. 
(9)	The completed impact assessment, as presented, shall be signed by the fee holder and developer of the affected property. 
(10)	Review by the planning commission. The planning commission shall review the impact assessment as presented in the terms of the established standard set in this section. The planning commission shall have 45 days from the date of filing to review and make its recommendation on the impact assessment. The planning commission may recommend changes to the developer to minimize adverse impact. 
(11)	Date of filing. The date of filing shall, for all purposes, be considered to be 30 days prior to the regular planning commission meeting date of any month. 
(12)	Additional data. Additional data and information may be required to be submitted with the impact assessment upon the recommendation of the planning commission or enforcement office for the protection of the general safety and welfare and for ensuring that the intent and objectives of this section will be observed. 
(13)	Acceptance. Upon finding that the impact acceptance satisfactorily fulfills all requirements set forth in this section, the township director of planning and building shall issue a statement of acceptance and copy of minutes, to the fee holder and developer of the affected property. 
(14)	Rejection. Upon finding that the impact assessment fails to fulfill all requirements as set forth in this section the planning commission shall issue a statement of rejection, detailing the reasons for such rejection and a copy of minutes to the applicant and property owner of the affected property. 
(15)	Basis of determination. The applicant shall establish, to the satisfaction of the planning commission, that the general standards specified and the specific standards outlined in each applicable section and subsection of this chapter shall be satisfied in the completion of the impact assessment. 
(16)	Qualifications. All impact assessments must be sealed by a registered professional engineer (PE) or registered landscape architect (RLA) licensed in the state. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 11.07)
Sec. 46-393. - Removal of soil deposits not including operations. 
(a)	Removal or excavation of topsoil, sand, soil, peat, minerals, or any disturbance of the natural terrain, topography, and/or soil conditions, including the construction of scenic ponds, unless excepted by this section, shall require site plan approval. All requests for incidental removal of soil deposits unless excepted by this section shall be reviewed and approved by the township planning commission. Within 30 days from the date of the completion of the submission pursuant to subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the director of the planning and building department shall submit a report to the planning commission detailing requested project. At a regular meeting, the planning commission, after reviewing the report, may in its sole discretion direct the planning and building director to approve the project request, or require further review as prescribed in subsection (d) of this section. 
(b)	Applicants requiring the approval of a project hereunder shall submit a site plan pursuant to article II, division 2 of this chapter. Where applicable, such application may include an application for special use approval pursuant to article II, division 3 of this chapter. Such application and approval may be incident to the approval of a principal project, which project involves removal, excavation, or disturbance of soil as controlled hereby. 
(c)	In addition to the normal site plan requirements, the application shall include the following: 
(1)	Overall project size.
(2)	Projected number of yards of material to be removed.
(3)	Type and description of material to be removed.
(4)	Method of removal, including a description of the equipment and vehicles that will be used. 
(5)	Projected commencement and completion time.
(6)	Hours of operations.
(7)	Finished plan including all final grades, ground cover and drainage control plans.
(8)	The planning commission, in its discretion, may require an impact assessment in accordance with article II, division 2 of this chapter. 
(d)	The planning commission shall require a special land use pursuant to article II, division 2 of this chapter. 
(1)	Removal of soil deposits from property shall be allowed when such soil removal is required to facilitate the completion of an approved project, the purpose of which is not soil removal, when such removal is incident to such approved project, and of insignificant impact as determined by the planning and building department and/or the planning commission. 
(2)	Should the planning and building department and/or the planning commission determine that the soil removal is of significant impact, in granting or denying the permit, the planning and building department and the planning commission shall apply those standards as set forth in this chapter. 
(e)	The following types of projects shall be excepted from the requirements of this section:
(1)	The removal, excavation, or disturbance of soil where such activities are required to facilitate the completion of a site plan approved by the planning commission, and where such removal, excavation, or disturbance is within the normal purview of the project as approved. 
(2)	Removal, excavation, or disturbance of the soil when such is a normal result of a permitted use within the zoning district in which the property is located, and the person removing, excavation, or otherwise disturbing the soil is lawfully engaging in that permitted use. 
(3)	Landscaping is a permitted use of the property where such landscaping would not otherwise require a permit. 
(4)	Removal and excavation of soil from properties to permit the construction of swimming pools, scenic ponds, and land balancing activities where such activities disturb one-half acre or less and within required setbacks pursuant to the zoning district in which the property is located. Contiguous or near contiguous sites which, when combined, exceed one-half acre in size shall be regulated hereby where such activity occurs within a three-year period. The director shall have discretion in determining whether or not a project requires a permit. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 11.08)
Secs. 46-394-46-414. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Natural resources and environmental protection act, MCL 324.101 et seq.

Sec. 46-415. - Purpose. 
    Environmental performance regulations are established in order to preserve the short- and long-term environmental health, safety, and quality of the township. No parcel, lot, building or structure in any district shall be used or occupied in any manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable element or condition so as to adversely affect the surrounding area or adjoining premises. Any use permitted by this chapter may be undertaken and maintained if acceptable measures and safeguards are employed to limit dangerous and objectionable elements to acceptable limits as established by the following performance standards. No use, otherwise allowed, shall be permitted within any district which does not conform to the following regulations of use, occupancy, and operation. These regulations are established as minimum requirements to be maintained. Nothing contained herein is intended to restrict farming operations in accordance with the Michigan right to farm act, Public Act No. 93 of 1981 (MCL 286.471 et seq.). 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 12.01)
Sec. 46-416. - Airborne emissions. 
(a)	Smoke and air contaminants. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the emission of any smoke or air contaminant from any source whatsoever to a density greater than that permitted by Federal Clean Air Standards and those standards promulgated by the state. 
(b)	Odors. Any condition or operation which results in the creation of odors of such intensity and character as to be detrimental to the health and welfare of public or which interferes unreasonably with the comfort of the public shall be removed, stopped, or so modified as to remove the odor. 
(c)	Gases. The escape or emission of any gas which is injurious or destructive, harmful to person or property, or explosive shall be unlawful and shall be abated. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 12.02)
Sec. 46-417. - Noise. 
(a)	The following standards shall apply to all uses in all zoning districts with the exception of single-family and multiple-family dwellings located within residential districts. Noise which is objectionable as determined by the township due to volume, frequency, or beat shall be muffled, attenuated, or otherwise controlled, subject to the following schedule of maximum noise levels permitted: 
Octave Band in Cycles
per SecondAlong Residential District Boundaries-Maximum Permitted Sound Level in DecibelsAlong All Nonresidential District Boundaries-Maximum Permitted Sound Level in Decibels0 to 1507070150 to 3006066300 to 6005260600 to 1,20046 531,200 to 2,40040 47above 2,40034 41  
(b)	In addition, objectionable sounds of an intermittent nature, or sounds characterized by high frequencies, even if falling below the aforementioned decibel readings, shall be so controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses. 
(c)	Air-raid sirens and related apparatus used solely for public purposes are exempt from this requirement. Noise resulting from temporary construction activity shall also be exempt from this requirement. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 12.03)
Sec. 46-418. - Vibration. 
(a)	No use shall generate any ground-transmitted vibration in excess of the limits set forth in subsection (d) of this section. Vibration shall be measured at the nearest adjacent lot line. 
(b)	The instrument used to measure vibrations shall be a three-compartment measuring system capable of simultaneous measurement of vibration in three mutually perpendicular directions. 
(c)	The vibration maximums set forth in subsection (d) of this section are stated in terms of particle velocity, which may be measured directly with suitable instrumentation or computed on the basis of displacement and frequency. When computed, the following formula shall be used: 
PV = 6.28 F × D 
Where: 
PV = Particle velocity, inches per second 
F = Vibration frequency, cycles per second 
D = Single amplitude displacement of the vibration in inches 
The maximum velocity shall be the vector sum of the three components recorded. 
(d)	Table of Maximum Ground-Transmitted Vibration.
Particle Velocity, Inches Per SecondAlong Nonresidential
District BoundariesAlong Residential
District Boundaries0.100.02 
(e)	The values stated in subsection (d) of this section may be multiplied by two for impact vibrations (i.e., noncyclic vibration pulsations not exceeding one second in duration and having a pause of at least two seconds between pulses). 
(f)	Vibrations resulting from temporary construction activity shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 12.04)
Sec. 46-419. - Use, storage and handling of hazardous substances. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to pollute, impair or destroy the air, water, soils or other natural resources within the township through the use, storage and handling of hazardous substances and/or wastes or the storage and disposal of solid, liquid, gaseous and/or sanitary wastes. 
(b)	Any person operating a business or conducting an activity which uses stores or generates hazardous substances shall obtain the appropriate permits or approval from the state, and/or other designated enforcing agencies. 
(c)	Any person operating a business or conducting an activity which uses stores or generates hazardous substances or petroleum products shall complete a hazardous chemicals survey and a pollution incidence protection plan (PIPP) in conjunction with the following: 
(1)	Upon submission of a site plan.
(2)	Upon any change of use or occupancy of a structure or premises.
(3)	Upon any change of the manner in which such substances are handled, and/or in the event of a change in the type of substances to be handled. 
(d)	All businesses and facilities which use, store, or generate hazardous substances in quantities greater than 100 kilograms per month (equal to or greater than 25 gallons or 220 pounds shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)	Aboveground storage and use areas for hazardous substances.
a.	Secondary containment of hazardous substances and polluting materials shall be provided. Secondary containment shall be sufficient to store the substance for the maximum anticipated period of time necessary for the recovery of any released substance. 
b.	Outdoor storage of hazardous substances and polluting materials shall be prohibited except in product-tight containers which are protected from weather, leakage, accidental damage and vandalism. 
c.	Secondary containment structures such as out buildings, storage rooms, sheds and pole barns shall not have floor drains which outlet to soils, groundwater, or nearby drains or rivers. 
d.	Areas and facilities for loading/unloading of hazardous substances, as well as areas where such materials are handled and used, shall be designated and constructed to prevent discharge or runoff to floor drains, rivers, lakes, wetlands, groundwater, or soils. 
(2)	Underground storage tanks.
a.	Existing and new underground storage tanks shall be registered with the authorized state agency in accordance with requirements of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the state police fire marshal division. 
b.	Installation, operation, maintenance, closure, and removal of underground storage tanks shall be in accordance with requirements of the state police fire marshal and township. Leak detection, corrosion protection, spill prevention and overfill protection requirements shall be met. Records of monthly monitoring or inventory control must be retained and available for review by state or local officials. 
c.	Out-of-service abandoned underground tanks shall be emptied and removed from the ground in accordance with the requirements of the state police fire marshal division, the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, and the township. 
(3)	Loading and unloading areas. Areas used for the loading and unloading of hazardous substances shall be designed and constructed to prevent the harmful release to the environment of hazardous materials which may be spilled or leaked. 
(e)	All site plans for businesses or facilities which use, store or generate hazardous substances shall be reviewed by the township fire department, township engineer and any other appropriate experts determined necessary by the planning commission prior to approval by the planning commission. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 12.05)
Sec. 46-420. - Electrical disturbance, electromagnetic, or radio frequency interference. 
    No use shall: 
(1)	Create any electrical disturbance that adversely affects any operation or equipment other than those of the creator of such disturbance. 
(2)	Cause, create, or contribute to the interference with electronic signals (including television and radio broadcasting transmission) to the extent that the operation of any equipment not owned by the creator of such disturbance is adversely affected. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 12.06)
Sec. 46-421. - Glare and exterior lighting. 
(a)	Glare from any process (such as or similar to arc welding or acetylene torch cutting) which emits harmful ultraviolet rays shall be performed in such a manner as not to be seen from any point beyond the property line, and as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines. 
(b)	The design and/or screening of the development shall ensure that glare from automobile and commercial or industrial vehicle headlights shall not be directed into any adjacent property, particularly residential property. 
(c)	Exterior lighting shall be located and maintained to prevent the reflection and glare of light in a manner which creates a nuisance or safety hazard to operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians, and neighboring land uses. This provision is not intended to apply to public street lighting. Any operation, which produces intense glare or heat, shall be conducted within an enclosure so as to completely obscure and shield such operation from direct view form any point along the lot lines. If heat is a result of an industrial operation, it shall be so insulated as to not raise the temperature at any property line at any time. 
(d)	Exterior doors shall be located, operated, and maintained so as to prevent any glare and light from creating a nuisance or safety hazard to operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians, and neighboring land uses. 
(e)	On-site lighting (i.e., parking, building lights, etc.) shall conform to the following regulations: 
(1)	It is the goal of the township to minimize lighting levels to reduce off-site impacts, prevent the reflection and glare of light in a manner which creates a nuisance or safety hazard to operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians, and neighboring land uses, and to promote "dark skies" in keeping with the rural character of township. 
(2)	When site plan review is required, all lighting, including signage and ornamental lighting, shall be shown on site plans in sufficient detail with appropriate photometric studies to allow determination of the effects of such lighting upon adjacent properties, traffic safety, and overhead sky glow. The objectives of these specific actions are to minimize undesirable on-site effects. 
(3)	Only nonglare, color-corrected lighting shall be permitted. For all nonresidential uses, full cutoff shades are required for light sources so as to direct the light onto the site and away from adjoining properties. The light source shall be recessed into the fixture so as not to be visible from off site. Building and pole-mounted fixtures shall be parallel to the ground. Wall-pak type lighting shall be prohibited. 
(4)	Lighting for uses adjacent to residentially zoned or used property shall be designed and maintained such that illumination levels do not exceed one-tenth footcandles along property lines. Lighting for uses adjacent to nonresidential properties shall be designed and maintained such that illumination levels do not exceed three-tenths footcandles along property lines. Where lighting is required, maximum light levels shall not exceed 25 footcandles directly beneath a light fixture. Lighting levels shall not exceed three footcandles as measured directly between two fixtures. The planning commission may allow for an increased level of lighting above maximum permissible levels when it determines that the applicant has demonstrated that such lighting is necessary for safety and security purposes. For the purposes of this chapter, all lighting measurements shall be taken at ground level. 
(5)	For parking lots of less than 100 parking spaces, lighting fixtures shall not exceed a height of 16 feet measured from the ground level to the centerline of the light source. For parking lots of more than 100 spaces, lighting fixtures shall not exceed a height of 18 feet measured from the ground level to the centerline of the light source. 
(6)	Signs shall be illuminated only in accordance with the regulations set forth in this chapter. In addition, signs within residential districts shall not be illuminated. 
(7)	Building or roof-mounted lighting intended to attract attention to the building and/or use and not strictly designed for security purposes shall not be permitted. 
(8)	Subdivision or site condominium street lighting is not permitted. The township planning commission may allow for street lighting when the applicant has demonstrated a need for such lighting. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 12.07)
Sec. 46-422. - Fire hazard. 
    Any activity involving the use or storage of flammable or explosive materials shall be protected by adequate firefighting and fire suppression equipment and such safety devices as are normally used in the handling of any such material. Such hazards shall be kept removed from adjacent activities to a distance which is compatible with the potential danger involved. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 12.08)
Sec. 46-423. - Safety. 
    Existing hazards or potential hazards and nuisances, such as construction sites, junkyards, landfills, sanitary landfills, demolition sites, unused basements, abandoned wells or cisterns and sand, gravel, and stone pits or piles are to be enclosed by suitable fencing or barriers so as not to endanger public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 12.09)
Secs. 46-424-46-444. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - SIGNS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Highway advertising act, MCL 252.301 et seq.

Sec. 46-445. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)	It is the intent of this article to ensure the effective use of signs as a means of communication in the township; to maintain and enhance the esthetic environment; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety; to minimize the adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property; and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign restrictions. This article is intended to allow a variety of types of signs in commercial and industrial zones, a limited variety of signs in other zones, and other incidental signs. 
(b)	In the application of this chapter, it is the intent to protect the public welfare and to enhance the appearance and economic value of the landscape by providing that signs: 
(1)	Do not add to or create visual clutter.
(2)	Do not create a nuisance to persons using the public right-of-way.
(3)	Do not constitute a nuisance to occupancy of nearby property by their brightness, size, height, or movement. 
(4)	Are not detrimental to land or property values.
(c)	A sign may be established or maintained in the township only in conformance with the standards, procedures, exemptions, and other requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 13.01)
Sec. 46-446. - Sign regulations. 
(a)	General prohibitions. 
(1)	No billboards or off-premises signs may be erected within the township except those meeting the requirements specified in section 46-420. Other signs must advertise a business or service on the premises on which the sign is located. 
(2)	In no case shall any sign be illuminated by any open spark or flame. Reflectors, lights and other forms of illumination shall be permitted but no signs or any part thereof shall move nor shall the illumination thereof be anything other than a steady, continuously burning bulb or component part thereof is prohibited. In no case shall any sign illumination exceed a level of illumination of one-tenth footcandles when measured from the nearest or adjacent residential zoned or used property line, or adjacent nonresidential zoned property line. 
(3)	No sign shall be illuminated by other than electrical devices and wiring shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the National Electrical Code. All electrically illuminated signs shall be certified as to wiring and devices by the electrical inspector and all wiring and accessory electrical equipment shall conform to the requirements of the National Electrical Code. 
(4)	No nails, tacks or wires shall be permitted to protrude from the front of any sign. This shall not exclude, however, the use of block letters, electrical reflectors, or other devices which may extend over the top and in front of the advertising structure. 
(5)	Unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, no sign shall be erected or placed in the public right-of-way nor be allowed to project further than 18 inches into the public right-of-way, provided the lower edge thereof is ten feet or more above the ground level; provided further that a sign shall not extend over any part of the public right-of-way used for vehicular traffic. The owner of any sign which has been removed from the right-of-way in violation of this provision shall pay to the township a violation fee approved by the township board before recovering said sign. If any sign is not claimed within 30 days, it shall be destroyed. 
(6)	No sign shall be erected at the intersection of any street in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision at any location where, by reason of the position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device or which makes use of the words, "Stop," "Look," "Danger" or any word, phrase, symbol or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. Nor shall any sign, signal, marking or device be placed, erected or operated in such a manner as to interfere with the necessary free and unobstructed view of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(7)	No sign shall be permitted to corrode, rust, peel, breakup or otherwise reach a state of disrepair that creates an unsightly or dangerous condition, and any such sign must be removed within ten days after notice thereof. 
(b)	Specifically prohibited signs. 
(1)	Beacons.
(2)	Pennants.
(3)	Portable signs.
(4)	Inflatable signs and tethered balloons.
(5)	Animated signs, including signs containing flashing, intermittent or moving lights or with moving or revolving parts. This provision is not intended to exclude those signs which gave the time or temperature, provided no other animated messages are displayed. 
(5)	Signs affixed to trees, rocks, shrubs or natural features, except signs denoting a site of historic significance may be allowed. 
(6)	Permanent signs (other than those erected by a public agency) which are located within or overhang the public right-of-way or on public property unless specified elsewhere in these regulations. 
(7)	Any strobe, flashing, or oscillating lights either from the interior or exterior of a building. 
(8)	Moving signs. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no sign or any portion thereof shall be permitted which moves or assumes any motion constituting a non stationary or fixed condition except for the rotation of barber poles, and except currently licensed vehicles and trailers which have painted upon them in a permanent manner the name of the product which they deliver and/or the name and address of the owner. 
(9)	Abandoned signs. Signs that advertise an activity, business, product or service no longer conducted or available on the premises on which the sign is located are prohibited. 
(10)	Signs which emit audible sound, odor or visible matter.
(11)	Exterior string lights used to advertise commercial premises.
(12)	Any sign erected on a tree or utility pole except signs of any election subdivision of this state. 
(13)	Awning signs with rear illumination.
(14)	Portable signs held by persons engaged, interalia, for the purpose of carrying such signs on a public way or waiving such signs to attract attention from any roadway. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 13.02)
Sec. 46-447. - General conditions. 
(a)	Location. All signs must direct attention to a business or profession conducted on the premises or to a commodity, service, or entertainment primarily sold, offered, manufactured, processed, or fabricated thereon unless specified elsewhere in these regulations. 
(b)	Illumination. 
(1)	The light from illuminated signs shall be directed in a manner that will not interfere with vehicular traffic or with the enjoyment or use of adjacent properties, nor directly shine onto adjacent or abutting properties. 
(2)	No sign shall have blinking, flashing, or fluttering lights or other illuminating devices which have a changing intensity, brightness or color, or which are so constructed and operated as to create an appearance or illusion of writing, printing or moving graphics, except that static message movement showing the date, the time and the temperature or where the color, brightness, intensity, static message or any part of the sign changes no less than every five minutes may be permitted. 
(3)	No exposed reflective type bulbs and no strobe lights or incandescent lamps shall be used on the exterior surface of any sign as to expose the face of the bulb, light or lamp to any public street or adjacent property. 
(4)	The illumination provisions above shall not apply to sign lighting systems owned or controlled by any public agency for the purpose of directing traffic. 
(5)	Neon lighting is prohibited outside of the sign structure and shall not be permitted as accent lighting along a building wall or window. 
(6)	Awning signs shall not be "back lit."
(c)	Exempt from permits. 
(1)	Incidental signs which are intended to direct the flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic on private property. Incidental signs shall not exceed two square feet in area per side and four feet in height, shall contain no advertising and may be illuminated. 
(2)	Signs erected for traffic safety purposes by public road agencies.
(3)	Federal, state, county, or local required signs on private property.
(4)	Real estate signs subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(5)	Changing of advertising copy or message on a theater marquee or similar approved signs which are specifically designed for the use of replaceable copy. 
(6)	Painting, repainting, cleaning, and other normal maintenance and repair of a sign or any sign structure unless a structural change is made. 
(7)	Integral signs, not to exceed a maximum area of six square feet.
(8)	Authorized signs of the state or an election subdivision of the state.
(9)	Flags bearing the official design of a nation, state, municipality, educational, institution, church, fraternal organization, or branch of military. Flags bearing the official seal or emblem of a company or corporation including related graphics. Zone lots shall be limited to four of the above flags. When the site plan review is required, the location of flag poles shall be indicated on the site plan and shall meet the minimum 15-foot setback required for all signs to adjacent property lines. Flags shall be limited to 40 square feet each. 
(10)	Permanent signs on vending machines or ice containers indicating only the contents of such devices and no commercial message provided that such devices must be located within ten feet of the building. 
(11)	Business signs containing information on credit cards, business affiliations, hours of operation, open/closed, etc. The combined area of all such signs shall not exceed four square feet and shall be included in the maximum window coverage calculation. 
(12)	Election signs subject o the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 13.03; Ord. No. 145-12, 5-7-2012)
Sec. 46-448. - Ground signs. 
(a)	General requirements. 
(1)	Within all nonresidential zoning districts, only one ground sign shall be permitted per zoning lot. If a second street frontage on the same zoning lot exceeds 200 feet or a parcel of land abuts three or more streets, two such ground signs may be permitted on separate street fronts. Sign size, number of signs, and location shall be finalized during site plan review. Maximum size area is provided in "Table A" found in subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)	Within all residential zoning districts, only one ground sign shall be permitted at the primary entrance for the purpose of identifying a subdivision, site condominium, multiple family development, or mobile home park. 
(3)	Within all residential zoning districts, only one ground sign shall be permitted per zoning lot for the purpose of identifying a nonresidential special land use. One additional ground sign may be permitted at a secondary entrance if it is not located on the same street as the primary entrance. Size and location shall be determined during site plan review. Maximum area is provided in "Table A" in subsection (b) of this section. 
(4)	One freestanding identification sign stating the name of a business center and major tenants therein may be erected for a shopping center, office park, industrial park or other integrated group of stores, commercial buildings, office buildings or industrial buildings. The sign area shall not exceed one square foot per front foot of building or buildings for which it is erected; however, such signs shall not exceed 100 square feet in area. Such signs may be up to eight feet in height. If the lot fronts on three or more collector or arterial streets one additional sign may be permitted. 
(5)	Within all PUD districts, the number and size and location of ground signs shall be determined by the intended use of the premises, subject to the review and approval of the township during PUD plan review. 
(6)	All ground signs shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from all road rights-of-way and shall be located no closer than 15 feet from the edge of the principal entrance driveway and all property lines. 
(7)	The support structure for a ground sign shall not exceed 25 percent of the maximum permissible area of the sign measured by viewing the elevation of the sign perpendicular to the sign face, unless otherwise approved during the site plan review process. 
(8)	Up to two incidental business signs (menu boards) shall be permitted for businesses with a drive-through component. Such signs shall not exceed 15 square feet in the area per sign, per face or six feet in height and shall be located only on internal drives to serve the drive-thru portion of the development. 
(b)	Maximum height and area. Maximum height and area requirements for ground signs shall be applied within each zoning district according to the following schedule. The maximum height and area for ground signs within business centers are pursuant to subsection (4) of this section: 
Table A - Ground Signs 
DistrictMax. Height (feet)Maximum Area (square feet)Per SideTotalRE62040 R-1A62040 R-1B62040 RM62040 RMH62040 C-1850100C-2850100C-3850100C-4850100I832 64TIO832 64REC62040  
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 13.04; Ord. No. 143-12, 2-6-2012)
Sec. 46-449. - Building signs. 
(a)	General requirements. 
(1)	Within all nonresidential zoning districts, a combination of building signs may be established not to exceed the maximum sign area per "Table B" for each zoning lot (for a single business). Signs for multiple-tenant shopping centers or multitenant buildings shall not exceed one square foot of sign area per one lineal foot of building frontage per tenant. In addition, multiple-tenant buildings shall be permitted external one wall directory sign, intended to identify all of the building occupants. The total area of this directory sign shall not exceed 12 square feet, with each tenant limited to one square foot. This sign shall be nonilluminated and shall be mounted on the entrance door or on the wall next to the entrance. 
(2)	Within all PUD districts, the number and size of wall signs shall be determined by the intended use of the premises, subject to the review and approval of the township, during PUD plan review. 
(3)	One projecting sign may be permitted for each first-floor business within the township. The projecting sign may be a maximum of 32 square feet in area (each side) and shall be included in the total amount of signs permitted for the subject building. Changeable copy shall not be permitted as a part of projecting signs. Projecting signs must provide a clear distance of eight feet from the sidewalk or private drive or parking lot to the bottom edge of the sign. Projecting signs may extend over abutting sidewalk, but shall not extend over public or private roadways, or parking areas unless approved by the township as a part of the sign permit. The leading edge of a projecting sign shall not extend more than nine feet from the face of the building that it is attached to. The maximum height of a projecting sign shall be 15 feet from the street to highest part of the sign. 
(4)	Placement limitations. No wall sign shall cover wholly or partially any wall opening. No wall sign shall be erected to extend above the top of the wall to which it is attached, nor extend beyond the ends of the wall to which it is attached unless it complies with all of the requirements for roof signs, projecting signs, or ground signs as the case may be. 
(b)	Maximum area. Maximum area requirements for building signs shall be applied within each zoning district according to the following schedule: 
DistrictArea (Square Feet) per One Foot of Building FrontageMaximum Area
in Square FeetREN/A3R-1AN/A3R-1BN/A3RMN/A3RMH132 C-1132 C-2132 C-3132 C-4132 I132 TIO132 RECN/AN/A 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 13.05)
Sec. 46-450. - Outdoor advertising sign (off-site or billboard sign). 
(a)	Outdoor advertising signs are permitted only on undeveloped and vacant unimproved lots in the C-4 district, and shall be considered the principal use of such lots. Such signs shall not be placed on a lot with any other building thereon, and no structure shall be placed on a lot on which such sign is located. 
(1)	One billboard sign shall be permitted per lot.
(2)	No such sign shall have a total area in excess of 300 square feet per sign face.
(3)	It shall have a minimum clearance of ten feet and a maximum clearance height of 22 feet, from average grade as calculated within a 60-foot radius from the base of the sign. 
(4)	It shall not be closer than 1,000 feet to any other billboard signs on the same side of the right-of-way. 
(5)	The setback of the billboard sign shall be 50 feet from the edge of the right-of-way.
(6)	Any billboard shall be situated on the property so as to:
a.	Maximize motor vehicle sight distance, clear view, and traffic safety in general, in relation to other vehicles, pedestrians, and to other signage which is, or is anticipated to be, nearby; and 
b.	Minimize the destruction of trees, the visibility of the billboard and illuminations thereof by and from residences, and any dangerous distraction and thus, hazard, of and to motorists, as determined in the discretion of the planning commission. 
(b)	A billboard sign may be illuminated, if it is located as least 500 feet from any residential zoning district or residential use. The illumination shall be directed away from all residential uses. No internal illumination shall be permitted for billboards. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 13.06)
Sec. 46-451. - Computations/measurements. 
    The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and sign height: 
(1)	Computation of area. The area of sign face (which is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one face) shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop of structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets the zoning ordinance regulations and is clearly incidental to the display itself. Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of the all faces shall be included in determining the total area of the sign. 
(2)	Computation of height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of: (1) existing grade prior to construction of (2) the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases where the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure when allowed on the zoning lot, whichever is lower. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 13.07)
Sec. 46-452. - Temporary signs. 
    Temporary signs shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations herein: 
(1)	Permit required. Unless specified elsewhere in this chapter, a permit shall be required to display any temporary sign described by these regulations. Such permit shall be issued by the township building official or designee and shall clearly specify the name, address and telephone number of the applicant as well as the title and dates of the event advertised and authorized location for placement of the sign. The permit number shall be clearly displayed on the sign. The permit fee, if any, is to be established by resolution of the township board. 
(2)	Construction signs. Construction signs shall only be erected on the construction site. Construction signs shall advertise only the project under construction and information related thereto, such as its developer, contractor, engineers, brokers, and architects. Signs advertising buildings or projects under construction shall not exceed 32 square feet. Such signs shall have a maximum height of eight feet and shall be set back at least 15 feet from any public right-of-way unless attached to a building, construction fence, or barricade. All such signs shall be removed promptly upon completion of construction. No more than one construction sign shall be permitted per thoroughfare frontage. Signs six square feet in area or less and a maximum of four feet in height which list persons or firms connected with construction, maintenance, or service work being performed at the time, shall be permitted without permit. Such signs must be located on the property under consideration and must be removed upon completion of work on site. 
(3)	Election signs. 
a.	Such signs shall not be erected more than 30 days prior to the election.
b.	Such signs shall not be erected within 100 feet from an entrance to a public polling place, nor shall they be erected within a 25-foot clear zone on corner lots. No election sign shall be erected in a manner as to impede clear vision by motorists on a highway. 
c.	Election signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in total area and eight feet in height. 
d.	Election signs shall not be attached or erected on public utility poles or installations.
e.	All election signs shall be removed no later than seven days after an election.
f.	The building inspector or the director of planning and building is authorized to remove any election signs placed in the public right-of-way and dispose of such signs with the costs assessed to the organization identified on the sign. 
g.	Violations of this section will be subject to the penalty provisions of article 3 of this chapter. 
(4)	Real estate. 
a.	Single- and multiple-family residential real estate signs: A sign with an area not in excess of six square feet advertising the sale, rent and/or lease of a single- or multiple-family structure or vacant property, placed adjacent to such a structure and upon the premises is permitted without permit. Such a sign may indicate only that the property is for sale, rent, and/or lease and the address or telephone number where the inquiry can be made. It shall have a maximum height of three feet from grade and shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from any public right-of-way unless attached to the building. 
b.	Nonresidential real estate signs: One sign, with a total area not in excess of 32 square feet, shall be permitted on each parcel for the purposes of advertising the sale, rent and/or lease of nonresidential real estate. Such signs shall have a maximum height of eight feet and shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from any public right-of-way unless attached to a permanent building. 
c.	Residential subdivision or condominium developments: The allowable area for one on-premises sign pertaining to the sale, rent and/or lease of real estate within a residential subdivision or condominium complex being developed shall be limited to an area of 32 square feet. Such signs shall have a maximum height of eight feet and shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from any public right-of-way. Not more than one real estate sign per thoroughfare frontage shall be placed on any premises. Real estate signs larger than six square feet shall not be placed on any premises with an occupied structure. Temporary portable real estate directional sign, not exceeding three square feet in area and four in number, saying "Open House" and/or showing a directional arrow and placed back of property lines outside the public right-of-way shall be permitted on approach routes to an open house, only for the day of the open house. The top of such signs shall not exceed three feet in height, nor may such signs be displayed for more than one day in any seven day period. No such signs shall be placed on private property without the consent of the owner. A permit is not required for this type of sign. 
d.	Removal: Real estate signs shall be removed within ten days of the sale, lease or rental of the premises, land parcels or residential subdivision/complex. 
(5)	Temporary commercial signs. 
a.	Temporary promotional or special sale signs for windows when erected in conjunction with a commercial establishment, provided they do not, individually or combined with other window signs, exceed 30 percent of the total area of the display window or 16 square feet, whichever is less. Temporary promotional signs are permitted on ground floor windows only. 
b.	Casual sales (garage sale, etc.) signs not to exceed six square feet. A permit is not required for this type of sign. 
c.	Commercial activity signs not to exceed 16 square feet.
d.	Signs intended to be utilized until a permanent sign may be obtained and erected can be approved by the director of building and planning for a period not to exceed 60 days. Such signs shall not exceed sign area permitted within the appropriate zones. 
(6)	Temporary civic/public signs. Temporary civic, cultural, and public service window posters shall be exempt when posted inside commercial establishments, provided they do not, individually or combined, occupy more than 30 percent of the total area of said window or five square feet, whichever is less. Temporary window signs are permitted on ground floor windows only. These types of signs shall not be posted outside on windows, doors, light posts, street furniture, etc. 
(7)	Placement and duration of temporary signs. Unless specified elsewhere in this chapter, the placement and duration of temporary signs shall be regulated as follows: 
a.	No temporary sign shall be placed on public property or public rights-of-way unless it is advertising an event to be held on public property unless specified elsewhere in these regulations. 
b.	No temporary sign shall be placed on public property other than the location of the event unless permission is granted by the property owner. 
c.	Temporary signs on private property must meet the minimum 15-foot sign setback requirements of this chapter. 
d.	Duration of display. Unless specified elsewhere in this chapter, temporary signs may not be displayed more than four consecutive days in any 90-day period. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 13.08)
Sec. 46-453. - Signs in the public right-of-way. 
    No signs shall be allowed in the public right-of-way, except for the following: 
(1)	Signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental or other public agency to post legal notices, identify public property, convey public information, and direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(2)	Projecting signs pursuant to the provisions of these regulations.
(3)	The director of planning and building has the authority to remove signs within the public road right-of-way (R.O.W.). 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 13.09)
Sec. 46-454. - Nonconforming existing signs. 
(a)	Intent. It is the intent of this section to encourage eventual elimination of signs that, as a result of the adoption of this article, become nonconforming, and to administer this article to realize the removal of illegal nonconforming signs and to avoid any unreasonable invasion of established private property rights, thereof: 
(1)	No person shall be required to remove a sign which was erected in compliance with previous regulations of this article if said sign becomes nonconforming due to a change occurring in the location of buildings, streets or other signs, which change, is beyond the control of the owner of the sign and the premises on which it is located. 
(2)	If the owner of a sign or the premises on which a sign is located changes, the location of a building, property line, or sign, or changes the use of a building so that any sign on the premises is rendered nonconforming, such signs must be removed or made to conform to this article. 
(b)	Lawful existing signs. Any sign lawfully existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, which does not fully comply with all the provisions shall be considered a nonconforming sign and may be permitted to remain as long as the sign is properly maintained and not detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the community except as hereafter provided. 
(c)	Continuance. 
(1)	Any lawful nonconforming sign shall be permitted to continue to exist, so long as the nonconforming sign: 
a.	Is not physically expanded or changed to another nonconforming sign.
b.	Is not relocated or structurally altered so as to prolong the life of the sign, or so as to change the shape, size, type, placement, or design of the sign. The term "altered" shall not include normal maintenance or maintenance to protect public safety. The term "normal maintenance" shall include painting of chipped or faded signs, replacement of faded or damaged surface panels, or repair and replacement of electrical wiring and devices. 
c.	Is not reestablished or maintained after the activity, business or usage to which it relates has been discontinued for 90 days or longer. 
d.	Is not repaired or re-erected after being damaged, if the repair or re-erection of the sign would cost more than 50 percent of the replacement cost of an identical new sign. 
(2)	In the case of a legal nonconforming sign without a defined background (such as individual letters or symbols mounted directly on a building, or lettering on an awning), changes may be made to the letters or symbols, so long as the overall area of the sign is not increased. In such situations, a new sign permit application shall be filed with the zoning administrator. 
(3)	The words or symbols on a nonconforming sign may be changed if a new sign permit application is filed with the zoning administrator. In such cases, the message may be changed without affecting the legal nonconforming status, as long as neither the sign structure nor frame is changed. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 13.10)
Sec. 46-455. - Permits and applications; plans; specifications; revocations; appeal. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, repair, alter, or relocate on the same or another premises or maintain within the township any sign as defined in this chapter, without first complying with this section: 
(b)	Except where exempted below, permits are required for all signs hereunder. Applications, therefore, shall be made upon blanks provided by the director of planning and building, and shall contain all required information. 
(c)	It shall be the duty of the building inspector, upon the filing of an application for permit, to examine such plans and specifications and other data and the premises upon which it is proposed to erect the sign or other advertising. 
(d)	Appeal. Any person filing an application for permit who feels that he has been aggrieved by the decisions of the building inspector may have his application reviewed by the township board of appeals. 
(e)	Permit revocable at any time. All rights and privileges acquired under the provisions of this chapter or any amendment thereto, and may be revoked by the township by letter to the permit holder upon the violation of any of the conditions herein, whereupon the planning and building department may remove the sign with costs of removal charged to the permit holder. If the work authorized under an erection permit has not been completed within six months after date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void. 
(f)	Exemption from permit requirement. Signs for which a permit is not required are as follows: 
(1)	Professional nameplates not exceeding two square feet in area.
(2)	The changing of advertising material or copy on a properly licensed sign and the maintenance or repair thereof shall not require the issuance of a permit. 
(3)	Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or aluminum. 
(4)	Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices, danger and such temporary emergency or non-advertising by the building inspector. 
(g)	Conflict with state statute. To the extent that a provision of this chapter conflicts with statutes enacted by the state, but only in those instances where enforcement hereof would be prohibited by state statute, such provision shall be null and void; such nullity and invalidity shall apply only as it concerns sections thereafter of this chapter which are specifically not enforceable in accordance with state law, and should said section be subsequently rendered valid by amendment to state act, said sections shall become fully enforceable and be considered a part hereof in all respects. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 13.11)
Sec. 46-456. - Construction and maintenance requirements. 
    All signs must be constructed to meet the current state construction code. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 13.12)
Sec. 46-457. - Removal of signs. 
(a)	Removal. The township building official or designee shall order the removal of any sign erected or maintained in violation of this chapter except for valid nonconforming signs. Notice in writing shall be given to the owner of such sign or of the building, structure, or premises on which such sign is located, to remove the sign or bring it into compliance with the ordinance within 14 days of the notice for nontemporary signs. Illegal temporary signs shall be removed within 24-hours. Failure to remove the sign or to comply with this notice shall be considered a zoning violation. The township shall also remove the sign immediately and without notice if it reasonably appears that the condition of the sign is such as to present an immediate threat to the safety of the public. Any cost of removal incurred by the township shall be assessed to the owner of the property on which such sign is located in the manner of taxes and such charge shall be a lien on the property. 
(b)	Renewal requirements. A sign shall be removed by the owner of lessee or the premises upon which the sign is located within 30 days after the business which it advertises is no longer conducted on the premises. If the owner or lessee fails to remove the sign, the township shall remove it in accordance with the provisions stated in subsection (a) of this section. These removal provisions shall not apply where a subsequent owner or lessee conducts the same type of business and agrees to maintain the signs to advertise the type of business being conducted on the premises and provided the signs comply with the other provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 13.13)
Sec. 46-458. - Violations. 
(a)	Any of the following shall be a violation of this chapter:
(1)	To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign in a way inconsistent with the terms of this chapter or that is inconsistent with any plan or permit governing such sign or the zoning lot on which the sign is located; 
(2)	To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign requiring a permit without such a permit. 
(b)	Each sign installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate violation. 
(c)	Unless specified elsewhere in this chapter, any signs placed within a road right-of-way (R.O.W.) and on utility poles will be considered a violation of this chapter and may be removed by the township at the expense of the owner. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 13.14)
Sec. 46-459. - Enforcement. 
    This article shall be administered and enforced by the director of planning and building. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 13.15)
Secs. 46-460-46-486. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND LOTS OF RECORD[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Nonconforming uses or structures, MCL 125.3208.

Sec. 46-487. - Existing nonconformities. 
    Within the districts established by this chapter, there exists: 
(1)	Lots;
(2)	Structures;
(3)	Uses of land and structures; and
(4)	Characteristics of use which were lawful prior to adoption of this chapter. It is the intent of this chapter to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this chapter that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. Nonconforming uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. A nonconforming use of structure and land in combination shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this chapter, the nature of which would be prohibited in the district involved. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 15.01)
Sec. 46-488. - Nonconforming structures. 
    Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived that could not be built under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)	No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity. 
(2)	Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 100 percent of the state equalized valuation at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)	Should such structure be moved for any reason whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 15.02)
Sec. 46-489. - Nonconforming uses of land. 
    Where, at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, lawful use of land exists which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this chapter, the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful provided: 
(1)	No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or amendment of this chapter. 
(2)	No such nonconforming uses shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or amendment of this chapter. 
(3)	If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than one year, such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land is located. 
(4)	No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this chapter shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 15.03)
Sec. 46-490. - Nonconforming uses and structures. 
    If lawful use involving individual structures or of structure and premises in combination exists at the effective date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this chapter, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)	An existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in the district in which it is located shall not be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which is it located. 
(2)	Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were validly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
(3)	If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure, or structures and premises, may be changed to another nonconforming use provided that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use, or to a permitted use in a district of greater restriction, it shall not thereafter be changed to a nonconforming use. 
(4)	When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for one year, the structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for one year, the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district which it is located. 
(5)	Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. Destruction for the purpose of this section is defined as damage to an extent of more than 100 percent of the state equalized valuation at time of destruction. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 15.04)
Sec. 46-491. - Nonconforming lots of record. 
(a)	In the RE, Rural Estate District in which single-family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record after the effective date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. Permission to use a single nonconforming lot as herein provided shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width or both, that are generally applicable in the district. Side yard dimensions may be reduced provided that in no event shall a side yard be less than 20 feet. 
(b)	This subsection applies to R-1A and R-1B, Single-Family Districts only and is intended to provide relief for the owners of nonconforming lots of record where said lot or lots in combination do not meet the minimum standards of this chapter. It is intended that this subsection be used to permit construction of a dwelling on all nonconforming lots of record; it is recognized that some such lots are simply too small to permit the construction of an adequate dwelling, the storage of family automobiles (in recognition of the fact that on street parking is not desirable), the maintenance of sufficient open space to permit fire protection, reasonable light and air, as well as room and view to permit and encourage property maintenance. 
(1)	No permit shall issue hereunder except with approval of the board of appeals after public hearing. The application to the board of appeals shall simply state, "Nonconforming Lot of Record," and the board of appeals may grant such variances as are necessary to permit construction on such lot, subject to the following standards: 
a.	Permits shall not be issued hereunder unless the construction that will result from the issuance of said permits will be in keeping with the general character of the neighborhood in which the construction will take place. 
b.	The board of appeals shall at all times consider and reconcile the interests of adjoining and nearby property owners. 
c.	Subject to the above, where the owner of a nonconforming lot of record cannot reasonably acquire sufficient land to enable him to conform to the requirements of this chapter relating to lot area, lot width, or both, such lot of record may be used by such owner as a building site, provided that, as required by the board of appeals, the other requirements of this section are met, which requirements for the purpose of this section shall be deemed to include reasonable provisions for automobile parking. 
(2)	For the purpose of maintaining building sites in compliance or near compliance with this chapter, in those instances where the same owner has adjoining nonconforming lots of record, the following regulations shall apply: Where two or more abutting lots of record are held under one ownership, and where one or both of these lots are nonconforming, they shall each be considered as a single lot of record and are subject to the provisions of this chapter, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this chapter. 
(3)	Notwithstanding the provisions as contained in subsection (b) of this section, the building department may issue a building permit in those instances where an isolated nonconforming lot or combination of lots of record meets 80 percent of the minimum frontage or area requirements of this chapter upon a determination that said 80 percent is in conformance with the general standards of the neighborhood. This subsection is intended to provide relief for those owners of isolated parcels that have more than 90 percent but less than 100 percent of the frontage or area required in section 46-215, schedule of regulations, and it is not intended to provide for the division or creation of parcels. In no event may this subsection be applied so as to accomplish a division or creation of any lot or combination of lots of record to reduce said frontage or area requirements to anything less than those standards set forth in section 46-215, schedule of regulations. 
(4)	In no event shall the side yards be less than seven feet to permit fire equipment reasonable access and further to prevent the spreading of fire. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 15.05)
Sec. 46-492. - Repairs and maintenance. 
(a)	On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding 50 percent of the state equalized valuation of the nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of the structure as the case may be, provided that the cubic content existing when it became nonconforming shall not be increased. 
(b)	If a nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to a lack of repairs and maintenance, and is declared by the director of planning and building to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it may be enlarged or structurally altered to make it comply with the health and safety laws or ordinances; provided further that the cost of such work does not exceed 50 percent of the state equalized valuation of such building or structure at the time such work is done. 
(Ord. of 3-17-2008, § 15.06)
APPENDIX A. - FIGURES[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note-Printed herein is an appendix to The Brandon Township Zoning Ordinance of 2008, Ordinance No. 141-11, as adopted by the township board on August 1, 2011. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.

Sec. 1. - Basement definition. 

Sec. 2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 160-14, adopted April 7, 2014, repealed § 2, entitled "Measuring building height" and derived from Ord. No. 141-11, 8-1-2011. 
Sec. 3. - Grade. 

Sec. 4. - Lot types. 

Sec. 5. - Yards and setbacks. 

Sec. 6. - Parallel parking. 

Sec. 7. - Parking, 30 degrees to 53 degrees. 

Sec. 8. - Parking, 54 degrees to 74 degrees. 

Sec. 9. - Parking, 75 degrees to 90 degrees. 

Sec. 10. - Off-street stacking spaces and lanes for drive-through facilities. 

Sec. 11. - Screening between conflicting land uses. 

Sec. 12. - Parking lot landscaping-Interior parking areas. 

Sec. 13. - Parking lot landscaping-Perimeter parking lot. 

Sec. 14. - Greenbelt buffer. 

Sec. 15. - Trash container screening. 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1989 COMPILED ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1989 Compiled Ordinances, as supplemented, which are included herein. Sections of the 1989 Compiled Ordinances, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances included herein, see the table immediately following this table. 
1989 Compiled Ordinances
SectionSection 
this Code12.0512-91 12.131, 12.13224-48, 24-49 17.011-17.01422-40-22-43 17.02022-44 17.03122-66 17.032-17.03522-68-22-71 17.15022-45 17.16022-46 17.31122-101 17.321, 17.32222-102 17.33022-103 17.341-17.34322-104 17.351-17.35422-105 17.36022-106 17.37122-107 17.381-17.38822-108-22-115 17.39022-116 17.40022-117 17.41022-118 17.80122-150 17.82122-151 17.82322-151 17.825-17.82922-151 17.831-17.83422-175-22-178 17.841-17.84422-210-22-213 17.851, 17.85222-235, 22-236 17.861-17.86322-266-22-268 17.871-17.87322-300-22-302 17.88122-152 17.891-17.89522-323-22-327 17.90222-153 20.001, 20.00230-1, 30-2 20.003-20.01130-29-30-37 20.012-20.01430-3-30-5 20.05228-285 20.05428-286 20.121-20.12334-1 20.131, 20.13234-35, 34-36 20.133-20.13734-38-34-42 20.141, 20.14234-2 20.14334-3 20.15334-4 20.161, 20.16234-5 20.17034-6 20.18134-7 20.21036-19 20.22136-46 20.231-20.23336-47-36-49 20.24036-20 20.25036-50 20.26036-21 20.32038-52 20.33138-78 20.33338-79 20.341-20.34438-80-38-83 20.350-20.35438-84 20.355-20.35738-85-38-87 20.361, 20.36238-88, 38-89 20.371, 20.37238-115, 38-116 20.374-20.37938-117-38-122 20.381-20.38538-143-38-147 20.39038-178 20.401-20.40338-179-38-181 20.574-20.5766-19 20.5806-51 20.586-20.5916-52-6-57 20.5956-20 20.601, 20.6026-21, 6-22 20.6036-58 20.604-20.6086-23-6-27 20.610, 20.6116-28, 6-29 20.616-20.6186-59-6-61 20.6206-30 20.626, 20.6276-31 20.7024-1 20.7044-2 20.76228-1 20.765-20.76928-2 20.78128-51 20.782-20.78628-220-28-224 20.78728-52 20.788, 20.78928-225, 28-226 20.79028-316 20.79128-318 20.79228-228 20.79428-317 20.79528-25 20.79728-26 20.79828-53 20.80028-54 20.80128-152 20.80228-319 20.80328-3 20.80428-55 20.806-20.80828-287-28-289 20.80928-291 20.810, 20.81128-252, 28-253 20.81228-27 20.821-20.82428-28-28-31 20.83128-487 20.83728-484 20.838, 20.83928-539, 28-540 20.840, 20.84128-485, 28-486 20.85128-183 20.852-20.85428-184 20.85528-185 20.85628-290 20.85728-110 20.858-20.86028-186-28-188 20.86228-112 20.86328-111 20.871-20.87528-113-28-117 20.9116-81 20.913-20.9156-81 20.9206-123 20.926-20.9326-124-6-130 20.9356-82 20.941, 20.9426-83, 6-84 20.9436-131 20.944-20.9526-85-6-93 20.9536-132 20.9546-94 20.9556-133 20.961-20.9636-134-6-136 20.9656-95 20.971, 20.9726-96 20.9736-97 20.9826-137 20.1002-20.102526-1-26-24 21.38040-139 21.451, 21.45244-19, 44-20 21.45444-23 21.47144-19 21.47244-22 21.47444-23 21.511-21.51340-75 21.515, 21.51640-75 21.53040-76 21.54040-77 21.55040-78 21.56040-79 21.57040-80 21.58040-81 21.62140-110 21.633-21.63340-108 21.641-21.64340-109 21.65140-111 21.67140-112 22.02020-19 22.03020-20 22.04020-21 22.05020-22 22.06020-23 22.08020-26 22.09020-27 22.41110-50 22.51210-76 22.52110-77 22.531-22.53610-78-10-83 22.54110-84 35-013-35.0158-1 35-0178-1 35-021, 35-0228-3 35-023-35-0278-4-8-8 35-041-35-0448-67-8-70 35-051-35-0558-35-8-39 35-061, 35-0628-99, 8-100 35-071, 35-0728-2 35-151-35-15438-19-38-22 35-157, 35-15838-23, 38-24 35-221-35-22318-19 35-241-35-24718-20-18-26 35-25018-27 35-421, 35-42218-58 35-431-35-44118-59-18-69 35-45118-70 40.012, 40.01316-19, 16-20 40.02016-21 40.031, 40.03216-22, 16-23 40.041-40.04616-24-16-29 40.051, 40.05216-30 40.061, 40.06216-31 40.07116-32 40.081, 40.08216-33 40.09116-34 40.10116-35 40.11116-36 40.22116-61 40.23116-62 40.24116-63 40.251-40.25316-64-16-66 40.263, 40.26416-67, 16-68 40.28116-69 40.42116-97 40.43116-98 40.441, 40.44216-99 40.451-40.45416-100 40.461-40.46616-101 40.47116-102 40.481-40.48316-103 40.49116-104 40.62120-58 40.63120-59 40.641, 40.64220-60 40.651-40.65320-61-20-63 40.66120-65 40.671-40.67320-66 40.67520-66 40.68120-67 48.14128-3 28-220 28-226 28-229 48.14228-227 48.14328-54 48.144, 48.14528-224, 28-225 48.14628-153 48.14728-219 48.23128-148 48.233, 48.23428-148 48.24128-149 48.251, 48.25228-150, 28-151 48.261-48.26428-154-28-157 48.31028-513 48.32028-512 48.33028-514  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance
Number DateSection Section
this Code9 7-31-196224-1 44-2 9A 7-20-19641-438-19-38-22 7, 838-23, 38-24 19  7-12-1971110-50 20 7-15-19721, 230-1, 30-2 3-1130-29-30-37 12-1430-3-30-5 28 5- 6-19741, 244-19, 44-20 444-23 30 5-22-19748.140-139 36 7- 7-1975228-285 428-286  7- 3-1976(Ord.)30-2 40 10- 4-19761.228-1 1.5-1.928-2 2.128-51 2.2-2.628-220-28-224 2.728-52 2.8, 2.928-225, 28-226 2.1028-316 2.1128-318 2.1228-228 2.1428-317 2.1528-25 2.1728-26 2.1828-53 2.2028-54 2.2128-152 2.2228-319 2.2328-3 2.2428-55 2.26-2.2828-287-28-289 2.2928-291 2.30, 2.3128-252, 28-253 2.3228-27 3.1-3.428-28-28-31 4.128-487 4.728-484 4.8, 4.928-539, 28-540 4.10, 4.1128-485, 28-486 5.128-183 5.2-5.428-184 5.528-185 5.628-290 5.728-110 5.8-5.1028-186-28-188 5.1228-112 5.1328-111 6.1-6.528-113-28-117 412- 6-1976art. 136-19 2.136-46 3.1-3.336-47-36-49 4.136-20 5.136-50 6.136-21 41 12- 6-19761.1-1.422-40-22-43 2.122-44 3.122-66 3.2-3.522-68-22-71 7.122-45 8.122-46 43  2- 7-19772.1-2.318-19 4.1-4.718-20-18-26 5.118-27 47 8-29-19772.1-2.334-1 3.1, 3.234-35, 34-36 3.3-3.734-38-34-42 4.1, 4.234-2 4.334-3 5.334-4 6.1, 6.234-5 7.134-6 8.134-7 46 10- 8-1977art. 238-52 3.138-78 3.338-79 4.1-4.438-80-38-83 art. 5, § A-D38-84 art. 5, § E-38-85-38-87 art. 5, § Gart. 6, § A,38-88, 38-89 art. 6, § Bart. 7, § A,38-115, 38-116 art. 7, § Bart. 7, § D-38-117-38-122 art. 7, § Iart. 8, § A-38-143-38-147 art. 8, § Eart. 938-178 10.1-10.338-179-38-181 51 1- 2-19781.3-1.58-1 1.78-1 2.1, 2.28-3 2.3-2.78-4-8-8 3.1-3.48-67-8-70 4.1-4.58-35-8-39 5.1, 5.28-99, 8-100 6.1, 6.28-2 53 2- 5-197912-91 57 5- 5-1980144-19 244-22 444-23 6110- 5-19816-25 2.4-2.66-19 3.16-51 4.1-4.66-52-6-57 5.16-20 6.1, 6.26-21, 6-22 6.36-58 6.4, 6.56-23, 6-24 6.6, 6.76-26, 6-27 6.9, 6.106-28, 6-29 7.1-7.36-59-6-61 7.46-30 9.1, 9.26-31 6410-19-19812.120-19 3.1, 3.220-20 art. IV-20-21-20-23 art. VIart. VIII,20-26, 20-27 art. IX6311-14-19814-1 65 5- 3-19822.16-81 2.3-2.56-81 3.16-123 4.1-4.76-124-6-130 5.16-82 6.1, 6.26-83, 6-84 6.36-131 6.4-6.126-85-6-93 6.136-132 6.146-94 7.16-133 8.1-8.36-134-6-136 9.16-95 10.1, 10.26-96 10.36-97 12.26-137 70 2- 6-1984art. I, §§ 1-340-75 art. I, §§ 5, 640-75 art. III40-76 art. IV40-77 art. V-40-78-40-81 art. VIII74 8- 6-19842.1, 2.218-58 3.1-3.1118-59-18-69 4.118-70 7510-15-19841.0210-76 2.0110-77 3.01-3.0310-78-10-80 3.04[1], 3.04[2]10-81, 10-82 3.0510-83 4.0110-84 76 2- 4-19851, 224-48, 24-49  3-18-1985(Ord.)34-1 77 4-15-1985art. I, § 1 16-20 art. I, § 2 16-19 art. II16-21 art. III, § 1, 16-22, 16-23 art. III, § 2 art. IV, § 1- 16-24-16-29 art. IV, § 6 art. V, §§ 1, 216-30 art. VI, §§ 1, 216-31 art. VII16-32 art. VIII, §§ 1, 216-33 art. IX-16-34-16-36 art. XI78 5- 7-19904.128-3 28-220 28-226 28-229 4.228-227 4.328-54 4.4, 4.528-224, 28-225 4.628-153 4.728-219 79 5- 7-19903.428-148, 28-149 5.1, 5.228-150, 28-151 6.1-6.428-154-28-157 80 5- 7-1990art. I28-513 art. II28-512 art. III28-514 82 8- 6-19901.122-101 2.1, 2.222-102 art. III22-103 4.1-4.322-104 5.1-5.422-105 art. VI22-106 7.122-107 8.1-8.822-108-22-115 art. IX-22-116-22-118 art. XI 8-13-1990(Ord.)44-20 8310-15-19902.140-110 art. III40-108 4.340-109 5.140-111 7.140-112 87 8-19-19912.116-61 3.116-62 4.116-63 5.1-5.316-64-16-66 6.216-67, 16-68 6.3, 6.416-67, 16-68 8.116-69 88 9-19-19912.116-97 3.116-98 4.1, 4.216-99 5.1-5.416-100 6.1-6.616-101 7.116-102 8.1-8.316-103 9.116-104 89 9-19-19912.120-58 3.120-59 4.1, 4.220-60 5.1-5.320-61-20-63 6.120-65 7.1-7.320-66 7.520-66 8.120-67  7- 7-1999(Ord.)128-291 96 1-25-20012-2526-1-26-24 97 6-17-20022.122-151 2.322-151 2.5-2.922-151 3.1-3.422-175-22-178 4.1-4.422-210-22-213 5.1, 5.222-235, 22-236 6.1-6.322-266-22-268 7.1-7.322-300-22-302 8.122-152 9.1-9.522-323-22-327 10.222-153 [preamble]22-150 101 7-14-20031.140-19 2.1, 4.140-19 100 7-21-2003I40-20 II, IV40-20 106 8-15-20051.140-19 2.1, 4.140-19  8-28-2006(Ord.)art. III,20-20, 20-21 art. IVart. VII(7.1)20-24 art. VIII20-26 110 9- 5-20063-528-463-28-465 111 9- 5-20061-310-19-10-21 11211- 6-20061.12-111 3.1-3.32-112 4.1-4.32-113 5.12-114 115 7- 2-20072.120-58 3.120-59 4.1-4.320-60 5.1-5.320-61-20-63 5.520-64 6.120-65 7.3-7.920-66 8.120-67 116 7- 2-2007art. III,20-20, 20-21 art. IVart. VII20-24 art. VIII20-26 117 8- 6-20071-52-142-2-146 114 8- 8-20072.116-61 3.116-62 art. IV16-63 5.1-5.316-64-16-66 art. VI,16-67, 16-68 art. VII8.116-69 10711- 7-2007art. I12-1 2.1-2.912-2-12-10 3.0, 3.112-11, 12-12 118 3-17-2008art. 2, art. 342-40, 42-41 art. 542-42, 42-43 art. 642-44 119 3-17-20081-2, 1-3 14-1, 14-2 1-4-1-7 14-4-14-7 2-1-2-1814-33-14-50 3-1, 3-214-74, 14-75 4-1-4-5 14-94-14-98 5-1-5-714-125-14-131 6-1-6-1014-161-14-170 7-1-7-514-194-14-198 8-1-8-6 14-220-14-225 9-1-9-814-244-14-251 10-1-10-514-281-14-285 11-1-11-914-304-14-312 12-1-12-6 14-343-14-348 13-1-13-514-370-14-374 14-1, 14-2 14-392, 14-393 15-1-15-314-415-14-417 ch. 16 14-3 120 3-17-2008art. III32-19 art. IV-32-20-32-23 art. VII 3-17-2008(Ord.)1.03-1.0546-2-46-4 2.01, 2.0246-5, 46-6 3.01-3.0646-31-46-36 4.01-4.0446-200-46-203 4.0446-204 4.04(B)-4.04(K)46-205-46-214 4.07, 4.0846-215, 46-216 5.01-5.1046-241-46-250 6.01-6.2446-279-46-302 7.01-7.0946-65-46-73 8.01-8.0846-105-46-112 9.01-9.0646-323-46-328 10.01-10.0446-360-46-363 11.0146-385 11.02(intro., (A)-(J))46-386 11.02(K)46-387 11.03-11.0846-388-46-393 12.01-12.0946-415-46-423 13.01-13.1546-445-46-459 14.0146-37 15.01-15.0646-487-46-492 16.01-16.0346-138-46-140 17.01-17.0846-164-46-171  4- 1-2008(Ord.)2.1-2.628-371-28-376 3.1-3.628-396-28-401 4.1, 4.228-431, 28-432 122 7- 7-20081.0146-1 123 7- 7-20082.124-72 3.1-3.324-73 4.1-4.324-74 4.4-4.724-75-24-78 5.1-5.424-19-24-22 124 7- 7-200826-31 6-96 10-51 12-12 16-69 16-104 18-27 18-70 20-67 22-153 26-24 28-157 28-286 30-5 34-7 36-21 38-24 38-181 40-81 40-139 44-23 12710- 6-2008428-157 12510-20-20083.1-3.628-371-28-376 4.1-4.628-396-28-401 5.1, 5.228-431, 28-432 129 2- 1-20102.0246-6 6.2546-303 128 3- 1-2010I-VIII22-19-22-26 130 4- 5-2010I(4.2)24-74 I(4.5)24-76 131-11 7- 5-20111, 226-24 132-11 7- 5-2011     Added28-118 133-11 7- 5-2011     Added28-488-28-490 134-11 7- 5-20111, 232-23 135-11 7- 5-20111, 240-139 136-11 7- 5-20111     Added40-21 137-11 8- 1-201146-242(1)d.5 138-12 2- 6-201246-242(1)d.5 139-1112-19-201146-249(2)m 140-12 2- 6-201246-246(a) 141-11 8- 1-2011     AddedCh. 46, App. A 142-12 2- 6-2012     Added46-246(c) 143-12 2- 6-201246-448(a)(1) 144-12 3- 5-2012     Added46-304 145-12 5- 7-201246-447(b)(2) 146-12 7-30-20123     Added40-19(d) 440-19(c) 147-1210-29-20123, 432-21(14) 148-13 1- 7-2013228-150 328-157 149-13 1- 7-2013218-70 150-13 1- 7-2013228-189 328-190 428-191 151-13 1- 7-2013     Added10-100-10-112 152-1310- 7-201324-48(b) 161-14 1- 6-2014     Added28-230 153-14 4- 7-201446-282(b)(2)a. 154-14 4- 7-201446-242(1)e. 155-14 4- 7-201446-242(1)g. 156-14 4- 7-201446-6 157-14 4- 7-201446-166(b) 158-14 4- 7-201446-215 159-14 4- 7-201446-216(i) 160-14 4- 7-2014     RpldCh. 46, App. A, § 2 162-15 5- 4-201546-6 163-15 5- 4-201546-6 164-15 5- 4-201546-6 165-15 5- 4-201546-282(b)(3)a.  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
MCLSection 
this Code8.3 et seq.1-2 8.3u1-8 8.41-4 8.4b1-3 8.51-7 10.31 et seq.Ch. 16 14.301 et seq.Ch. 34 15.231 et seq.Ch. 2 Ch. 2, Art. II 15.261 et seq.Ch. 2 Ch. 2, Art. II 15.341 et seq.Ch. 2, Art. II,
Ch. 2, Art. III 24.201 et seq.40-20 28.251 et seq.Ch. 24 28.601 et seq.Ch. 24 29.1 et seq.Ch. 20 29.41 et seq.Ch. 20 29.471 et seq.Ch. 38 30.401 et seq.Ch. 16 Ch. 16, Art. II 16-21 30.41016-21 16-25 30.41116-32 30.41216-26 35.441 et seq.Ch. 34 41.1a et seq.Ch. 2 41.1861-1 42.1 et seq.Ch. 2 42.5Ch. 2, Art. II 42.7 et seq.Ch. 2, Art. II 42.9 et seq.Ch. 2, Art. III 42.1024-21 42.201-1 42.211-11 40-19 42.2340-19 40-21 40-138 42.252-91 123.51 et seq.Ch. 32 123.361 et seq.Ch. 38 123.811 et seq.Ch. 24 124.281 et seq.Ch. 42 125.538 et seq.10-50 125.1508b(6)10-19, 10-20 125.2301 et seq.46-6 125.3101 et seq.Ch. 46 46-6 46-37 46-112 46-166 46-169 125.320646-204-46-207 125.3208Ch. 46, Art. XI 125.3401 et seq.Ch. 46, Art. II,
Div. 5 125.3501Ch. 46, Art. II,
Div. 2 125.3502 et seq.Ch. 46, Art. II,
Div. 3 125.3503Ch. 46, Art. VI 125.3601 et seq.Ch. 46, Art. II,
Div. 4 46-138 125.3801 et seq.22-41 Ch. 46 128.1 et seq.Ch. 12 141.421 et seq.Ch. 2, Art. V 141.1201 et seq.Ch. 2, Art. V 141.2101 et seq.Ch. 2, Art. V 247.61 et seq.Ch. 18, Art. II 252.201 et seq.Ch. 36, Art. II 252.301 et seq.Ch. 46, Art. X 257.1 et seq.Ch. 40 40-19 257.257.951 et seq.40-20 257.605, 257.606Ch. 40 257.606(1)(a)Ch. 40, Art. III 257.610Ch. 40 257.672 et seq.Ch. 40, Art. III 257.72640-111 280.1 et seq.14-162 280.43314-165 286.471 et seq.46-204 46-415 287.261 et seq.Ch. 8, Art. II 287.266 et seq.Ch. 8, Art. II,
Div. 2 287.290Ch. 8 287.321 et seq.8-4 289.1101 et seq.30-36 324.101 et seq.Ch. 18 42-40, 42-41 Ch. 46, Art. VIII,
Ch. 46, Art. IX 324.401 et seq.42-41 324.3101 et seq.14-167 324.4301 et seq.Ch. 38 Ch. 42 324.8901 et seq.Ch. 18, Art. III 18-70 324.890318-70 324.9101 et seq.46-302 324.11101 et seq.2-143 Ch. 38 324.11501 et seq.Ch. 38 324.1150638-52 324.11522Ch. 20, Art. III 324.11701 et seq.30-36 324.14501 et seq.Ch. 38 324.19101 et seq.Ch. 38 324.20101 et seq.Ch. 2, Art. V,
Div. 3 2-143, 2-144 324.21301 et seq.2-143 324.30101 et seq.14-167 324.30301 et seq.14-129 Ch. 44 46-389 324.36501 et seq.Ch. 8 324.40101 et seq.Ch. 8 28-291 324.4190228-286 324.43501 et seq.28-291 324.52701 et seq.46-391 324.80101 et seq.Ch. 44 44-19 324.80110 et seq.Ch. 44, Art. II 324.81101 et seq.40-138 333.2850Ch. 12 333.7101 et seq.Ch. 28, Art. VII,
Div. 2 28-371 28-431 28-463 28-512 30-3 333.710628-372 333.7451 et seq.Ch. 28, Art. VII,
Div. 3 333.12501 et seq.30-36 333.12521 et seq.30-36 333.12541 et seq.30-36 333.12701 et seq.30-36 333.1277130-36 333.26201 et seq.Ch. 38 338.3511 et seq.30-36 339.2001 et seq.22-44 400.271 et seq.Ch. 34 400.701 et seq.46-6 408.681 et seq.Ch. 32 436.1101 et seq.Ch. 4 4-1 445.111 et seq.Ch. 34 445.371 et seq.Ch. 34 445.401 et seq.Ch. 36 Ch. 36, Art. II 446.201 et seq.Ch. 36 456.521 et seq.Ch. 12 559.101 et seq.42-41 46-6 560.101 et seq.Ch. 22 22-20 22-41 22-44 42-41 46-6 560.10822-21 22-44 560.10922-21 22-44 560.11322-67 560.113--560.11822-67 22-70 560.11422-67 560.115--560.11722-67 560.11822-67 560.25822-69 560.263Ch. 22, Art. IV 560.26722-26 600.839624-74 600.8701 et seq.1-11, 1-12 Ch. 24, Art. IV 600.870924-73 722.751 et seq.Ch. 28, Art. VIII,
Div. 3 750.1 et seq.Ch. 28 750.2828-488 750.49 et seq.Ch. 8 750.508-3 750.71 et seq.Ch. 20 750.81 et seq.28-51 750.11528-185 750.13128-114 750.131a28-115 750.135a28-485 750.14128-487 750.141a28-488 750.14528-489 750.157s28-117 750.167(1)(c)28-54 750.167(1)(e)28-220 750.167(1)(h)28-55 750.167(1)(j)28-3 750.167(1)(l)28-224 750.17028-221 750.18428-29 750.200 et seq.Ch. 20 750.21528-30 750.21828-116 750.222 et seq.Ch. 28, Art. VI,
Div. 2 750.23328-287 750.234f28-291 750.23728-288 750.24028-25 750.240 et seq.Ch. 20 750.291 et seq.28-113 750.335a28-317 750.35628-111 750.356 et seq.Ch. 28, Art. IV,
Div. 2 750.356d28-118 750.36428-110 750.377a28-187 750.377a et seq.Ch. 28, Art. IV,
Div. 4 750.38028-188 750.39128-186 750.411a28-25, 28-26 750.41628-184 750.448 et seq.28-319 750.47928-27, 28-28 750.493a28-190 750.493d28-486 750.50428-157 750.53528-112 750.540e28-53 750.546 et seq.Ch. 28, Art. IV,
Div. 3 28-191 750.55228-150 28-157 750.552a28-189 750.75328-490 752.861 et seq.28-289 752.89128-291 764.9c24-22 769.1fCh. 2, Art. V, 
Div. 2,
Ch. 2, Art. V, 
Div. 3 801.261 et seq.28-31  
