Chapter 1 - General Provisions
1.01 BEVERLY HILLS MUNICIPAL CODE
1.02 DEFINITIONS
1.03 THE PROVISIONS OF THIS CODE
1.04 ORDINANCES REPEALED NOT REENACTED
1.05 JURISDICTION
1.06 PENALTIES
1.06.1 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES FOR MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION
1.06.2 EMERGENCY SERVICES COST RECOVERY
1.07 SCHEDULE OF FEES
1.08 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ACTS
1.09 SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS
1.10 EFFECTIVE DATE

1.01 BEVERLY HILLS MUNICIPAL CODE

(a) Title. This code of ordinances may be known and cited as the Beverly Hills Municipal Code.

(b) Amendments. Any additions or amendments to this code are incorporated in this code so that a reference to the Beverly Hills Municipal Code includes such additions and amendments.

(c) Number of Sections. Each section number of this code shall consist of two component parts separated by a period, the figure before the period referring to the chapter number and the figure after the period referring to the position of the section within the chapter.

(d) Numbering Additions. The decimal system shall be used for all additions and amendments to this code. When a chapter or section is added, the new chapter or section shall be given a decimal character.

1.02 DEFINITIONS

(a) Terms used in this code, unless specifically defined in this code, have the meanings prescribed by the laws of Michigan for such terms.
(b) Terms used in this code have the following meanings:

Village: Village of Beverly Hills, Michigan
County: Oakland County
State: State of Michigan

Village Clerk or Clerk: The Village Clerk of the Village of Beverly Hills and similarly the title of any other officer, board or commission shall mean such officer, board or commission of the Village of Beverly Hills unless otherwise stated.

Person: Any natural individual, firm, partnership, trust, estate, club, association or corporation. As applied to partnerships, or associations, the word includes the partners or members thereof; as applied to corporations, the word includes the officers, agents or employees thereof who are responsible for the act referred to. The singular person includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.

Municipal Civil Infractions: Shall mean a violation of a provision of a Village ordinance for which the remedy and/or penalty is prescribed to be a civil fine, or other sanction other than a criminal penalty. A municipal civil infraction is not a letter included offense of a criminal offense or of an ordinance violation that is not a civil infraction. {Ord. 311; 12-18-02}

Municipal Civil Infraction Determination: Shall mean a determination that a defendant is responsible for a municipal civil infraction by one of the following:

a. An admission of responsibility for the municipal civil infraction.
b. An admission of responsibility for the municipal civil infraction, "with explanation".
c. A preponderance of the evidence at an informal hearing or formal hearing.
d. A default judgment for failing to appear at a scheduled appearance. {Ord. 311; 12-18-02}

Repeat Offense: Shall mean a determination of responsibility for a second, or any subsequent, municipal civil infraction with regard to the same ordinance, committed by the same person within any three year period, unless some other period is specifically provided with regard to a specific ordinance provision. {Ord. 311; 12-18-02}

Responsible or Responsibility shall mean a determination entered by a court or magistrate that a person is in violation of a provision of a Village ordinance prescribed to be a municipal civil infraction. {Ord. 311; 12-18-02}

Violation: Shall mean any act, which is prohibited or made or declared to be unlawful or an offense under a Village ordinance, including affirmative acts as well as omissions and/or failures to act where the act is required by these ordinances. {Ord. 311; 12-18-02}

1.03 THE PROVISIONS OF THIS CODE, so far as they are the same in substance as those of heretofore existing ordinances are continuations of ordinances and not new enactments. Any act done, offense committed, or right accruing or acquired, or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior hereto shall not be affected, but may be enjoyed, asserted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted as fully and to the same extent as if the code had not been effected.

1.04 ORDINANCES REPEALED NOT REENACTED. No ordinance or part of any ordinance heretofore repealed shall be considered reordained or reenacted by virtue of this code, unless specifically reenacted. The repeal of any curative or validating ordinance does not impair or affect any cure or validation already effected thereby.

1.05 JURISDICTION. Unless otherwise provided in this code, this code applies to acts performed within the corporate limits of the Village. Provisions of this code also apply to acts performed outside the corporate limits and up to the limits prescribed by law where the law confers power on the Village to regulate such particular acts outside the corporate limits.

1.06 PENALTIES.

(a) Standard Penalty. Unless another penalty is specifically provided by this code for violation of any particular provision, section or chapter, any person violating any provision of this code, or any rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, or any provision of any code adopted herein by reference, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned in the County jail for a period not to exceed ninety-three (93) days, or shall be both fined and imprisoned in the discretion of the court and shall pay the costs of prosecution. In addition to the penal provisions contained herein, the Village may resort to a Court of Equity or use any other legal means to enforce the terms and/or accomplish the purpose of this code.

(b) Commitment. The person upon whom any fine or penalty is imposed for violation of any provision of this code or any ordinance of the Village, upon order of the court before whom the conviction is had, may be committed to the Village or County jail as provided by law, or to any other place provided by ordinance for the incarceration of offenders until the fine, penalty, and costs are fully paid. No imprisonment, however, shall exceed ninety-three (93) days for any one offense.

1) Cost recovery; expenses for which the court may order a person convicted to reimburse the Village of Beverly Hills.

Pursuant to state law, MCL 769.1(f), as part of the sentence for a conviction of any of the following offenses, in addition to any other penalty authorized by law, the court may order the person convicted to reimburse the Village of Beverly Hills for expenses incurred in relation to that incident, including, but not limited to, expenses for an emergency response and expenses for prosecuting the person, as provided following:

(a) A violation or attempted violation of operating under the influence of intoxicating liquor, operating while ability visibly impaired, or operating with an unlawful blood alcohol content, or per se violation.

2) The expenses for which reimbursement may be ordered under this section include all of the following:

(a) The salaries or wages, including overtime pay, of law enforcement personnel for time spent responding to the incident from which the conviction arose, arresting the person convicted, processing the person after the arrest, preparing reports on the incident, investigating the incident, and collecting and analyzing evidence, including, but not limited to, determining bodily alcohol content and determining the presence of and identifying controlled substances in the blood, breath, or urine.

(b) The salaries, wages, or other compensation, including overtime pay, of fire department and emergency medical service personnel, including volunteer fire fighters or volunteer emergency medical service personnel, for time spent in responding to and providing fire fighting, rescue, and emergency medical services in relation to the incident from which the conviction arose.

(c) The cost of medical supplies lost or expended by fire department and emergency medical service personnel, including volunteer fire fighters or volunteer emergency medical service personnel, and providing services in relation to the incident from which the conviction arose.

(d) The salaries, wages, or other compensation, including, but not limited to, overtime pay of prosecution personnel for time spent investigating and prosecuting the crime or crimes resulting in a conviction.

3) The amount ordered to be paid under this section shall be paid to the clerk of the court, who shall transmit the appropriate amount to the Village of Beverly Hills in order to receive reimbursement. If not otherwise provided by the court under this subsection, the reimbursement order under this section shall be made immediately. However, the court may require that the person make the reimbursement ordered under this section within a specified period or in specific installments.

4) If the person convicted is placed on probation, any reimbursement ordered under this section shall be a condition of that probation. The court may revoke probation if the person fails to comply with the order and if the person has not made a good faith effort to comply with the order. In determining whether to revoke probation, the court shall consider the person's employment status, earning ability, number of dependents, and financial resources, the willfulness of the person's failure to pay, and any other special circumstances that may have a bearing on the person's ability to pay.

5) An order for reimbursement under this section may be enforced by the Village Attorney named in the order to receive the reimbursement in the same manner as judgment in a civil action.

6) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a person shall not be imprisoned, jailed, or incarcerated for a violation of probation, or otherwise, for failure to make a reimbursement as ordered under this section unless the court determines that the person has the resources to pay the ordered reimbursement and has not made a good faith effort to do so. {Ord. 314; 6-25-03}

1.06.1 DEFINITIONS AND ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES FOR MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS.

General Administration

Commencement of Municipal Civil Infraction Action.

1. A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation by an authorized official of the Village directing the person alleged to be responsible to appear in court.
2. The form of citations used to charge municipal civil infraction violations shall be in accordance with state law (MCL 600.8709).
3. The basis for issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation shall be as set forth as follows:

a. An authorized official who witnesses a person violate an Ordinance, the violation of which is a municipal civil infraction, shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and as completely as possible, an original and three copies of a citation.

b. An authorized official may issue a citation to a person if, based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to believe that a person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction.

c. An authorized official may issue a citation to a person if, based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly witnessed a person violate an Ordinance, a violation of which is a municipal civil infraction, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and if the attorney for the Village approves in writing the issuance of the citation.

4. Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served in the following manner:

a. Except as otherwise provided below, the authorized official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged violator.

b. A municipal civil infraction action involving the use or occupancy of land or a building or other structure, a copy of the citation need not be personally served upon the alleged violator, but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or structure by posting the copy on the land or attaching the copy to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first-class mail to the owner of the land, building or structure at the owner's last known address.

c. A citation served as provided in Paragraph b above, for a violation involving the use or occupancy of land or a building or other structure, shall be processed in the same manner as a citation served personally upon a defendant.

Ordinance Enforcement Officer.

1. The Village Council is hereby authorized to appoint by motion or resolution any person or persons as Ordinance Enforcement Officers for such term or terms as may be designated in the motion or resolution for the purposes of carrying out the duties and responsibilities specified in this Ordinance for officials charged with the enforcement of the Ordinances. The Council may further, by motion or resolution, remove any person from such office, in the discretion of the Council.

2. An appointed Ordinance Enforcement Officer is authorized to enforce all ordinances of this Village whether or not any particular provision specifies or designated a different enforcing official. Where a particular officer is designated in any ordinance provision, that officer's authority shall continue in full force and effect, and shall not be diminished or impaired by the terms of this Ordinance, and the authority of the Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall be in addition and supplementary to the authority granted to such other specific officer.

3. The Ordinance Enforcement Officer's duties shall include the following: investigation of ordinance violations; issuance and service of municipal civil infraction citations appearance in court and other judicial or quasi-judicial proceedings in the administration of the Village ordinances. {Ord. 311; 12-18-02}

1.06.2 EMERGENCY SERVICES COST RECOVERY. This Ordinance is created to ensure that the Village of Beverly Hills, shall, to the extent permitted by law, recover the costs of an emergency response from the responsible party. {Ord. 335; 12-26-09}

Definitions - The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section:

Costs of the emergency response shall mean the costs incurred in responding to an emergency event, except as may be limited by a policy adopted by the governing body. Costs include, labor, equipment usage, and materials associated with investigation, removal, repair, abatement, mitigation, monitoring, cleanup, analysis, collection costs and attorney fees. {Ord. 335; 12-26-09}

Emergency response shall mean any response by the Public Safety Department/Fire Department, entity operating at the request of the Public Safety Department/Fire Department or any other responder as set forth in the National Incident Management System (Homeland Security Presidential Directive 5), to any call, including medical emergencies, for assistance from any person, property owner, government agency, emergency service provider, or other entity. {Ord. 335; 12-26-09}

Hazardous Materials Response shall mean any response to an event involving any chemical, substance, compound, mixture, or other material defined as designated as, listed as, or having the same characteristics as any substance, compound, mixture or material listed as hazardous under federal or state law or regulation. {Ord. 335; 12-26-09}

Person shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability corporation, association, consortium, governmental entity, or any other legal entity. {Ord. 335; 12-26-09}

Liability for Expense of Emergency Response.

a. Any owner, lessor, lessee, or operator of any property who is responsible for, or contributes to an emergency response shall be liable for the expense of the emergency response.
b. Any registered owner, lessor, lessee, or operator of any motor vehicle, the operation of which results in an emergency response, shall be liable for the expense of the emergency response.
c. Any public or private utility whose activities or facilities necessitated an emergency response shall be liable for the expense of the emergency response.
d. Any person owning, maintaining or operating a railroad shall be liable for the expense of the emergency response.
e. When an emergency response directly benefits more than one person or property, each person and/or property benefited shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of the expense of the emergency response. For purposes of an emergency response involving a motor vehicle, occupants other than the operator and the registered owner shall not be liable for the expense of the emergency response.
f. Cost recovery for any Hazardous Materials response may be pursued in a civil action, pursuant to the Natural Resource Environmental Protection Act (MCL 324.20135(1)(b)).
{Ord. 335; 12-26-09}

Collection and Billing of Emergency Response Costs.

Collection recovery costs incurred by the Public Safety Department/Fire Department, including billing and collection costs, court costs, and attorney fees, shall be assessed to a responsible party who fails to remit reimbursement for the costs of the provided emergency services in accordance with the billing procedures of this Ordinance. {Ord. 335; 12-26-09}

Upon a determination of responsibility for an emergency response, the Public Safety Director/Fire Chief, or his/her designee, shall prepare and deliver an invoice of the charges imposed to the responsible party or parties for payment. The responsible party shall reimburse the Public Safety Department/Fire Department, as directed by the invoice, for the charges set forth in the invoice within thirty (30) days. The responsible party shall be liable for any costs associated with the collection of the unpaid balance that remains after the expiration of thirty (30) days. {Ord. 335; 12-26-09}

1.07 SCHEDULE OF FEES. Established by the Village Council for the purpose of assuring adequate inspections, plan examination and compliance with respect to the various codes and ordinances of the Village of Beverly Hills as administered by the Building Department. All fees shall be paid to the Village of Beverly Hills.

Any dollar value of fees appearing in all other ordinances or in this Code which are inconsistent with the most recent Schedule of Fees adopted by the Village Council are to the extent of such inconsistency, hereby repealed.

A complete copy of the current Schedule of Fees is available at the office of the Village Clerk for inspection by the public during regular business hours.

1.08 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ACTS. Every person concerned in the commission of an act prohibited by this code, whether he directly commits the act, or prosecutes, counsels, aids, or abets in its commission, may be prosecuted and on conviction is punishable as if he had directly committed such act.

1.09 SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS. Each section, paragraph, sentence, clause and provision of this code is separable and if any provision is held unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the remainder of this code nor any part thereof, other than that part affected by such decision.

1.10 EFFECTIVE DATE. This code or ordinances shall take effect ten (10) days after passage and publication in book form under the authority of the Village Council. Copies of this code shall be kept on file in the Village Clerk's office for public inspection.

Chapter 2 - Village Government
2.01 EMERGENCIES
2.02 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT PROCEDURE
2.03 FINANCE DIRECTOR

2.01 EMERGENCIES

(a) Definition of Emergency. During times of great public crisis when the public health or safety is imperiled because of disaster, rioting, or other similar public catastrophe, or where there is reasonable apprehension of danger to the public health or safety therefrom, the President of the Council of the Village of Beverly Hills may proclaim a state of emergency and designate the area or areas within the Village involved. In the absence of the President or in the event of his disability the President Pro-Tem shall have the power and authority herein given the President, and if neither the President nor the President Pro-Tem are able or available to exercise such power and authority, then the Village Council, either at a regular or special meeting, shall have such power and authority.

(b) Emergency Powers. Following such proclamation, the President may promulgate such reasonable orders, rules and regulations as he deems necessary to protect life and property or to bring the emergency situation within the affected area or areas under control. Such orders rules and regulations may provide for the control of traffic, designation of specific zones within the area or areas in which occupancy and use of buildings and ingress and egress of persons and vehicles may be prohibited or regulated, control of places of amusement and assembly and of persons on public streets and thoroughfares, establishment of a curfew, control of the sale, transportation and use of alcoholic beverages and liquors, and control of the sale, carrying and use of firearms or other dangerous weapons, ammunition, explosives and inflammable materials or liquids deemed to be dangerous to the public safety. The President may also issue such other orders, rules and regulations, without being limited by the foregoing.

(c) Effective Date. Such orders, rules and regulations shall be effective from the date and in the manner therein prescribed and shall be made public as provided therein. Such orders, rules and regulations may be amended, modified or rescinded in like manner from time to time by the President during the pendency of the emergency, but shall cease to be in effect upon declaration by the President that the emergency no longer exists.

(d) Penalty. The violation of any such orders, rules and regulations made in conformity with this section shall be punishable as a misdemeanor where such order, rule or regulation states that the violation thereof shall constitute a misdemeanor.

2.02 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT PROCEDURE

(a) Definitions.

1. The term "Assessor" shall be a qualified person designated by resolution of the Village Council in the establishing of a special assessment district.

2. The term "improvement" shall mean any public improvement made directly by the Village, any part of the cost of which is to be assessed against one or more lots or parcels of land to be especially benefited thereby, in proportion to the benefit to be derived therefrom.

3. The term "cost" when referring to the cost of any improvement, shall include the cost of surveys, plans, right-of-way, financing and construction and all other costs incident to the making of such improvement, and shall mean the aggregate amount of the obligation, principal and interest. In all cases the term "cost" shall include the cost of spreading the rolls, examining tax and ownership records, notices, advertising, mailing, printing, hearings, litigation and all other costs directly related to the making of the special assessments and the financing of and payment for the improvement.

4. The term "local water and sewer improvements" means lateral sewers and distribution water mains intended primarily to serve properties abutting the improvement and specially benefiting therefrom.

(b) Power of Council. The Council shall have power to determine by resolution that the whole or any part of the cost or expenses of any improvement shall be defrayed by special assessments upon the property especially benefited in proportion to the benefits derived or to be derived.

(c) Advisory Petition. The Council, in order to ascertain whether or not a reasonable number of property owners to be assessed desire any particular improvement to be made, may request and receive a petition therefor, or may receive such a petition voluntarily presented; but in either event, such petition shall be advisory only and shall not be jurisdictional.

(d) Project Plans. Before determining to make any improvement, any part of the costs of which is to be defrayed by special assessment, the Council shall require the Village Manager to have prepared by the Village Engineer or his designated engineer, plans and specifications therefor and an estimate of the cost thereof and to file the same with the Clerk. For any improvement, the Village Manager shall recommend as to what proportion of the cost should be paid by special assessment and what part, if any, should be general obligation of the Village, the number of installments in which assessments may be paid and the lands which should be included in the special assessment district.

(e) Notice of Hearing. After such filing, a public hearing shall be held before the Council, which hearing shall be held not less than ten (10) days after notice of the time and place thereof has been published (publication to be twice, the first publication to be at least ten [10] days before the hearing and sent by the clerk by first (1st) class mail to all property owners in the proposed district as shown by the current assessment roll of the Village).

(f) Hearing on Project. At the time and place specified in such notice for the public hearing, the Council shall meet and hear any person to be affected by the proposed public improvement. The hearing may be adjourned from time to time by the Council.

(g) Determination by Council. After said public hearing, the Council may, by resolution, determine to make the improvement and to defray the whole or any part of the cost of the improvement by special assessment upon the property especially benefited in proportion to the benefits derived or to be derived. By such resolution the Council shall approve the Plans and specifications for the improvement; determine the estimated cost thereof; determine what proportion of such cost shall be paid by special assessment upon the property especially benefited and what part, if, any, shall be a general obligation of the Village; determine the number of installments in which assessments may be paid; determine the rate of interest to be charged on installments, not to exceed the maximum rate as allowed by state law; designate the district or land and premises upon which special assessments shall be levied; and direct the Assessor to prepare a special assessment roll in accordance with the Council's determination.

(h) Preparation of Roll. The Assessor shall thereupon prepare a special assessment roll including all lots and parcels of land within the special assessment district designated by the Council, and shall assess to each such lot or parcel of land such relative portion of the whole sum to be levied against all the lands in the special assessment district as the benefit to such lot or parcel of land bears to the total benefits to all lands in such district. There shall also be entered upon such roll the amount which has been assessed to the Village At Large.

(i) Filing Roll. When the Assessor shall have completed such assessment roll, he shall attach thereto, or endorse thereon, his certificate to the effect that said roll has been made by him pursuant to a resolution of the Council (giving date of adoption of same) and that in making the assessments therein he has, as near as may be, according to his best judgment, conformed in all respect to the directions contained in such resolution, and to the provisions of this ordinance. Thereupon he shall file said special assessment roll with the Clerk, who shall present the same to the Council.

(j) Notice of Hearing on Roll. Upon receipt of such special assessment roll the Council shall order it filed in the office of the Clerk for public examination; shall fix the time and place when it will meet and review such roll, which meeting shall be held not less than ten (10) days after notice thereof has been sent by the Clerk by first (1st) class mail to all property owners in the proposed district as shown by the current assessment roll of the Village. Such notice shall specify the time and place of such meeting. The Clerk shall also publish notice of said meeting twice (2), the first publication to be not less than ten (10) days prior to date of said meeting.

(k) Hearing on Roll. Any person deeming himself aggrieved by the special assessment roll may file his objections thereto in writing with the Clerk prior to the close of said hearing, which written objections shall specify in what respect he deems himself aggrieved.

(l) Review of Roll. The Council shall meet and review the said special assessment roll at the time and place appointed, or at any adjourned date therefor, and shall consider any oral or written objection thereto. The Council may correct said roll as to any assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land, or other errors appearing therein. Any changes made in such roll shall be noted in the Council's minutes. After such hearing and review the Council may confirm such special assessment roll with such corrections as it may have made, if any, or may refer it back to the Assessor for revision or may annul it and any proceedings in connection therewith. The Clerk shall endorse the date of confirmation upon each special assessment roll.

(m) Final Confirmation. Such roll shall, upon confirmation, be final and conclusive.

(n) Installments; Lien. All special assessments contained in any special assessment roll, including any part thereof deferred as to payment, shall, from the date of confirmation of such roll, constitute a lien upon the respective lots or parcels of land assessed and until paid shall be a charge against the respective owners of the several lots and parcels of land and a debt to the Village from the persons to whom they are assessed. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as the lien created by the Village Charter for Village taxes and shall include accrued interest and penalties. No judgment or decree, nor any act of the Council vacating a special assessment, shall destroy or impair the lien of the Village upon the premises assessed for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the same, or as by a regular mode of proceeding might be lawfully assessed thereon. All special assessments shall become due upon confirmation of the special assessment roll or in annual installments in number as the Council may determine at the time of confirmation and if in annual installments, the Council shall determine the first installment to be due upon confirmation or on the following July 1st and subsequent installments shall be due on July 1st of succeeding years.

(o) Collection of Assessments. The assessment roll shall be transmitted by the Clerk to the Treasurer for collection immediately after its confirmation. The Treasurer may mail statements of the several assessments to the respective owners, as indicated by the records of the Assessor, of the several lots and parcels of land assessed, stating the amount of the assessment and the manner in which it may be paid; provided, however, that failure to mail any such statement shall not invalidate the assessment or entitle the owner to an extension of time within which to pay the assessment.

(p) Early Payment. The Council may determine that the whole or any part of any such assessment may be paid during a determined period after the date of confirmation of the special assessment roll without interest or penalty.

(q) Spreading Installments. The first (1st) installment shall be spread upon the next Village tax roll in a column headed "Special Assessments", together with interest upon all unpaid installments from the date of the confirmation of the roll to the 1st (first) day of July of the year in which such tax roll is made; provided, that any fraction of a month shall be considered as a full month. Thereafter one (1) installment shall be spread upon each annual tax roll, together with one year's interest upon all unpaid installments; provided, that when any annual installment shall have been prepaid as hereinafter provided, then there shall be spread upon the tax roll for such year only the interest upon all unpaid installments.

(r) Collection of Installments. After each installment has been placed on the tax rolls, the same shall be collected by the Treasurer with the same rights and remedies, and the same penalties and interest, as provided in the Charter for the collection of taxes.

(s) Advance Payment of Installments. After the expiration of the period provided for in Section 15.01, any installment which has not been spread upon the tax rolls may be discharged by paying the face amount thereof plus the interest thereon to date of payment. Any person desiring to pay such installment in advance shall first secure the proper statement from the Assessor to permit the Treasurer to compute the amount to be paid. The Treasurer shall report to the Assessor all advance payments on installments so that the Assessor shall have such information before spreading installments on the next Village tax roll.

(t) Determination of Actual Cost. Upon completion of the improvement and the payment of the cost thereof, the Village Manager shall certify to the Council the total cost of said improvement, together with the amount of the original roll for said improvement.

(u) Deficiency Assessments. Should the assessment in any special assessment roll, including the amount assessed to the Village At Large, prove insufficient for any reason to pay the cost of the improvement for which they were made, then the Council shall make additional assessments against the Village, and the several lots and parcels of land, in the same ratio as the original assessments, to supply the deficiency; but the total amount assessed against any lot or parcel of land shall not exceed the value of the benefits received from the improvement.

(v) Excessive Assessments. The excess by which any special assessment proves larger than the actual cost of the improvement and expenses incidental thereto may be placed in the general fund of the Village if such excess is five (5%) percent or less of the assessment, but should the assessment prove larger than necessary by more than five (5%) percent, the entire excess shall be refunded on a pro rata basis to the current owners of the property assessed. The assessment roll shall by resolution contain the minimum dollar amount that will not be returned by Council. Such refund shall be made by credit against future unpaid installments in the inverse order in which they are payable to the extent such installments then exist and the balance of such refund shall be in cash. No refunds may be made which contravene the provisions of any outstanding evidence of indebtedness secured in whole or part by such special assessment.

(w) Reassessments. Whenever any special assessment shall, in the opinion of the Council, be invalid by reason or irregularity or informality in the proceedings, or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge such assessment to be illegal, the Council shall, whether the improvement has been made or not, or whether any part of the assessment has been paid or not, have power to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made. All proceedings on such reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be conducted in the same manner as provided for the original assessment; and whenever the assessment, or any part thereof, levied upon any premises has been so set aside, if the same has been paid and not refunded, the payment so made shall be applied upon the reassessment and the reassessment shall to that extent be deemed satisfied.

(x) Collection by Suit. In addition to any other remedies and without impairing the lien therefor, any delinquent special assessment, together with interest and penalties, may be collected in an action in assumpsit in the name of the Village against the person assessed, in any court having jurisdiction of the amount. If in any such action it shall appear that by reason of any irregularities or informalities the assessment has not been properly made against the defendant or upon the premises sought to be charged, the court may, nevertheless, on satisfactory proof that expense has been incurred by the Village which is proper charge against the defendant or the premises in question, render judgment for the amount properly chargeable against such defendant or upon such premises.

(y) Assessment to Precede Project. No public improvement to be financed in whole or in part by special assessment shall be made before the confirmation of the special assessment roll for such improvement.

(z) Single Lot Assessments. When any expense shall have been incurred by the Village upon or in respect to any single premises, which expense is chargeable against said premises and the owner thereof under the provisions of State Law, Village Charter or Ordinances and is not of that class required to be pro rated among the several lots and parcels of land in a special assessment district, an account of the labor, material and service for which such expense was incurred; with a description of the premises upon or in respect to which the expense was incurred, and the name of the owner, if known, shall be reported to the Treasurer, who shall immediately charge and bill the owner, if known. The Council shall, at such times as it may deem advisable direct the Assessor to prepare a special assessment roll covering all such charges reported to it together with the cost of administration. Such roll shall be filed with the Clerk who shall advise the Council of the filing of the same, and the Council shall thereupon set a date for the hearing of objections to such assessment roll. The assessment roll shall be open to public inspection for a period of seven (7) days before the Council shall meet to review the roll and hear complaints. The Village Clerk shall give notice in advance by publication of the opening of the roll to public inspection and of the meeting of the Council to hear complaints and shall also give like notice to the owners of the property affected by first class mail at their addresses as shown on the current general assessment roll of the Village, at least ten (10) days prior to the date of such hearing. Such special assessments and all interest and charges thereon, shall, from the date of confirmation of the roll, be and remain a lien upon the property assessed of the same character and effect as a lien created by general law for State and County taxes, until paid. Village Council may in its discretion authorize a payment schedule of a period not to exceed three (3) years under this section. Interest shall be paid on such assessments, from such date after confirmation and payment as shall be fixed by the Council, and such assessments, with penalties and interest, shall be added by the Treasurer to the next general Village Tax Roll or general County and School Tax Roll, according to the assessment as shall be convenient, and shall thereafter be collected and returned in the same manner as general Village taxes.

(aa) Closing of Assessments. The Village Council shall by resolution close out each special assessment district as soon as legally possible. Such resolution shall state the refund, if any, or the balance, if any, to the general fund.

2.03 FINANCE DIRECTOR

Pursuant to Section 4.12 of the Village Charter, the Village Council hereby creates the position of Finance Director for the Village of Beverly Hills. Such person shall be responsible for the system of municipal accounts and shall be the general accountant of the Village, keeping the books and records of assets, liabilities, receipts and expenditures of the Village, and shall keep the Council informed as to the financial affairs of the Village. The system of accounts of the Village shall conform to such uniform systems as it may be required by law.

The Finance Director shall perform all functions now performed by the Village Clerk as to the financial matters of the Village of Beverly Hills. {Ord. 278, 7-10-96}

Chapter 3 - Department of Public Safety
3.01 DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY
3.02 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
3.03 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY
3.04 APPOINTMENTS
3.05 INTEGRATION
3.06 RULES AND REGULATIONS
3.07 IMPOUNDED OR LOST PERSONAL PROPERTY
3.08 RETIREMENT SYSTEM ESTABLISHED
 
3.01 DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY
 
There is hereby created and established the Department of Public Safety for the Village.
 
3.02 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
 
The Department of Public Safety shall perform all of the duties and responsibilities of the police and fire services of the Village and shall have all of the powers, duties and responsibilities conferred upon the police and fire services by virtue of the Charter and ordinances of the Village and by law, and shall have such other and additional powers, duties and responsibilities as may be lawfully imposed upon it by any administrative directive, resolution, rule, ordinance, Charter provision or law.
 
3.03 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY
 
There is hereby created the administrative office of Director of Public Safety who shall be the administrator and head of the Department of Public Safety. The Director of Public Safety shall combine the administrative offices of the Chief of Police and Chief of the Fire Department as provided in the Charter of the Village. The Director shall have all of the duties, responsibilities and functions conferred upon a Chief of Police and Chief of the Fire Department. He shall in addition thereto have such powers, duties and responsibilities as shall from time to time be lawfully conferred upon him by the Village Manager and by law generally. Wherever any statute, ordinance, municipal regulation or law shall require a duty or responsibility of the Chief of Police or Chief of the Fire Department, such duties and responsibilities shall be assumed and performed in the Village by the Director of Public Safety.
 
3.04 APPOINTMENTS
 
The Director of Public Safety shall be appointed by the Village Manager subject to the approval of the council and his term of office shall be limited as provided by the Charter of the Village. The Director of Public Safety may appoint such deputies and officers as he shall deem necessary for the proper and efficient operation of the Department of Public Safety. 
 
3.05 INTEGRATION
 
The duties and responsibilities of policemen and firemen are hereby combined in the persons of Public Safety Officers, and the Public Safety Officers shall perform such duties and responsibilities as shall be conferred upon them from time to time by the Director of Public Safety. In addition thereto, the Public Safety Officers shall have and perform such duties as are imposed upon policemen or firemen by the Charter of the Village, ordinances of the Village and by law.
 
3.06 RULES AND REGULATIONS
 
The Council, subject to the pertinent provisions of the Charter of the Village, shall from time to time adopt such rules and regulations as it may deem expedient for the proper administration of the Department of Public Safety and the duties, responsibilities and privileges of Public Safety Officers. Such regulations shall become effective twenty-four (24) hours after they are posted on a bulletin board in the office of the Director of Public Safety.
 
3.07 IMPOUNDED OR LOST PERSONAL PROPERTY. 
 
(a) Disposition. Any personal property which shall be impounded by, or which may otherwise come into the possession of the Village of Beverly Hills or any of its officers, employees, or agents shall be held and disposed of as provided in this section.
 
(b) Custody. All such property shall be immediately turned over to the Director of Public Safety, who shall be the custodian thereof, and it shall be his duty to provide storage for such property until the same shall have been reclaimed by the owner or sold as provided herein. All money and negotiable securities shall be turned over by the Director of Public Safety to the Village Treasurer for safekeeping, and if not reclaimed within the forty-five (45) day period provided for below, such securities shall be converted to cash and shall be deposited in the general fund along with other moneys so turned over to the Treasurer.
 
(c) Locating Owner. Upon receipt of any such property, the Director of Public Safety shall make diligent effort to locate the rightful owner thereof and to return such property to such owner. No property shall be surrendered by the Director of Public Safety until any and all charges for taking possession, keeping and storing such property shall be paid. Before surrendering any such property, the Director of Public Safety shall require such evidence of ownership as may be appropriate in each case. In the event the name and post office address of the owner of any such property is known, notice of the retention of such property, of the requirements of this section pertaining to the sale thereof on the event it shall remain unclaimed within forty-five (45) days, and of the limitation on the right of the owner to reclaim such property, as set forth in subsection (e) hereof, shall be given by the Director of Public Safety to such owner by certified mail, return receipt requested.
 
(d) Unclaimed; Sale. Any such property other than money and negotiable securities, which shall remain unclaimed for a period of forty-five (45) days, or which shall not be returned to the owner thereof within such period because of the owner's failure, refusal or neglect to pay the charges for taking possession, keeping and storing such property, as hereinbefore set forth, shall be considered as abandoned property and shall be sold at public auction. Where the name and a post office address of the owner of such abandoned property is known, the Director of Public Safety shall give to such owner not less than ten (10) days written notice of the time and place of such sale, by certified mail, return receipt demanded, directed to such owner at his last known post office address. Notice of such sale shall also be published in two consecutive issues of a newspaper of general circulation in the Village of Beverly Hills. The Director of Public Safety, or his deputy, shall conduct the sale and shall sell such property at the best price possible.
 
All proceeds of such sales shall be promptly turned over to the Village Treasurer for deposit in the general fund of the Village. The Director of Public Safety or his deputy, shall deliver bills of sale and such other papers as may be necessary to transfer property title of any property sold at such sale. The owner of any such property may not purchase the same at an auction sale unless the price bid and paid therefore shall be sufficient to cover all costs of taking possession of, keeping, storing and selling such property.
 
(e) Effect of Sale. Upon the sale of any such property all rights of the owner therein shall be extinguished, and such owner shall thereafter have no claim upon such property nor for the value thereof, against the Village of Beverly Hills or any of its officers, agents or employees or against any person who shall purchase such property at auction sale.
 
(f) Vehicles. In the case of the sale of any abandoned motor vehicle, the Director of Public Safety shall notify the Secretary of State of such abandonment, and the proceedings for such sale shall be in accordance with the provision of Section 252 (b) of Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of 1949 as amended, known as the Michigan Vehicle Code. Any surplus received at such sale, after costs of the sale, all charges for taking possession, keeping and storing have been deducted, shall be returned to the owner of such vehicle.
 
(g) Gambling Devices; Weapons; Perishable Goods. The Director of Public Safety may destroy gambling paraphernalia, any dangerous weapons or other articles which may be dangerous to store, and any perishable goods for which storage may be impracticable, or shall otherwise dispose of them according to law.
 
(h) Records. The Director of Public Safety shall maintain accurate records of all personal property impounded by or coming into the possession of the Village or any of its officers, agents or employees, which records, among other things, shall show a brief description of each item; the name and last known post office address of the owner thereof if known; a copy of all notices mailed and published, to which the return receipts from any certified mail shall be attached; the cost of taking possession, keeping and storing such property; if reclaimed, the person to whom the property was delivered and the amount receipted therefore; if sold, the name and address of the purchaser and the amount paid therefore; and such other information as may be appropriate.
 
3.08 RETIREMENT SYSTEM ESTABLISHED
 
Effective Date. The Beverly Hills Retirement System is hereby created and established by authority given in Section 4.13 of the Village Charter. The effective date of the retirement system shall be July 1, 1961.
 
3.08.1 RETIREMENT SYSTEM
 
The membership of all current and future employees and retirees of the bargaining units for Public Safety Command and Public Safety Officers in the Beverly Hills Retirement System is terminated, and their membership and accrued benefits are transferred to the Municipal Employees' Retirement System (MERS) and their membership and accrued benefits are transferred to the Municipal Employees' Retirement System (MERS) of Michigan defined benefit plan, a qualified governmental pension plan pursuant to Internal Revenue Code 401 (a), as provided in the MERS Restated Plan Document of 2012 ("Plan Document") and the Adoption Agreement between MERS and the Village, as both may be amended from time to time. To the extent that any provisions of these Ordinances contracdict or are inconsistent with the Plan Document and/or the Adoption Agreement with respect to Bargaining Unit Command Officers and Public Safety Officers, the Plan Document and/or the Adoption Agreement controls. All assets and obligations currently held by the Beverly Hills Retirement System for Bargaining Unit Command Officers and Public Safety Officers (as set forth in the MERS Initial Actuarial Valuation dated January 1, 2013, will transfer to MERS on June 1, 2013.
 
Any Public Safety Officers hired after July 1, 2013, be covered by a Defined Contribution Plan administered by the Municipal Employees' Retirement System (MERS) in lieu of participation and eligibility in the Village Defined Benefit Pension Plan. {Ord. 245; 5-30-2013}
 
(a) Definitions: The following words and phrases as used in this section, unless a different meaning is plainly required by context, shall have the following meanings:
 
Accounts Receivable: Those receivables of a system which presumably will be converted into cash during the next twelve (12) months, including but not limited to, employee contributions, employer contributions due from other funds, and employer contributions due from other units of government.
 
Accumulated Contributions: The sum of all amounts deducted from the compensation of a member and credited to his individual account in the members deposit fund, together with regular interest thereon. Effective the 1st day of July, 1976, no amounts will be deducted from the compensation of members and a member's accumulated contributions will consist of the amount credited to his individual account in the members deposit fund that date together with such regular interest as thereafter accrues to his account.
 
Assets: For the purpose of meeting asset limitations contained in this act, means the total of the cash, accounts receivable, and investments of a system valued at cost.
 
Beneficiary: Any person, except a retirant, who is in receipt of a pension or other benefit payable from funds of the retirement system.
 
Board of Trustee's or Board: The Board of Trustees provided for in this Ordinance.
 
Compensation: The salary and wages paid a member for personal services rendered to the Village of Beverly Hills, including longevity pay, vacation pay, holiday pay, cost of living (cola), sick leave pay while absent from work and items of deferred compensation as provided by Board Rule. Compensation does not include overtime pay, allowances for clothing, cleaning, equipment, travel and similar items, reimbursement of expenses incurred, bonuses, termination or severance pay, payment in consideration of unused sick leave, the value of any fringe benefit, salary, wages and any other items which are the basis of benefits under another retirement program, or items of a similar nature, as provided by Board Rule.
 
Council: The Council of the Village of Beverly Hills.
 
Credited Service: The service credited a member to the extent provided for in this Ordinance.
 
Final Average Salary: The average of the highest annual compensation paid a member of the Village during any period of two (2) consecutive years of his credited service contained within his five (5) years of credited service immediately preceding termination of his last employment by the Village as a Public Safety Officer. If he has less than two (2) years of credited service his final average salary shall be the average of his annual compensations received during his total years of credited service.
 
Gender: The masculine gender shall include the feminine gender, and words of the singular number with respect to persons shall include the plural number, and vice-versa.
 
Invest or Investment: The utilization of money in the expectation of future returns in the form of income or capital gain. Investments initially purchased in accordance with this act which subsequently do not qualify for purchase for any reason, shall be considered to continue to meet the requirements of this act.
 
Investment Fiduciary: A person who does any of the following: (1) Exercises any discretionary authority or control in the investment of a system's assets. (2) Renders, for a fee, investment advice for a system.
 
Member: Any person who is included in the membership of the retirement system.
 
Net Earnings Available for Fixed Charges: The net income after deducting operating and maintenance expenses, taxes other than federal and state income taxes, depreciation, and depletion, but excluding extraordinary expenses appearing in the regular financial statement of the system.
 
Obligations: The bonds, notes, collateral trust certificates, convertible bonds, debentures, equipment trust certificates, conditional sales agreements, guaranteed mortgage certificates, pass-through certificates, participation certificates, mortgages, trust deeds, general obligations bonds, revenue bonds, or other similar interest bearing instruments of debt. Obligations may be secured or unsecured and may be publicly offered or privately placed.
 
Pension: An annual amount, payable from funds of the retirement system, throughout the life of a person or for a temporary period, as provided in this Ordinance. All pensions shall be paid in equal monthly installments.
 
Pension Reserve: The present value of all payments to be made on account of any pension and shall be computed based upon such mortality and other tables of experience, and regular interest, as the Council shall from time to time adopt.
 
Public Safety Officer: Any officer or employee in the Department of Public Safety of the Village who holds the rank of patrolman, including probationary patrolman, or higher rank. The term "Public Safety Officer" shall not include (1) any civilian employee in the said Department of Public Safety, nor (2) any person who is temporarily employed as a Public Safety Officer, nor (3) any person who is privately employed as a Public Safety Officer or as a Policeman or Fireman.
 
Regular Interest: Such rate or rates of interest per annum, compounded annually, as the Council shall from time to time determine.
 
Retirant: Any member who retires from the employ of the Village with a pension payable from funds of the retirement system.
 
Retirement: A member's withdrawal from Village employment with a pension payable from funds of the retirement system.
 
Retirement System or Systems: The Beverly Hills Retirement System created and established by this Ordinance.
 
Service: The service rendered to the Village by a Public Safety Officer in the employ of the Village.
 
Village: The Village of Beverly Hills, Michigan.
 
Village Council: The legislative body of the Village of Beverly Hills, Michigan.
 
Voluntary Retirement Age: For a Public Safety Officer means age fifty-five (55) years.
 
(b) Board of Trustees: There is hereby created a Board of Trustees in whom is vested the power and authority to administer, manage, and operate the retirement system, and to construe and make effective the provisions of this Ordinance. The Board shall consist of five (5) trustees, as follows:
 
1. The President of the Village, to serve by virtue of his office.
 
2. A Councilman to be selected by the council to serve at the pleasure of the Council.
 
3. A citizen, who is an elector of the Village, and who is not eligible to participate in the retirement system as a member or retirant, to be appointed by the Village President by and with the consent of the Council.
 
4. Two Public Safety Officers to be elected by the Public Safety Officers. The said elections shall be held under such rules and regulations as the Board of Trustees shall from time to time adopt. Provided, that the first such election shall be held under such rules and regulations as the Council shall adopt.
 
(c) Trustees' Terms of Office: For the first Board of Trustees, the term of office of the citizen trustee provided for in Section 3.08(b) (3) hereof shall expire June 30, 1964; the term of office of the Public Safety Officer trustee receiving the highest number of votes shall expire June 30, 1963, and the term of office for the office for the Public Safety Officer receiving the next highest number of votes shall expire June 30, 1962. Thereafter the terms of office for the trustees provided for in Section 3.08(b) (3) and (4) hereof shall be three (3) years. Each trustee shall continue to serve as trustee until his successor has qualified.
 
(d) Vacancy on Board; How Filled: In the event a trustee provided for in Section 3.08(b) (1), (2) or (3) hereof ceases to be an officer or employee of the Village, or in the event any trustee provided for in Section 3.08(b) (3) or (4) hereof shall fail to attend scheduled meetings of the Board of Trustees for three (3) consecutive meetings, unless in each case excused for cause by the remaining trustees attending such meetings, he shall be considered to have resigned from the Board and the Board shall by resolution declare his office of trustee vacated as of the date of adoption of such resolution. If a vacancy occurs in the office of trustee, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term, in the same manner as the office was previously filled.
 
(e) Meetings of Board; Quorum; Vote; Proceedings: The Board of Trustees shall hold meetings regularly, at least one (1) each quarter year, and shall designate the time and place thereof. Three (3) trustees shall constitute a quorum at any meeting of the Board. Each trustee shall be entitled to one (1) vote on each question before the Board and at least three (3) concurring votes shall be required for a decision by the Board at any of its meetings. The Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of its proceedings. All meetings of the Board shall be public.
 
(f) Retirement System Officers. The Board of Trustees shall designate a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman from its own number.
 
1. The Village Treasurer shall be secretary of the retirement system and shall serve as its administrative officer.
 
2. The Village Treasurer shall be treasurer of the retirement system and the custodian of its funds.
 
3. The Board of Trustees shall designate an actuary or actuarial firm who shall be the technical advisor to the Board on matters regarding the operation of the retirement system, and who shall perform such other duties as are required of him under the provisions of this Ordinance.
 
4. The Village Attorney shall be legal advisor of the Board of Trustees.
 
5. The Board of Trustees shall have the authority to employ such medical and other professional services required to carry out the provisions of this Ordinance. Compensation for such services shall be fixed by the Board subject to the approval of the Council.
 
(g) Annual Reports. The secretary shall keep, or cause to be kept, such data as shall be necessary for an actuarial valuation of the retirement system. The Board of Trustees shall annually, or before February 1, render a written report to the Council showing the fiscal transactions of the retirement system for the preceding fiscal year. the Board shall furnish the Council such additional information regarding the operation of the retirement system as the Council shall from time to time request.
 
(h) Adoption of Experience Tables and Regular Interest. The Council shall from time to time adopt such mortality and other tables of experience, and a rate or rates of regular interest as are necessary in the operation of the retirement system on an actuarial basis.
 
(i) Membership.
 
1. The membership of the retirement system shall include all Public Safety Officers who are in the employ of the Village June 30, 1961, and all persons who become Public Safety Officers after June 30, 1961.
 
2. In any case of doubt as to the membership status of any individual the Board of Trustees shall decide the question and its decision shall be final.
 
(j) Termination of Membership. Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, should any member leave the employ of the Village as a Public Safety Officer, for any reason except his retirement or death, he shall thereupon cease to be a member and his credited service at that time shall be forfeited by him. Should he be reemployed by the Village as a Public Safety Officer he shall again become a member of the retirement system. If his said reemployment occurs within a period of one (1) year from and after the date he last separated from Village employment as a Public Safety Officer his credited service last forfeited by him shall be restored to his credit. Provided, that he returns to the members deposit fund the amount he withdrew therefrom together with regular interest from the date of withdrawal to the date of repayment. Upon his retirement or death he shall thereupon cease to be a member.
 
(k) Credited Services. The Board of Trustees shall fix and determine by appropriate rules and regulations, consistent with the provisions of this Ordinance, the amount of service to be credited any member; Provided, that in no case shall less than ten (10) days of service rendered in any calendar month be credited as a month of service; nor shall less than ten (10) months of service rendered in any calendar year be credited as a year of service; nor shall more than one (1) year of service be credited any member for all service rendered by him in any calendar year.
 
(l) War Service Credit. In the event a member, who while employed by the Village, enters the armed forces of the United States during any period of compulsory military service and re-enters the employ of the Village as a Public Safety Officer, such armed service rendered by him, not to exceed an aggregate of five (5) years, shall be credited him as Village service. Provided, that (1) his re-employment by the Village occurs within six (6) months from and after termination of such armed service actually required of him, and (2) he pays into the members deposit fund the amount he may have withdrawn therefrom, together with regular interest from the date of withdrawal to the date of repayment. In any case of doubt as to the period to be so credited any member, the Board of Trustees shall have final power to determine such period. During the period of such armed service and until his return to Village employment, his contributions to the retirement system shall be suspended and any balance standing to his credit in the members deposit fund shall be accumulated at regular interest. No credit hereunder shall be given to a member who enlists or volunteers for the armed forces while the United States is not in a state of declared war by Congress or national emergency declared by the President of the United States. Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, contributions, benefits, and service credit with respect to qualified military service will be provided under the retirement system in accordance with Section 414(u) of the Internal Revenue Code. This subsection applies to all qualified military service on or after December 12, 1994. {Ord. 315; 8-16-03}
 
(m) Normal Retirement.
 
1. Any member who has attained or attains the age of sixty-five (65) years shall be separated from the employ of the Village on the first day of the calendar month next following the month in which he attains age sixty-five (65) years; Provided, that this paragraph shall be subject to paragraph (2) of this section.
 
2. Any member who has attained or attains age sixty-five (65) years may be continued in Village employment for periods not to extend beyond this attainment of age seventy (70) years. Provided, that his continuance in Village employment is (1) requested by him in writing, (2) approved by the Director of Public Safety, and (3) approved by the Council.
 
3. He shall receive no more retirement system credit after attaining the age of sixty-five (65).
 
4. If, at the time of a member's separation from Village employment, as provided in this section, he has ten (10) or more years of credited service he shall be entitled to a pension provided for in Section 3.08(o) hereof.
 
(n) Voluntary Retirement. Any member, who has ten (10) or more years of credited service and has attained or attains his voluntary retirement age (55), may retire upon his written application filed with the Board of Trustees setting forth at what time, not less than thirty (30) days nor more than ninety (90) days subsequent to the execution and filing thereof, he desires to be retired. Effective December 31, 1987, any member of the Public Safety Department who has attained age fifty (50) years with 
twenty-five (25) years of credited service may retire upon his written application filed with the Board of Trustees setting forth at what time, not less than thirty (30) days nor more than ninety (90) days subsequent to the execution and filing thereof, he desires to be retired. Upon his retirement he shall receive a pension provided for in Section 3.08(o) hereof. {Ord. 315; 8-16-03}
 
(o) Straight Life Pension. Upon the retirement of a member, as provided in this Ordinance, the member shall receive a straight life pension equal to 2.0 percent of his/her final average salary multiplied by the number of years, and fraction of a year, of his/her credited service. The member shall have the right to elect an option provided for in Section 3.08(r).
 
1. Effective January 1, 1986, the Public Safety employees of sergeant and above will be provided the additional retirement benefit of an increased multiplier from two percent to two and one-quarter percent from the time the employee retires to the day before the retiree turns age sixty-two. Effective upon the retiree's sixty-second birthday, the multiplier shall revert to 2.00 percent.
 
2. Effective March 1, 1991, the retirement benefit shall be revised to provide a multiplier of two and one-quarter percent until the retiree reaches age sixty-two or the retiree's adjusted earliest date of eligibility for Social Security payments, whichever is earlier. At age sixty-two or the retiree's adjusted earliest date of eligibility for Social Security payments, whichever is earlier, the multiplier shall be two percent.
 
3. Effective January 1, 1994, the retirement benefit for member shall be revised to provide a multiplier of two and one-quarter percent until the retiree reaches age sixty-two or the retiree's adjusted earliest date of eligibility for Social Security payments, whichever is later. At age sixty-two or the retiree's adjusted earliest date of eligibility for Social Security payments, whichever is later, the multiplier shall be two percent. {Ord. 277, 6-16-96}
 
4. Effective January 1, 2000, the retirement benefit shall be revised to provide a multiplier of two and one-half percent at all ages; there will be no multiplier reduction at date of eligibility for social security payments.
 
5. Any member who retires from the Village under this retirement system after January 1, 2003 shall receive a 2% annual escalator (compounded) for a period of ten (10) years, beginning in the sixth year of retirement and concluding after the fifteenth year of retirement. This escalator provision shall continue for the surviving spouse of a retiree who has elected the survivor option; provided that said spouse was the spouse of the member on the date of his/her retirement. {Ord. 315; 8-16-03}
 
(p) Straight Life Refund Provision. If a retirant dies before he has received in straight life pension payments an aggregate amount equal to his accumulated contributions standing to his credit in the members deposit fund at the time of his retirement, the difference between his said accumulated contributions and the said accumulated contributions and the said aggregate amount of straight life pension payments received by him shall be paid from the pension reserve fund to such person or persons as he shall have nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the Board of Trustees. If there be no such designated person or persons surviving the said retirant such difference, if any, shall be paid to his legal representative. No benefits shall be paid under this section on account of death of a retirant if he elected option A or B provided for in Section 3.08(r) hereof. 
 
(q) Deferred Retirement. Should any member who has ten (10) or more years of credited service leave the employ of the Village prior to his attainment of his voluntary retirement age, for reasons except his disability retirement or death, he shall be entitled to a pension provided for in Section 3.08(o) hereof, provided he does not withdraw his accumulated contributions standing to his credit in the member deposit fund. His said pension shall begin the first day of the calendar month next following the month in which his application for same is filed with the Board of Trustees on or after his attainment of age fifty-five (55) years. {Ord. 315; 8-16-03}
 
(r) Pension Options. Prior to the effective date of a member's retirement, but not thereafter, he/she may elect to receive his/her pension as a straight life pension payable throughout his/her life, or he/she may elect to receive the actuarial equivalent, at that time, of his/her straight life pension in a reduced pension payable throughout his/her life, and nominate a beneficiary, in accordance with the provisions of option A or B set forth below:
 
Option A. Upon the death of a retirant, who elected Option A., his/her reduced pension shall be continued throughout the life of and paid to such person, having an insurable interest in his/her life, as he/she shall have nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the Board of Trustees prior to the effective date of his/her retirement. Effective January 1, 1994, in the event the designated beneficiary under Options A or B predeceases the retirant, the retirant's benefit shall revert to the amount of a normal straight life pension, or
 
Option B. Upon the death of a retirant, who elected Option B, one-half his/her reduced pension shall be continued throughout the life of and paid to such person, having an insurable interest in his/her life, as he/she shall have nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the Board of Trustees prior to the effective date of his/her retirement. Effective January 1, 1994, in the event the designated beneficiary under Options A or B predeceases the retirant, the retirant's benefit shall revert to the amount of a normal straight life pension. {Ord. 277, 6-16-96}
 
(s) Disability Retirement. Upon the application of a member, or his department head, a member who (1) is in the employ of the Village, (2) has ten (10) or more years of credited service, and (3) becomes totally and permanently disabled for duty as a public safety officer, by reason of a personal injury or disease, may be retired by the Board of Trustees. Provided, that after a medical examination of the said member, by or under the direction of a medical committee consisting of three (3) physicians, one of whom shall be named by the Board, one by the said member, and the third physician by the first two physicians so named, the said medical committee certifies to the .Board, in writing, that (1) the said member is physically or mentally totally disabled for duty as a Public Safety Officer, (2) his disability will probably be permanent and (3) the said member should be retired. The ten (10) years of service requirement contained in this section shall be waived in the case of any member whom the Board finds (1) to be totally and permanently disabled as the natural and proximate result of a personal injury or disease arising out of and in the course of this actual performance of duty as a Public Safety Officer in the employ of the Village, and (2) to be in receipt of, or entitled to receive workmen's compensation on account of his said physical or mental disability.
 
(t) Disability Pension.
 
1. Upon a member's retirement on account of disability, as provided in Section 3.08(s) hereof, he shall receive a disability straight life pension computed according to the provisions of Section 3.08(o) hereof, notwithstanding that he might not have attained his voluntary retirement age. Provided, that his said disability straight life pension shall not be less than twenty percent (20%) of his final average salary. Upon his retirement he shall have the right to elect an option provided for in Section 3.08(r) hereof.
 
2. Upon termination of his workmen's compensation payments, if any, arising on account of his Village employment, a disability retirant shall be given service credit for the period he was in receipt of workmen's compensation and his disability pension payable thereafter shall include such additional service credit. In the event he is paid a single sum in lieu of weekly workmen's compensation the period covered by such single sum shall be considered to be the number of weeks determined by dividing the applicable weekly workmen's compensation into the said single sum payment.
 
3. Any pensions payable under this section shall be subject to Section 3.08(u) hereof.
 
(u) Re-examination of Disability Retirement.
 
1. At least once each year during the first five (5) years following the retirement of a member with a disability pension, and at least once in each three (3) year period thereafter, the Board of Trustees may, and upon the retirant's application shall, require a disability retirant, who has not attained his voluntary retirement age to undergo a medical examination to be made by or under the direction of a physician designated by the Board. Should the said retirant refuse to submit to such medical examination in any such period, the Board may suspend payment of his disability pension until his withdrawal of such refusal. If such refusal continues for one (1) year all his rights in and to a disability pension may be revoked by the Board. If upon such medical examination of the retirant the said physician reports to the Board that the said retirant is physically able and capable of resuming employment with the Village as a Public Safety Officer he shall be returned to active service in the employ of the Village and his disability pension shall terminate. In returning the said retirant to Village employment as provided herein, reasonable latitude shall be allowed the Village in placing him in a position commensurate to the rank or position held by him at time of his retirement.
 
2. In the event a disability retirant, who has not attained his voluntary retirement age, becomes engaged in a gainful occupation, business or employment during the three (3) year period immediately following his disability retirement, paying more than the difference between his annual rate of compensation at the time of his retirement and his disability pension, his disability pension shall be reduced to an amount which together with the amount so earned by him shall equal but not exceed his annual rate of compensation. For each of these three (3) years following disability retirement, the retirant shall provide a statement of earnings for the prior year in a form deemed appropriate by the Board of Trustees. Should the retirant's earnings change the reduction in his disability pension, it shall be correspondingly adjusted.
 
Following the three (3) year period end and continuing until the retirant reaches voluntary retirement age, the retirant may petition in writing the Board of Trustees to adjust the income ceiling imposed by the preceding paragraph. A retirant may petition the Board of Trustees one time in each two (2) year period. Upon receipt of such a petition, the board of Trustees shall review same and render its decision within ninety (90) days of receipt of the petition. Any decision by the Board of Trustees shall consider the following standards:
 
a. Income level at retirement;
b. Income level at time of petition;
c. Physical and mental ability of retirant;
d. Amount of increase sought with reasons for requested increase;
e. Years remaining until retirant reaches voluntary retirement age;
f. Whether any adjustment should be based on any of the following:
 
(1) A flat percentage increase; 
(2) The performance of the Consumer Price Index;
(3) Any Federal indicators relevant to Social Security adjustments;
(4) Any other factors deemed relevant by the Board of Trustees.
 
The decision of the Board of Trustees shall be in writing.
 
3. A disability retirant who has been or shall be returned to active service in the employ of the Village, as provided in this section, shall again become a member of the retirement system. His credited service at the time of his retirement shall be restored to full force and effect. He shall be given service credit for the period he was receiving a disability pension provided for in this Ordinance if within such period he was in receipt of workmen's compensation on account of his Village employment; otherwise, he shall not be given service credit for such period.
 
(v) Non-Duty Death Benefits. Any member who continues in the employ of the Village on or after the date he acquires ten (10) years of credited service and (1) dies while in the employ of the Village, and (2) leaves a widow, or in the case of an unmarried member leaves a father or mother whom the Board of Trustees finds to be dependent upon the said member for at least fifty percent (50%) of his or her support, the said widow or dependent father or dependent mother, as the case may be, shall receive a pension computed according to Section 3.08(o) and 3.08(r) hereof, in the same manner in all respects as if the said member had (1) retired the day preceding the date of his death notwithstanding that he might not have attained his voluntary retirement age, (2) elected Option A, and (3) nominated his said widow or dependent father or dependent mother, as the case may be, as beneficiary. In the event of the remarriage of the said beneficiary to whom a pension is being paid, his or her pension shall terminate.
 
(w) Duty Death Benefits. In the event a member with less than ten (10) years of credited service dies while in the employ of the Village and the Board of Trustees finds (1) his death to be the result of an injury or disease arising out of and in the course of his employment with the Village, and (2) that his eligible dependents are in receipt of workmen's compensation on account of his death, he shall, as of the date of his death, be granted a sufficient number of years of service to give him a total of ten (10) years of credited service, any provisions of this Ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding.
 
(x) Subrogation. If a person becomes entitled to a pension payable from funds of the retirement system as the result of an accident or injury caused by the act of a third party, the Village shall be subrogated to the rights of the said person against said third party to the extent of benefits which the Village pays or becomes liable to pay.
 
(y) Refund of Member's Accumulated Contributions.
 
1. Should any member cease to be employed by the Village and not be entitled to a pension payable from funds of the retirement system he shall be paid his accumulated contributions standing to his credit in the members deposit fund upon his application therefor filed with the Board of Trustees.
 
2. Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, upon the death of a member his accumulated contributions standing to his credit in the members deposit fund at the time of his death shall be paid to such person or persons as he shall have nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the Board of Trustees. If there be no such designated person or persons surviving the said member his said accumulated contributions shall be paid to his estate.
 
3. Refunds of accumulated contributions as provided in this section may be made in a single sum or in installments as the Board of Trustees may from time to time determine by appropriate rules and regulations.
 
(z) Members Deposit Fund. The members deposit fund is hereby created. It shall be the fund in which shall be accumulated, at regular interest, the contributions deducted from the compensations of members and from which shall be paid refunds of accumulated contributions, as provided in this Ordinance.
 
1. Subject to any eligibility rules established by Section 3.08(i), a member's contributions to the retirement system shall be the sum of 3 percent (3%) of the first $4,800 of his annual compensation plus 6 percent (6%) of the portion, if any, of his annual compensation in excess of $4,800. Effective the 1st day of July, 1976, a member shall not be required to make additional contributions to the retirement system. Contributions already made and standing to a member's account in this fund shall remain in this fund and continue to be credited with regular interest until transferred to the pension reserve fund or distributed in accordance with this Ordinance.
 
2. The officer or officers responsible for making up the payroll shall cause the contributions provided for in this section to be deducted from the compensations of each member on each and every payroll, for each and every payroll period, from the date of his entrance in the retirement system to the date of his retirement or prior separation from Village employment, until the 30th day of June, 1976. The members' contributions provided for shall be made notwithstanding that the minimum compensation provided by law for any member shall be thereby changed. Every member shall be deemed to consent and agree to the deductions made and provided for herein and payment of his compensation less said deductions shall be a full and complete discharge and acquittance of all claims and demands whatsoever for the services rendered by said person during the period covered by such payment, except as to benefits provided by this Ordinance. Each of said amounts shall be deducted by the Village Treasurer and when deducted shall be paid to the retirement system and shall be credited to the members deposit account of the member from whose compensation said deduction was made.
 
3. In addition to a member's contributions, as hereinbefore provided, a member shall deposit in the members deposit fund, by a single contribution or by an increased rate of contribution, as approved by the Board of Trustees, the amounts he may have previously withdrawn therefrom and not repaid thereto, together with regular interest from the date of withdrawal to the date of repayment. In no case shall any member be given credit for service rendered prior to the date he withdrew his accumulated contributions until he repays to the members deposit fund all amounts due the said fund by him.
 
4. Upon the retirement of a member his accumulated contributions shall be transferred to the pension reserve fund. At the expiration of a period of three (3) years from the date a member ceases to be a member any balance standing to his credit in the members deposit fund, unclaimed by the said member or his estate, shall be transferred to the pension reserve fund. Provided, that no other disposition of the said balance is specifically provided for in this Ordinance.
 
(aa) Pension Reserve Fund. The pension reserve fund is hereby created. It shall be the fund in which shall be accumulated contributions made by the Village to the retirement system, and from which shall be paid pensions as provided in this Ordinance. Upon the basis of such mortality and other tables of experience, and regular interest, as the Council shall from time to time adopt, the actuary shall annually compute the pension reserve (1) for pensions being paid retirants and beneficiaries, and (2) for service rendered and to be rendered by members. The portions of the said pension reserves which are not financed by members' contributions shall be financed by annual appropriations to be made by the Village. The said Village appropriations shall be determined according to paragraphs (1), (2) and (3) of this section.
 
1. The appropriation for members' current service shall be a percent of their annual compensations which will produce an amount which if paid annually by the Village during their future service will be sufficient to provide the pension reserves, at the time of their retirements or deaths, for the portions of the pensions, not financed by the members' contributions, to be paid them based upon their future service; and
 
2. The appropriation for members' accrued service shall be a percent of their annual contributions which will produce an amount which if paid annually by the Village over a period of years, to be determined by the Council, will amortize, at regular interest, the unfunded pension reserves for the accrued service portions of the pensions to which they may be entitled; and
 
3. The appropriation for pensions being paid retirants and beneficiaries shall be a percent of the annual compensations of members which will produce an amount which if paid annually by the Village over a period of years, to be determined by the Council, will amortized, at regular interest, the unfunded pension reserve liabilities for pensions being paid retirants and beneficiaries.
 
4. In the event the amounts appropriated in the budget in any year are insufficient to pay in full the amounts due in said year to all retirants and beneficiaries, the amount of such insufficiency shall thereupon be provided by the appropriating authorities of the Village.
 
5. Should a disability retirant return to employment with the Village the pension reserve, at that time, for the portion of his pension which was financed by his accumulated contributions, at the time of his retirement, shall be transferred to the members deposit fund and shall be credited to his individual account therein.
 
(bb) Expense Fund. The Board of Trustees shall transfer from the Pension Reserve Fund into the Expense Fund sufficient funds to pay the expenses for the administration of the retirement system. {Ord. 315; 8-16-03}
 
(cc) Investment of Moneys.
 
1. The Board of Trustees shall be the trustees of the assets of the retirement system and shall have full power to invest and reinvest such assets, subject to the terms, conditions, limitations, and restrictions imposed by the State of Michigan as provided by Public Act 55 of 1982. The Board shall have the power to purchase notes, bonds, or other obligations of the Village at any legally conducted public or private sale, with or without advertising bids. The Board shall have the power to hold, purchase, sell, assign, transfer, and otherwise dispose of any securities and investments in which any of the moneys of the system have been invested, as well as the proceeds of the said investments and any moneys belonging to the system. 
 
2. All assets of the system shall be held for the sole purpose of meeting disbursements for pensions and other payments authorized by this Ordinance and shall be used for no other purpose whatsoever.
 
3. The description of the various funds of the retirement system, namely, the members deposit fund, the pension reserve fund, and the expense fund shall be interpreted to refer to the accounting records of the system and not to the actual segregation of moneys in the said funds of the system.
 
(dd) Trust Agreement. The Board of Trustees is authorized, with the prior approval of the Council, to establish a retirement trust in order to finance the benefits to be provided under the retirement system created and established by this Ordinance, and in so doing, to execute a legal document, with the consent of the Council, establishing such retirement trust. Such trust indenture shall include reasonable rules and regulations consistent with this Ordinance in order to provide for any administrative procedures not covered by this Ordinance, including procedures to be utilized if all or a portion of the funds are to be invested with an insurance company. Such trust indenture may include other provisions deemed necessary for the satisfactory administration of the retirement system created and established by this Ordinance.
 
(ee) Allowance of Regular Interest. All interest and other earnings on moneys and investments of the retirement system shall be credited to an investment income account. The Board of Trustees shall, at the end of each fiscal year, allow and credit regular interest computed on members' individual balances in the members deposit fund at the beginning of such fiscal year; and on the mean balance in the pension reserve fund. Any excess interest earnings may be used to provide contingency reserves or may be credited to the pension reserve fund, as the Board shall determine.
 
(ff) Method of Making Payments. All payments from moneys of the retirement system shall be made by the Village Treasurer in accordance with Charter provisions governing payments from the Village's general fund. Provided, that such payments shall be made only upon authorization signed by two (2) persons designated by the Board of Trustees. No such authorization for payment shall be executed unless the payment was previously approved by a specific or continuing resolution adopted by the Board.
 
(gg) Assignments Prohibited. The right of a person to a pension, to the return of accumulated contributions, the pension itself, any optional benefit, any other right accrued or accruing to any member, retirant, or beneficiary under the provisions of this Ordinance and the moneys belonging to the retirement system shall not be subject to execution, garnishment, attachment, the operation of bankruptcy or insolvency laws, or any other process of law whatsoever, and shall be unassignable, except as is specifically provided in this Ordinance, subject to Chapter 38 of the Michigan Compiled Laws and the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. Provided, that should a member be covered by a group insurance or prepayment plan participated in by the Village, and should he be permitted to, and elect to, continue such coverage as a retirant, he may authorize the Board of Trustees to have deducted from his pension the payments required of him to continue such group insurance or prepayment plan; provided, further, that the Village shall have the right of set off for any claim arising from embezzlement by or fraud of a member, retirant or beneficiary. {Ord 315; 8-16-03}.
 
(hh) Errors. Should any change or error in the records of the Village or the retirement system result in any person receiving from the system more or less than he would have been entitled to receive had the records been correct, the Board of Trustees shall correct such error and as far as practicable shall adjust the payment in such manner that the actuarial equivalent of the benefit to which such person was correctly entitled shall be paid.
 
 
(ii) Penalties. Whoever with intent to deceive shall make any statement or report required under this Ordinance which is untrue, or shall falsify or permit to be falsified any record of the retirement system, or shall otherwise violate the provisions of this Ordinance, with intent to deceive, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not to exceed One Hundred Dollars ($100) or shall be imprisoned for ninety (90) days, or both, in the discretion of the court, together with payment of costs of prosecution.
 
(jj) Validity. If any provision in this Ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the remaining provisions of this Ordinance, or the Ordinance in its entirety.
 
(kk) Provisions to Assure Qualification under the Internal Revenue Code. The Village intends the retirement system to be a qualified pension plan under Section 401 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, and that the trust be an exempt organization under Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code. The Board of Trustees shall administer the retirement system so as to fulfill this intent.
 
1. At any time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities with respect to employees and their beneficiaries under the trust which is a part of this ordinance, no part of the corpus or income may be (within the taxable year or thereafter) used for, or diverted to, purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of the employees of the Village or their beneficiaries.
 
2. The Member's benefits accrued under the ordinance shall be 100% vested (to the extent funded) upon termination of or discontinuance of employer contributions to the retirement system.
 
3. Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, the compensation of a Member of the retirement system shall be taken into account for any year under the retirement system only to the extent that it does not exceed the compensation limit established in section 401(a)(17) of the Internal Revenue Code, as adjusted by the commissioner of internal revenue.
 
4. Notwithstanding any provision of the retirement ordinance to the contrary that would limit a distributee's election under this subsection, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the Board of Trustees, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly, as a direct rollover, to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. The following definitions shall apply with regard to this subsection:
 
(a) ELIGIBLE ROLLOVER DISTRIBUTION. Any distribution of all or a portion of the balance of the credit of the distributee, except an eligible rollover distribution does not include: any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently that is annually made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten years or more; any distribution to the extent the distribution is required under Internal Revenue Code Section 401(a)(9); and the portion of any distribution that is not includable in gross income.
 
(b) ELIGIBLE RETIREMENT PLAN. In the case of an eligible rollover distribution to a participant, an individual retirement account described in Section 408(A) of the Internal Revenue Code, an individual retirement annuity described in Section 408(B) of the Internal Revenue Code, an annuity plan described in Section 403(B) of the Internal Revenue Code, or a qualified trust described in Section 408 of the Internal Revenue Code, that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution. In the case of an eligible rollover distribution to a surviving spouse, an individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity.
 
(c) DISTRIBUTEES. A Member or former Member, the surviving spouse of a Member or former Member and the spouse or former spouse of a Member or former Member, with regard to their interest, who is an alternative payee under a domestic relations order defined in Section 414(P) of the Internal Revenue Code.
 
(d) DIRECT ROLLOVER. A payment by the retirement system to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee.
 
(e) Beginning January 1, 2002, except as otherwise provided in this subsection, 'ELIGIBLE RETIREMENT PLAN" means an individual retirement account described in section 408(A) of the Internal Revenue Code, an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(B) of the Internal Revenue Code, an annuity plan described in section 403(A) of the Internal Revenue Code, or a qualified trust described in section 401(A) of the Internal Revenue Code, an annuity contract described in section 403(B) of the Internal Revenue Code, or an eligible plan under section 457(b) of the Internal Revenue Code which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or an agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such eligible plan under section 457(b) of the Internal Revenue Code from this retirement system, that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution. However, in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to a surviving spouse, an eligible retirement plan means an individual retirement account or an individual retirement annuity described above.
 
(f) Beginning January 1, 2002, "ELIGIBLE ROLLOVER DISTRIBUTION" means a distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee.
 
Eligible rollover distribution does not include any of the following:
 
(1) A distribution made for the life or life expectancy of the distributee or the joint lives or joint life expectancies of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary.
 
(2) A distribution for a specified period of 10 years or more.
 
(3) A distribution to the extent that the distribution is required under section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code.
 
(4) The portion of any distribution that is not includable in federal gross income, determined without regard to the exclusion for net unrealized appreciation with respect to employer securities, except to the extent that the portion of a distribution that is not includable in federal gross income is paid to either of the following:
 
(i) An individual retirement account or annuity described in section 408(a) or (b) of the Internal Revenue Code.
 
(ii) A qualified defined contribution plan as described in section 401(A) or 403(A) of the Internal Revenue Code that agrees to separately account for amounts transferred, including separately accounting for the portion of the distribution that is includable in gross income and the portion of the distribution which is not includable in gross income.
 
(5) The provisions of this retirement system chapter notwithstanding, the Board of Trustees shall at all times administer the retirement system in compliance with the provisions of Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code which are applicable to public employee retirement plans and are hereby incorporated by reference. In determining the 415 limit, compensation shall include all remuneration from the Village within the meaning I.R.C. Section 415(c)(3). In the event the limitation of I.R.C. Section 415(e) is exceeded, the employer-financed benefits will be reduced so that the sum of the defined contribution plan fraction and the employer financed benefit fraction will not exceed 1.0. The foregoing sentence shall no longer apply after December 31, 1999.
 
Required distributions:
 
(6) The entire interest of each Member will be distributed, in accordance with Treasury regulations 1.401(a)(9)-1 through 1.401(a)(9)-9, to such Member not later than the required beginning date, or will be distributed, beginning not later than the required beginning date, in accordance with regulations, over the life of such Member or over the lives of such Member and a designated beneficiary (or over a period not extending beyond the life expectancy of such Member or the life expectancy of such Member and a designated beneficiary). The provisions of this subsection shall supercede any provisions in this ordinance to the contrary.
 
If the distribution of the Member's interest has begun and the Member dies before his entire interest has been distributed to him, the remaining portion of such interest will be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method of distributions being used as of the date of his death. If a Member dies before the distribution of the Member's interest has begun, the entire interest of the Member will be distributed within five years after the death of such Member. If any portion of the Member's interest is payable to (or for the benefit of) a designated beneficiary, such portion will be distributed (in accordance with regulations) over the life of such designated beneficiary (or over a period not extending beyond the life expectancy of such beneficiary), and such distributions begin not later than one year after the date of the Member's death or such later date as the Secretary may by regulations prescribe. If the designated beneficiary is the surviving spouse of the Member, the date on which the distributions are required to begin shall not be earlier than the date on which the Member would have attained age 70 , and, if the surviving spouse dies before the distributions to such spouse begin, this subparagraph shall be applied as if the surviving spouse were the Member.
 
The term "required beginning date" means April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the Member attains age 70 , or the calendar year in which the Member retires. The life expectancy of a Member and the Member's spouse (other than in the case of a life annuity) may be redetermined but not more frequently than annually. Any distribution required under the incidental death benefit requirements of subsection 401(A)(9) of the Code shall be treated as a distribution required under this subsection of the ordinance. {Ord. 315; 8-16-03}

Chapter 4 - Cable Communications
4.01 Franchise necessary
4.02 Definitions
4.03 Reserved
4.04 Selection of Franchisee
4.04.1 Request for proposal
4.04.2 Application process
4.04.3 Application fees
4.04.4 Criteria for selection of franchisee
4.04.5 Reserved
4.04.6 Disclosure requirements
4.04.7 Award of franchise
4.04.8 Franchise agreement
4.04.9 et seq. Reserved
4.05 Franchise Territory
4.05.1 Service area
4.05.2 Initial geographic coverage
4.05.3 et seq. Reserved
4.06 Length, Renewal and Transfer of Franchise

4.06.1 Nonexclusivity of franchise
4.06.2 Length of franchise
4.06.3 Conditions for initial franchise validation
4.06.4 Transfer of ownership or control
4.06.5 Franchise renewal
4.06.6 Franchise termination
4.06.7 Termination procedure
4.06.8 Removal of system
4.06.9 - 4.06.11 Reserved
4.06.12 Resolution of disputes
4.06.13 et seq. Reserved
4.07 System Design and Specifications
4.07.1 Channel capacity
4.07.2 Lock-out device
4.07.3 Services to educational institutions

4.07.4 Timetable for establishment of educational services
4.07.5 Future educational facilities
4.07.6 Reserved
4.07.7 Government access channels
4.07.8 Cost and maintenance of equipment
4.07.9 Public access channels
4.07.10 Leased access channels
4.07.11 Additional channel capacity
4.07.12 FM radio service
4.07.13 Automated channel
4.07.14 Program index
4.07.15 Additional services
4.07.16 Interconnection
4.07.17 Standby power
4.07.18 Underground and aboveground installations
4.07.19 Construction standards and technical requirements
4.07.20 System design changes
4.07.21 Maintenance of facilities, equipment
4.07.22 Subscriber privacy
4.07.23 Continuity of service
4.07.24 All channels emergency alert
4.07.25 Home security
4.07.26 Reserved

4.08 Franchise Fee and Rates

4.08.1 Establishment of franchise fee
4.08.2 Payment of franchise fee
4.08.3 Renegotiation of franchise fees
4.08.4 Rates and charges for service
4.08.5 Revision of rates for services
4.08.6 Establishment of rates and charges subject to law
4.08.7 Refunds to subscribers and programmers
4.08.8 et seq. Reserved

4.09 Administration and Regulation

4.09.1 Performance review
4.09.2 Security fund
4.09.3 Performance bond/Letter of credit
4.09.4 Insurance

4.09.5 Indemnification
4.09.6 Foreclosure
4.09.7 Receivership
4.09.8 Reports
4.09.9 Other petitions and applications
4.09.10 Other business activities
4.09.11 Nondiscrimination requirements
4.09.12 Compliance with laws
4.09.13 Theft of services and tampering
4.09.14 Approval by Village Engineer
4.09.15 Public notice
4.09.16 Charges to security fund
4.09.17 Penalties and charges to tenants for service prohibited
4.09.18 Solicitation of subscribers
4.09.19 et seq. Reserved

4.10 Cablecasting Board

4.10.1 Creation and membership of board
4.10.2 Meetings
4.10.3 Duties and powers
4.10.4 Appeals
4.10.5 Authority of municipalities
4.10.6 et seq. Reserved

4.11 Consumer Protection

4.11.1 Customer service
4.11.2 Cable service
4.11.3 Franchisee's billings
4.11.4 Disconnect and downgrade charges
4.11.5 Late payment charges
4.11.6 Notice of programming or channel change
4.11.7 Notice of price increase or reduction of service
4.11.8 Franchisee's communications
4.11.9 Disclosure of information on franchisee's costs
4.11.10 Subscriber rebates
4.11.11 Liquidated damages
4.11.12 Remedies available
4.11.13 Appeal process
4.11.14 et seq. Reserved

4.01. FRANCHISE NECESSARY

No person shall occupy or use the streets, sidewalks or other public right-of-way of the Village for the purpose of operating a cable communications system, nor operate such a system, without a cable communications franchise.

4.02. DEFINITIONS

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Access channel means any channel dedicated for use by a governmental institution, educational institution or the public.

Access channel, educational, means any channel or portion of a channel in which educational institutions are the only designated programmers.

Access channel, government, means any channel or portion of a channel to which governmental agencies are the only designated programmers.

Access channel, leased, means any channel or portion of a channel made available for a fee by an operator for programming by persons other than the franchisee.

Access channel, public, means any channel or portion of a channel utilized for programming on a nonprofit basis with no commercial purpose that is available to the general public.

Activated or ability to activate means a function, service, channel or piece of equipment that is in working order and may be operated or received by a franchisee, subscriber, programmer, operator or user.

Basic service means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals.

Broadcast means the over-the-air transmission of an electromagnetic audio or video signal.

Cable means either coaxial cable or fiber optic cable.

Cable, A trunk means a downstream distribution system which supplies cable communications signals to the feeder line.


Cable communications service or cable service means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service, and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service.

Cable communications system or cable system means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of 1 or more television broadcast stations; a facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way; a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of section 621(c)) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; an open video system that complies with section 653 of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended; or any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems.

Cablecast means transmission of programming and signals over a cable communications system.

Cablecasting board means the agency of the City of Birmingham, Village of Beverly Hills, Village of Franklin and Village of Bingham Farms whose duties may include the monitoring and reporting of and on the cable communications system.

Capability means a function, service, channel or piece of equipment that has the potential to be operated or received at some time in the future by a subscriber, programmer, franchisee, user or operator.

Cable Channel or Channel means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television channel (as television channel is defined by the FCC by regulation).

Coaxial cable means copper or aluminum wire used to transmit cable communications signals through the cable system.

Community service agencies means the Birmingham-Bloomfield Art Association, Common Ground, the Birmingham Community House and the Birmingham Center for Continuing Education.


Complete wiring means the time when cable and related equipment, facilities, and appurtenances are installed throughout the Village of Beverly Hills so that service may be provided to any person that may choose to become a subscriber.

Completion of construction means the time when all services offered in the application and franchise agreement shall be accomplished, including but not limited to stringing of cable throughout the community so that any subscriber may immediately receive cable communications signal upon installation, construction of all access facilities and required networks and are fully operational.

Converter or Set Top Convertor means an electronic device which converts signals to a frequency for use by the television receiver of the subscriber, and by an appropriate channel selector which also permits a subscriber to view all signals including the cable service delivered at designated cable channel locations.

Downstream means cable communications signals that travel on a cable from the headend equipment or other location to the individual subscribers.

Drop means a line or cable linking the feeder line to an individual subscriber.

Effective date of the franchise means the date on which the parties have signed the franchise agreement or as otherwise specified in the franchise agreement.

FCC means the Federal Communications Commission.

Feeder line means the line or cable linking a main cable trunk line to a drop serving an individual subscriber.

Fiber Optic Cable means high capacity cable made of glass or plastic threads through which information is transmitted as pulsating light.

Franchise means the authorization granted by the Village of Beverly Hills to construct, operate, maintain, rebuild, and/or retrofit a cable communications system in the Village of Beverly Hills.

Gross revenues means all revenue derived directly or indirectly by the franchisee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parent companies and/or any person in which the franchisee has a financial interest, from or in connection with the operation of a cable communications franchise authorized by the Village. Gross revenues shall include but not be limited to basic subscriber monthly fees, pay cable fees, installation and reconnection fees, converter fees, fees relating to internet access and leased access fees. Gross revenues shall not include advertising revenues, home shopping revenue and any taxes on services furnished by the franchisee and imposed directly upon any subscriber or user, by the state, village or other governmental unit and collected by the franchisee on behalf of such governmental unit.

Headend means the electronic control center of the cable communications system where, among other things, incoming cable communications signals are amplified, filtered and converted before being delivered to the subscriber home.

Initial groundbreaking means the first step in construction: either stringing of cable or installation of a pole.

Institutional subscriber means any public agency or institution, educational institution, community service agency or school receiving institutional services on the institutional subscriber network.

Institutional subscriber network means a cable communications network designed principally for the provision of nonentertainment interactive services to schools or public agencies for use in connection with the ongoing operations of such institutions.

Interactive services means services provided to subscribers by which the subscriber either receives information consisting of television or other signals and transmits signals generated by the subscriber or equipment under its control for the purpose of selecting what information shall be transmitted to the subscriber or for any other purpose; or transmits signals to any other location for any purpose.

Interconnection means the linking of separate cable communications systems by microwave, cable or other means.

Local origination channel means any channel or portion of a channel on which the franchisee is either the only designated programmer or has received programming from a third party, and which is utilized to provide television programs to subscribers.

Microwave means a high-frequency transmission facility used to relay messages, including cable communications signals from point to point, by common carrier.

Monitoring means observing a communications signal or the absence of a signal, where the observer is neither the subscriber nor the programmer, whether the signal is observed by visual or electronic means. Monitoring shall not include a systematic, nonindividually addressed sweep of the system for the purpose of verifying system integrity, controlling return pass transmissions, or billing for cable services.

Operator means the franchisee.

Parent corporation or parent company means any corporation of which the franchisee is a subsidiary.

Pay channel or premium channel means a channel in which television channels are delivered to subscribers for a special fee or charge to subscribers over and above the regular charges for basic subscriber services, on a per program, per channel, or other subscription basis.

Pay television means the delivery over the cable communications system of video and audio signals in intelligible form to subscribers for a fee or charge over and above the charge for basic or full services, on a per program, per channel, or other subscription basis.

Person means individual, firm, organization, partnership, association, corporation, legal representative, or other entity.

Pole agreements means the authorization from utility companies to the franchisee for use of or space in their easements, equipment, poles or other facilities for installation of equipment related to the cable communications system.

Programmer means any person who produces or otherwise lawfully provides program material or information for transmission by means of the cable communications system.

Proposal means an application filed with the Village either in response to the Village of Beverly Hills' request for proposal, or any additions or amendments thereto, or submitted without such request.

Records means any writing or other memorialization containing information relating to the system, regardless of form or characteristics.

Related persons means any agent or employee of an applicant or its parent corporation; any person to whom an applicant or its parent corporation has paid or has promised to pay any money or compensation of any kind whatsoever for that person's services in promoting the applicant's proposal for the cable communications franchise before the Village, its employees, agents, servants and/or elected or appointed officials or any community service agencies or newspaper reporters in the Detroit Dominant Market Area; officers and directors of any applicant or its parent corporation; persons owning one percent or more of any class of outstanding stock or securities convertible into stock of an applicant or its parent corporation; partners of an applicant; and the spouse, parent, child or sibling of any such person described in the foregoing definitions.

Residential services means services delivered on the residential subscriber network.

School district means the school district of the Village.

Service means all services delivered on the institutional or residential subscriber network.

Standard service drop means the installation of the feeder cable to individual subscribers.

Strand mapping means the designation on maps of where cables will be placed.

Street means the surface of and the space above and below a public street, road, highway, freeway, path, public place, sidewalk, alley, boulevard, parkway, drive or other easement held by the Village and shall include other easements or rights-of-way which shall be held by the Village and which shall within their proper use allow the Village and a franchisee to the use thereof for the purposes of installing or transmitting cable communications system transmissions over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may be ordinarily pertinent to a cable communications system.

Subscriber means a recipient of services which are delivered over the cable communications system.

Tamper or tapping means observing a communication signal exchange when the observer is neither of the communicating parties, whether the exchange is observed by visual or electronic means, but shall not include monitoring.

Television broadcast signals means signals receivable in the Detroit Dominant Market Area, including but not limited to, those on channels 2, 4, 7, 9, 20, 38, 50, 56, 62.

Upstream means cable communications signals traveling from subscribers to the headend.

User means a person utilizing a cable communications system channel for purposes of production and transmission of materials to subscribers.

Village means the Village of Beverly Hills

4.03. RESERVED.

4.04 SELECTION OF FRANCHISEE

In selecting a franchisee pursuant to this chapter, the Village Council may prepare a request for proposal to seek bids for a cable communication system to be established under franchise by the Village Council. This request for proposal may contain detailed information and instructions relating to the preparation and filing of proposals, construction and technical standards regarding the installation, operation and maintenance of a cable communications system under the Village's franchise, and the criteria to be used in evaluating applicant proposals.

4.04.2. APPLICATION PROCESS

(a) The Village shall only consider those applications for a franchise that have been submitted on an application form approved by the Village Council. Applications shall only be considered if submitted to the Village's office prior to any deadline authorized by the Village Council and if accompanied by the application fees set forth in section 4.04.3.

(b) Any requests for proposal shall be sent to all operators that have indicated, in writing, an interest in obtaining a franchise.

(c) Any notice soliciting the submission of applications shall be sent to all persons who have previously indicated, in writing, an interest in obtaining a franchise and shall be advertised in a local newspaper of general circulation and at least two national trade magazines. Applications shall be opened no earlier than 90 days after the initial publication date of the newspaper notice.

(d) Distortion, falsehoods or misinformation by an applicant may be grounds for elimination of the proposal if the Village should choose.

(e) Any request for proposal shall clearly state that the Village Council reserves the right to reject any and all bids. The Village shall have the right to negotiate with any person that has submitted a qualified application.

4.04.3. APPLICATION FEES

(a) Applications shall only be considered if accompanied by a cashier's or certified check in the amount of $10,000.00 of which fifty percent of the application fee shall not be refundable in any case.

(b) If any applicant shall withdraw its application or cease to be considered after initial screening, fifty percent of the application fee shall be returned to the applicant without interest. The entire application fee of any applicant which remains under consideration after initial screening shall be nonrefundable.

Revenues from application fees shall be used to offset the cost of consulting services, if any, and administration of the franchise selection process. If the costs of consulting services, if any, and other administrative expenses shall exceed the amount of the application fee, then an applicant to whom a cable communications franchise is awarded shall pay the excess costs and expenses up to a maximum of $30,000.00.

4.04.4. CRITERIA FOR SELECTION OF FRANCHISEE

Applicants for a cable franchise will be required to furnish information to be evaluated according to the following criteria:

(1) Service priorities. System capability in terms of no cost or low cost telecasting production facilities and service available to municipal and educational institutions, community groups and individuals; system provisions for two-way communications; and the maximum total channels provided by the system.

(2) Installation plan. An installation plan that addresses the flexibility needed to adjust to new developments, maintenance practices and services that would be available to the subscriber and the community upon initial activation and throughout the duration of the franchise.

(3) Rate schedule. Applicant's installation and subscriber rate schedule.

(4) Financial soundness. Evidence of the applicant regarding the following:

a. Its financial ability to assure completion of construction as called for in the application and franchise agreement within 18 months of the effective date of the franchise.
b. Its ability to obtain all necessary and required permits and authorizations from the federal, state and local governments.
c. Its ability to sustain and enhance a fiscally sound system throughout the duration of the franchise.
d. Its ability to obtain the performance bond or letter of credit specified in section 4.07.3 should it be awarded a franchise. Evidence of current financial capability shall include, but not be limited to, the most recent three years' audited or reviewed financial statements of the applicant and of any parent entities, and a copy of the most recent published annual report and 10-K report if the applicant is, or is a subsidiary of, a publicly held company.

(5) Demonstrated experience in operating a cable communications system under local government franchise; the extent to which an applicant has experience in operating a cable communications system under village or county franchise.

(6) Educational programming. The extent to which the system presents and supports a program whereby the school district and other educational institutions such as Oakland Community College, Oakland University and Birmingham Center for Continuing Education may benefit, utilize and develop educational programs for students and subscribers; the extent to which the system provides an activated two-way system and a plan to interconnect public schools within the school district through a cable communications network

(7) Technical standards. The extent to which the system will meet or exceed all of the technical standards and specifications set forth in the most current FCC Technical Standards Order.

(8) Pay cable services. The extent to which the system offers at least alternate levels of pay cable services, for the purpose of providing a pay cable channel that would offer full service pay cable programming and a distinct pay cable channel that would offer a minipay package designed and marketed for general audience and family viewing.

(9) Interconnection plan. The extent to which the system includes a firm timetable for active interconnection with other political subdivisions in the Detroit Dominant Market Area.

(10) Innovative technology. The extent to which the system offers system technology sufficiently flexible and progressive to adapt to new services, including: home security, energy management, meter reading, home computer for entertainment, educational, business or personal purposes, two-way computer data transmission, internet access, and traffic signalization.

4.04.5. RESERVED.

4.04.6. DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS

(a) Any applicant for a franchise shall file with its application a sworn statement setting forth in such detail as shall be satisfactory to the Village the identification and description of all relationships which such applicants (or any related parties) may then have, or may have had during the year prior to the date of filing of such application, directly or indirectly, with the Village, its employees, agents, servants and/or elected or appointed officials, including but not limited to the following:

(1) Written or oral arrangements or undertakings of any nature whatsoever, including as vendor, vendee, or the provider of services, credit, or counsel or otherwise;

(2) All lending relationships, whether as borrower or lender;

(3) All investing relationships, as stockholder, partner, joint venturer, coadventurer or otherwise, or as the entity, vehicle or recipient of such investment;

(4) All relationships entailing the granting or holding of security in any property, tangible or intangible, real or personal;

(5) All relationships in which any valuable consideration shall have been required, offered, received, paid or extended, whether in cash, in kind or in services, and whether contemporaneous or deferred in whole or in part; and

(6) All relationships involving the assertion of any claim of any nature whatsoever, including administrative proceedings or litigation.

(b) Each applicant shall affirmatively undertake to advise the Village during the pendency of the application, and prior to its rejection or acceptance, of any additional such relationships which shall come into being, and of the termination or other material change in any such relationships as shall have been required to be disclosed prior thereto. Each franchisee shall also affirmatively undertake to so advise the Village on a continuing basis, and shall recertify the existence or nonexistence of all such relationships (other than as a franchisee pursuant to this chapter) on each annual anniversary of the franchise agreement under which such franchisee shall derive rights pursuant to this chapter.

4.04.7. AWARD OF FRANCHISE

The Village Council shall award a franchise to an applicant only after a public hearing on the application and proposal, notice of which hearing shall be published in a local newspaper of general circulation at least 20 days before the date of the hearing. Except as otherwise provided in Sec. 4.06.02, all contracts granting or giving any original franchise, or extending or amending any existing franchise, shall be made by ordinance, which ordinance shall be thereafter published in the manner prescribed by law.

4.04.8. FRANCHISE AGREEMENT

(a) An applicant awarded a franchise by ordinance shall execute a franchise agreement, agreeing to the terms and provisions of this chapter. Failure of a selected applicant to execute such an agreement, within 30 days from the Village Council's demand therefor, or to meet any deadlines outlined in the franchise agreement and this chapter for completion of strand mapping, pole agreements, initial ground breaking and all wiring phases shall be grounds for immediate rescission of the authorizing ordinance, revocation of any rights the applicant may have in the franchise and forfeiture of the applicant's security fund. The franchisee shall, within 30 days after the execution of the franchise agreement, apply for all necessary permits and authorizations for the construction of the cable communications system.

(b) In addition to those matters required elsewhere in this chapter to be included in the franchise agreement, the franchise agreement shall contain the following express representations of the franchisee that:

(1) It accepts and agrees to all the enforceable provisions of this chapter and any enforceable supplementary specifications, as to construction, technical standards, operation, maintenance and rate structures, which the Village Council may include in the franchise agreement.

(2) It recognizes the right of the Village Council to make lawful amendments to the franchise ordinance during the term of the franchise upon 30 days' notice to the franchisee. If an emergency amendment becomes necessary, the Village Council shall not be required to direct the amendment to the Cablecasting Board for review, but the franchisee shall be given at least two hours' notice, orally or in writing, of the Village Council meeting at which the emergency amendment is to be considered. It further recognizes and agrees that the Village Council shall not be bound to renew the franchise at the end of any franchise term, except as otherwise provided by law.

(3) It recognizes and agrees that it may be considered as a franchisee for the purposes of this chapter.

(4) It recognizes and agrees that no franchise shall be exclusive.

(c) The franchise agreement may set forth the specific standards which the franchisee must maintain in respect to signal quality requirements and technical standards of construction, operation and maintenance of the system.

(d) The franchise agreement shall contain such further conditions or provisions as may be negotiated between the Village and the franchisee, except that no such conditions or provisions shall be such as to conflict with any provisions of this chapter or any other law. In the case of such conflict or ambiguity between any terms or provisions of the franchise agreement and this chapter, the words of this chapter shall be deemed to control.

4.04.9 et seq. RESERVED.

4.05 FRANCHISE TERRITORY

4.05.1. SERVICE AREA

The franchise territory shall include the entire territorial limits of the Village, and shall include any future area that shall become part of the Village, during the term of the franchise, by annexation, consolidation, merger, realignment, subdivision development or other means. Any portion of the Village which, during the term of the franchise, is annexed from the Village or which by consolidation, merger, realignment, subdivision development, or other means, shall cease to be within the territorial limits of the Village shall cease to be included in the franchise territory.

4.05.2. INITIAL GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE

Cable communications service must be available for installation to all residents within the Village within 15 months of the effective date of the franchise. Service in newly acquired territory, as defined in section 4.05.1, must be available to residents within 12 months of annexation of the territory to the Village.

4.05.3 et seq. RESERVED.

4.06 LENGTH, RENEWAL AND TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE

4.06.1. NONEXCLUSIVITY OF FRANCHISE

The Village Council may award a nonexclusive franchise to construct, erect, operate and maintain in, upon, along, above, over and under the streets, alleys, public ways and public places, now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto, in the franchise territory, poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, underground conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property and fixtures necessary for the operation and maintenance of a cable communications system, and to furnish and to sell service from such system to the inhabitants of the entire franchise territory pursuant to the terms of this chapter. The Village Council specifically reserves the right to grant a similar franchise to any person at any time.

4.06.2. LENGTH OF FRANCHISE

The term of a franchise and all rights, privileges, obligations and restrictions pertaining thereto shall not be more than 15 years from the effective date of the franchise, as specifically set forth in the franchise agreement. The franchise may be terminated sooner pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or the franchise agreement. The Village shall have the option to extend the franchise for an additional five-year period. The decision to extend the franchise under this section shall be made by resolution of the Village Council at least six months prior to the expiration of the initial franchise term, and after a public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be given in accordance with the provisions of section 4.09.15. A copy of the Village Council resolution setting forth its decision shall be mailed to the franchisee no more than five days after its passage.

4.06.3. CONDITIONS FOR INITIAL FRANCHISE VALIDATION

(a) Within 30 days after the effective date of the franchise, the franchisee shall apply for all necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business, including but not limited to any utility-joint use attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses, and any other permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of cable communications systems or their associated microwave transmission facilities. The franchisee shall apply for all necessary and required permits and file all necessary and required statements with the FCC within 30 days after the effective date of the franchise.

(b) The franchisee shall complete strand mapping and shall commence initial ground breaking within 60 days after the effective date of the franchise.

(c) The franchisee shall complete pole agreements and shall begin preparing the poles within 90 days after the effective date of the franchise subject to the cooperation of the utility companies involved. All poles shall be ready within 180 days after the effective date of the franchise subject to the cooperation of the utility companies involved. The franchisee shall notify the Village of any failure on the part of the utility company to so cooperate under this subsection.

(d) Within 120 days after the commencement of construction, activation and installation of the system, the franchisee shall proceed to render cablecast service to subscribers, and the completion of the construction, activation and installation shall be pursued with reasonable diligence thereafter. Service shall be provided to not less than one-third of the franchise territory, and the subscribers located therein, within six months from the effective date of the franchise, and service shall be provided to not less than two-thirds of the franchise territory, and the subscribers located therein, within 12 months from the effective date of the franchise. Additional time for completing the installation of service may be granted by the Village Council during the 12 months upon a proper showing of need, but in no event shall the elapsed time for completing such installation exceed 15 months.

(e) Within 12 months from the effective date of the franchise or within the times otherwise set forth in the franchise agreement, the franchisee shall provide all equipment and all personnel required by this chapter and the franchise agreement.

(f) Any required institutional network shall be activated and fully operational in all local government buildings, libraries and community service agencies specified in the franchise agreement within 12 months of the effective date of the franchise. The institutional network shall be activated and fully operational in all public schools in the school district located within the franchise territory within 18 months of the effective date of the franchise unless a shorter time period is specified in the franchise agreement.

(g) Failure on the part of the franchisee to commence and diligently pursue each of the foregoing requirements and to complete each of the matters set forth in this chapter shall be grounds for immediate rescission of the authorizing ordinance, revocation of any rights the franchisee may have in the franchise and forfeiture of the franchisee's security fund, performance bonds, and/or letter of credit; provided, however, that the Village Council, upon formal application of the franchisee, in its discretion may extend the time for the commencement and completion of construction, activation and installation for additional periods if the franchisee, acting in good faith, experiences delays by reason of circumstances beyond its control.

4.06.4. TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL

(a) A franchise shall not be assigned or transferred, either in whole or in part, or leased, or sublet in any manner, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest or property therein, pass to or vest in any person without the prior written consent of the Village. The proposed assignee must show its qualifications and its financial responsibility as determined by the Village Council and must agree to comply with all provisions of the franchise. A franchise shall not be mortgaged, either in whole or in part, without an agreement by the mortgagee to be subordinate to the franchisor's right to receive franchise fees from the franchisee, and without the prior written consent of the Village. The Village shall be deemed to have consented to a proposed transfer, assignment, or mortgage if its refusal to consent is not communicated in writing to the franchisee within 120 days following receipt of written notice of a proposed transfer, assignment, or mortgage, accompanied by all information required by law, including this chapter and the franchise agreement. Consent by the Village Council shall not be unreasonably withheld.

(b) A franchisee shall promptly notify the Village of any proposed change in, or transfer of, or disposition of or acquisition by any other party of, control of the franchisee. The word "control" as used in this subsection is not limited to major stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. Every change in, transfer of, or acquisition of control of the franchisee shall make the franchise subject to revocation unless and until the Village shall have consented thereto, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer, disposition, or acquisition of control, the Village Council may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and the franchisee shall assist the Village Council in such inquiry.

(c) The consent or approval of the Village Council to any transfer of a franchise shall not constitute a waiver or release of the right of the Village in and to the streets, and any transfer shall by its terms, be expressly subordinate to the terms and conditions of the franchise.

(d) In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the Village Council shall not approve any transfer or assignment of a franchise prior to completion of construction of the proposed system or any required upgrade thereof.

(e) The Village Council reserves the right to review the purchase price of any transfer or assignment of the cable communication system.

(f) In no event shall a transfer of ownership be approved without the transferee becoming a signatory to the franchise agreement.

4.06.5. FRANCHISE RENEWAL

(a) The franchise may be renewed by the Village Council upon application by the franchisee pursuant to the procedures established in this section upon the advice of the Cablecasting Board.

(b) At least 12 months prior to the expiration of the franchise, the franchisee shall inform the Village Council in writing if it intends to seek renewal of the franchise.

(c) After giving public notice, the Village Council shall proceed, upon the advice of the Cablecasting Board, to determine whether the franchisee has satisfactorily performed all obligations under the franchise. To determine satisfactory performance, the Village Council shall consider technical developments and performance of the system, programming, other services offered, costs of services, and any other particular requirements set out in this chapter and the franchise agreement. The Village Council shall also consider the records of the performance evaluation sessions required hereinafter as well as the franchisee's annual reports made to the Village as required by this chapter. The Village Council shall also be entitled to consider or compare the franchisee's performance with the performance of other systems of comparable configuration nationally in arriving at its decision. The Village Council shall also consider comments of subscribers to, and users of, the system.

(d) Within four months of receiving notice from the franchisee of its desire to renew the franchise, the Village Council shall hold a public hearing. Subsequently, the Village shall arrive at a decision on the eligibility of the franchisee for renewal. Notice of the public hearing shall be given in accordance with the provisions of section 4.09.15. Upon the finding by the Village Council that the franchisee's performance is satisfactory, and that superior service for subscribers may not be obtained from other companies or operators, a renewal with any amendments shall be granted for a period of not more than fifteen (15) years and not less than five (5) years, as specifically set forth in the franchise agreement. All contracts granting any franchise, or renewing or amending any existing franchise, shall be made by ordinance, which ordinance shall be thereafter published in the manner prescribed by law.

(e) Upon a finding that the franchisee's performance is not satisfactory or that superior service for subscribers may be obtained from other companies or operators, the Village Council may deny renewal. A new franchise may be awarded at any time utilizing the procedures set forth in this chapter.

(f) If a franchise is denied renewal, the Village Council may require, at its option, the non-renewed franchisee to temporarily continue service until the execution of a new franchise agreement.

(g) The provisions of this Section 4.06 shall be applicable only to the extent permitted by the renewal provisions of higher law.

4.06.6. FRANCHISE TERMINATION

Any franchise granted by the Village, pursuant to this chapter, shall be revocable at the will of the Village or for any material violation by the franchisee of the provisions of this chapter or of the terms of the franchise agreement.. The procedure set forth in this chapter regarding franchise termination shall be followed in revoking a franchise.

4.06.7. TERMINATION PROCEDURE

(a) Upon receipt by the Village Council of a petition seeking termination of the franchise and signed by five percent of cable communications system subscriber households in the Village, or upon receipt by the Village Council of a written report of the Cablecasting Board recommending investigation into the possibility of franchise termination, the Village Council shall, by resolution, direct the Cablecasting Board to:

(1) Investigate all areas of concern in the operation of the franchise;

(2) Hold public hearings to receive the viewpoint of the franchisee and the general public;

(3) Report to the Village Council within a specified period of time regarding the condition of the franchise; and

(4) Set forth the recommendations of the Cablecasting Board on termination of the franchise.

A copy of the Village Council resolution, together with a copy of the petition and/or written reports of the Cablecasting Board, shall be sent to the franchisee.

(b) At the direction of the Village Council, the Cablecasting Board shall investigate and collect all relevant data regarding the operation of the franchise. The Cablecasting Board shall hold at least one public hearing to hear the comments and concerns of the general public and to hear the position of the franchisee. Written notice of the first such hearing shall be mailed to the franchisee at least 30 days prior to the scheduled hearing date. Written notice of any subsequent public hearings shall be mailed to the franchisee at least 15 days in advance. Public notice of each hearing shall be given in accordance with the provisions of section 4.09.15.

(c) Upon completion of its investigation, the Cablecasting Board shall prepare a written report outlining the scope of its investigation and the information received, and setting forth its recommendations regarding termination of the franchise. A copy of the report shall be mailed to the franchisee. The report shall be forwarded to the Village Council which shall schedule a public hearing to hear and determine the issue of franchise termination. Written notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to the franchisee at least 30 days prior to the scheduled hearing date. Public notice of the hearing shall be given in accordance with the provisions of section 4.09.15.

(d) The Village Council shall hear any interested person, shall consider the issue, and shall determine in its discretion whether to continue the franchise, to continue the franchise for a specified period subject to conditions, or to terminate the franchise. If the Village Council decides to terminate the franchise, it shall issue a written report within 15 days setting forth its position and the date upon which the franchise shall be terminated. If the Village Council decides to continue the franchise with conditions, it shall issue a written report within 15 days setting forth the specific conditions, establishing an appropriate timetable for accomplishment and review of the objectives and establishing any necessary supervisory board. A copy of the Village Council report shall be mailed to the franchisee.

4.06.8. REMOVAL OF SYSTEM

At the expiration of the term, or any extension thereof, for which this franchise is granted, or upon its termination as provided in this article, a franchisee shall forthwith, at the option of the Village and upon notice by the Village Council, remove at its own expense such portions of the cable communications system owned by the franchisee as specified by the Village from all streets and public property within the Village. If a franchisee fails to do so, the Village may have the work performed at a franchisee's expense after 30 days' written notice to a franchisee. A letter of credit or bond, at the Village's discretion, in the amount of $50,000.00 or in any greater amount specified in the franchise agreement shall be furnished by a franchisee for the specific performance of this section, not less than thirty (30) days after the above notice. Such letter of credit or bond, in the Village's discretion, shall be furnished in addition to and concurrently with the letter of credit or bond required in section 4.09.3.

4.06.9. RESERVED.

4.06.10. RESERVED.

4.06.11. RESERVED.

4.06.12. RESOLUTION OF DISPUTES

(a) Any disputes arising under this chapter or the franchise agreement shall be settled either by commencement of a suit in county circuit court or by compulsory arbitration, at the option of the Village. If a franchisee feels aggrieved, it shall advise the Village of any dispute it has arising out of this chapter or a franchise agreement and shall demand that the Village elect whether the dispute is to be resolved by submitting it to compulsory arbitration or by commencement of a suit in the county circuit court. The Village shall make its election in writing within 30 days from the receipt of such notice.

(b) If the Village elects to have the dispute resolved by compulsory arbitration, it shall be settled pursuant to MCL 600.5001 et seq., MSA 27A.5001 et seq., with each of the parties appointing one arbitrator and the two thus appointed appointing a third.

(c) If the Village fails to make such an election, any dispute between the parties may be resolved by filing of a suit in Oakland County Circuit Court.

4.06.13 et seq. RESERVED

4.07 SYSTEM DESIGN AND SPECIFICATIONS

4.07.1. CHANNEL CAPACITY

(a) A franchisee shall construct, and thereafter operate and maintain, a cable communications system that shall initially be capable of delivering the minimum number of channels specified in the franchise agreement. Applicants may provide greater channel capacity. A set top converter shall be provided by a franchisee when required to enable subscribers to receive programming services. Any fee charged by a franchisee for a set top converter shall be in accordance with applicable law. A franchisee may also require a refundable deposit not to exceed the franchisee's actual cost of the converter , but only if the franchisee has required such deposit in adjacent cable systems. A franchisee shall not be required to pay interest on the refundable deposit. The refundable deposit may be required by a franchisee for each set top converter provided and the responsibility for normal maintenance of the converter shall be that of the franchisee and no charges for the repair of the converter shall be made except in cases of subscriber misuse. There shall be no charge for removal of the converter.

(b) When required by federal law, a franchisee shall provide, as part of its cable communications system, all television broadcast signals, as presently available or as may become available off the air in the Village, and the maximum number of additional television signals consistent with the rules and regulations of the FCC and all other applicable laws, rules, or regulations. A franchisee's system shall be designed, engineered and maintained so as not to interfere with the television and radio reception of residents of the Village who are not subscribers to the system.

(c) A franchisee shall offer all channels and programming specified in its application and the franchise agreement. Changes in service may be made only if authorized by the Village Council and incorporated into an amended franchise agreement except as otherwise provided by law.

4.07.02. LOCK-OUT DEVICE

A franchisee shall provide, at no charge to subscribers, a lock-out mechanism that prevents viewing of any pay channel. This mechanism shall be provided upon request of the subscriber. A franchisee shall make all subscribers, prior to installation, aware of the availability of this device.

4.07.3. SERVICES TO EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS

A franchisee shall provide, at no charge throughout the term of the franchise, such services, equipment and facilities devoted to educational use as specified in the franchise agreement.

4.07.4. TIMETABLE FOR ESTABLISHMENT OF EDUCATIONAL SERVICES

The educational services, equipment and facilities shall be furnished by a franchisee within the time periods specified in the franchise agreement.

4.07.5. FUTURE EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES

In addition to the currently existing educational facilities and buildings benefiting from the provisions of section 4.07.3, the same services shall be provided to all future such facilities and buildings. Such services may be suspended to buildings no longer used for public purposes.

4.07.6. RESERVED

4.07.7. GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNELS

A franchisee shall provide, at no charge throughout the term of the franchise, such services, equipment, and facilities devoted to village governmental use as specified in the franchise agreement. Such services, equipment and facilities shall be furnished within the time periods specified in the franchise agreement.

4.07.8. COST AND MAINTENANCE OF EQUIPMENT

(a) When required by a franchise agreement, all maintenance, repair and periodic update/replacement of the original equipment shall be provided by a franchisee at no charge to the educational institutions or any other governmental agency. The level of service provided shall be sufficient to assure that each unit of equipment operates satisfactorily at least 95 percent of the elapsed time desired for use during any 90-day period. Responsibility for maintaining appropriate operating and failure statistics shall be that of the institution or agency. A franchisee shall be notified promptly by the institution or agency whenever a failure occurs and maintenance or repair service is required.

(b) When required by a franchise agreement, any major additional equipment which may be acquired, and which is clearly not a replacement for originally installed equipment, may be provided through a franchisee at the lowest possible cost for comparable equipment with acceptable quality. Lowest cost shall be evidenced by competitive bids from at least three suppliers of such equipment, each of whom have records of previous sales with acceptable performance. Such equipment shall be warranted by a franchisee to the educational institution for a period of not less than one year after installation of each unit of equipment. During this warranty period, all maintenance, repair and replacement, if necessary, shall be provided by a franchisee at no charge to the institution in order to provide a minimum 95 percent level of service as described above for the original equipment requirements.

4.07.9. PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNELS

(a) Throughout the duration of a franchise, a franchisee shall make available, at no cost, such public access channels exclusively dedicated for use by the public as specified in the franchise agreement. Priority in use of the channel and public access playback facilities shall be given to residents, taxpayers, and persons affiliated with tax-exempt organizations as set forth in section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code, within the Village, and to residents, taxpayers and persons affiliated with the aforementioned organizations in municipalities that enter into an agreement with the Village for cooperative use of the public access channel and its related studio and facilities. Use of the public access studio and production equipment shall be restricted to residents, taxpayers, and persons affiliated with such organizations.

(b) A franchisee shall provide such public access studios, facilities, and equipment as specified in the franchise agreement.

(c) In order that there is maximum opportunity for freedom of expression by members of the public, public access programming shall be free from any control by a franchisee as to program content except as required by the FCC or to protect a franchisee from liability under appropriate law to the extent such exceptions are permitted by law.

(d) Reasonable rules and procedures governing use of and charges for use of any public access channel shall be established by the Cablecasting Board upon the approval of the Village Council.

4.07.10. LEASED ACCESS CHANNELS

A franchisee shall make any unused channels available for lease to any organization, group, or individual on a first come, first served basis. At least one channel must be available for leasing on a part-time basis. A franchisee shall not exercise program controls over leased channels, but it shall adopt rules governing the leasing of channel space which:

(1) Provide for access on a first come, nondiscriminatory basis;

(2) Prohibit the presentation of lottery information and obscene or indecent matter;

(3) Require sponsorship identification;

(4) Specify an appropriate rate schedule; and

(5) Permit public inspection of the record of the names and addresses of all persons or groups requesting time, which record shall be retained for a period of two years.

4.07.11. ADDITIONAL CHANNEL CAPACITY

If any public, governmental or educational access channel is cablecasting locally produced, non-duplicative programming Monday through Friday for eight consecutive hours for ten consecutive weeks, a franchisee shall report that fact to the Cablecasting Board. For purposes of this threshold, character generator programming shall not qualify. The Cablecasting Board shall investigate the need for the addition of a new channel or channels and file its recommendations with the Village Council. After review of the Cablecasting Board report, the Village Council may, in its discretion, require a franchisee to make a new channel available within six months for any or all of the uses and under the conditions specified in section 4.07.3, 4.07.7, 4.07.9 or 4.07.10. Nothing in this section shall interfere with a franchisee's right to add additional channels of the type described in such sections, provided that such channels are operated in a manner consistent with those sections. Should a franchisee choose to add such additional channels, it shall notify the Village Council, in writing, of its intention, its plan and its timetable for doing so.

4.07.12. FM RADIO SERVICE

A franchisee shall make available to all subscribers any FM stereo radio service indicated in its proposal and the stereo audio portion of all channels as available. A franchisee shall advise all subscribers of the availability of this service, but shall not require that it be purchased.

4.07.13. AUTOMATED CHANNEL

A franchisee shall provide a channel cablecasting automated time, weather, stock, sports and news information. Such information may be displayed by means of a character generator during normal cablecast hours.

4.07.14. PROGRAM INDEX

During all cablecast hours, a franchisee shall provide a channel continuously informing subscribers of the programs being cablecast on all other operational channels. A franchisee shall actively seek and cablecast such indexing information from access channel managers.

4.07.15. ADDITIONAL SERVICES

If such services are generally available in the Detroit Dominant Market Area, a franchisee shall make available such additional video, audio, radio, digital, internet and other services as are requested by subscribers and/or programmers who are willing to pay for such services, provided that such services are technologically and economically appropriate. The Village specifically reserves the right, if authorized by law, to require a franchisee to furnish non-discriminatory access to its cable system for providers of internet access service, subject to applicable law. This provision does not waive the Village or franchisee's rights, obligations, claims, defenses or remedies regarding the authority of such requirement. The franchisee shall be provided with reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard, including the right to present evidence on the findings, if any, to be made by the Village with respect to such requirement.

4.07.16. INTERCONNECTION

(a) A franchisee shall provide one-way and two-way interconnection facilities to interconnect the system with other cable systems, the school district, and other political subdivisions as may be required by the Village Council. Interconnection facilities may be effected by direct cable connection, microwave length, satellite or any other appropriate method. Interconnection facilities may be required for one, several, or all channels of the system. Upon receiving a directive to interconnect, a franchisee shall reasonably cooperate in the interconnection if other systems express a willingness to share the cost of such interconnection.

(b) Before the Village Council issues a directive requiring interconnection, it shall notify a franchisee in writing of its consideration of the issue and schedule a public hearing, not less than 15 days from the notification date, at which a franchisee shall be provided an opportunity to state its position on the issue. Notice of the hearing shall be given in accordance with the provisions of section 4.09.15.

(c) Upon receiving a directive from the Village Council to interconnect, a franchisee shall immediately initiate negotiations with the other affected system or systems in order that the cost may be shared by the franchisees of the affected systems for both construction and operation of the interconnection link. A franchisee shall report to the Village Council monthly in writing regarding the status of all negotiations and construction progress. The monthly reports shall continue until the interconnection line is operational.

(d) A franchisee shall cooperate with any interconnection corporation, regional interconnection authority, council of governments, county, federal or state regulatory agency which may be established for the purpose of regulating, facilitating, encouraging, financing or otherwise providing for the interconnection of cable communication systems beyond the boundaries of the individual political jurisdictions.

(e) Should a dispute arise over any matter regarding interconnection, it shall be resolved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter on methods of resolving disputes.

(f) The Village Council may grant reasonable extensions of time to interconnect or rescind its request to interconnect upon petition by a franchisee to the Village Council. The Village Council shall grant such request if it finds that a franchisee has negotiated in good faith and has failed to obtain an approval from the system of the proposed interconnection, or that the cost of the interconnection would cause an unreasonable or unacceptable increase in subscriber rates.

(g) In order to assure future interconnection capability, a franchisee shall meet the following initial technical requirements: use of standard frequency allocations for cable communications signals, use of signal processors at the headend for each cable communications signal, use of adequate amplifiers spaced appropriately to enable two-way activation of the total system, and use of local origination equipment compatible with video cassettes, videotapes, video disks, video film chains and other various video formats.

4.07.17. STANDBY POWER

A franchisee shall install and maintain equipment capable of providing standby power for headend, transportation and trunk amplifiers for a minimum of four hours. The standby power equipment for the headend shall be constructed so as to automatically notify the cable office when it is in operation and to automatically revert to the standby mode when the AC power returns. All utility safety regulations must be followed to prevent a standby generator from powering the dead utility line.

4.07.18. UNDERGROUND AND ABOVEGROUND INSTALLATIONS

(a) A franchisee may lease, rent or in any other manner by mutual agreement obtain the use of towers, poles, lines, cables and other equipment and facilities from utility companies operating within the Village, and use towers, poles, lines, cables and other equipment and facilities for the system, subject to all existing and future laws, ordinances and regulations of the Village, the state and the United States of America. When and where practicable, the poles used by a franchisee's distribution system shall be those erected and maintained by utility companies operating within the Village provided mutually satisfactory rental agreements can be reached. All utility companies in the Village shall cooperate with a franchisee and allow a franchisee the use of their poles and pole line facilities whenever possible so that the number of new or additional poles installed in the Village may be minimized.

(b) A franchisee shall have the right to erect, install and maintain its own towers, poles, guys, anchors, underground conduits, amplifiers, transformers, manholes and other equipment as may be necessary for the proper construction and maintenance of the antenna site, headend and distribution system, provided that the location and construction of towers, poles, guys, anchors, underground conduits, amplifiers, transformers and other equipment, manholes placed on Village property and public rights-of-way shall be approved in advance, in writing, by the Village Engineer. In cases of conflict, preference shall be given to more essential utilities and services such as water, power, steam, telephone, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, traffic signals, street lighting and gas. If a franchisee violates the provisions in this paragraph, the Village Engineer may require a franchisee to remove any and all equipment at its own cost.

(c) A franchisee shall have the right to establish terms, conditions and specifications governing the form, type, size, quantity and location of equipment belonging to other persons on its poles, and shall have the further right to charge a fair rental for attachment, space or spaces occupied by the equipment and plant of such other persons, except that no rent shall be paid by the Village for its attachment to a franchisee's poles. The Village shall pay any reasonable additional costs incurred by a franchisee in providing space for the Village's attachments, including the reasonable cost of any necessary rearrangements of a franchisee's equipment and plant to provide room for Village attachments. Upon expiration, termination or revocation of a franchise, or should a franchisee wish to dispose of any of its poles being used by the Village, the Village shall have the first option to purchase them in place for a value equal to depreciated book value.

(d) In those areas of the Village where transmission or distribution facilities of all utility companies are, or are scheduled to be placed underground, a franchisee shall likewise construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground to the maximum extent the then existing technology permits, in accordance with the then management edition of the National Electrical Safety Code, and the Telephone System Practices Governing Joint Attachment Practices, and their successor documents, as well as in conformance with all applicable laws, statutes, ordinances, regulations and/or codes of the federal, state or municipal governments. If and when necessary, amplifiers and/or transformers in a franchisee's transmission and distribution lines may be in appropriate housings on the surface of the ground.

(e) All transmission and distribution structures, lines, poles, conduits, fixtures and equipment erected by a franchisee in the Village shall be located so as not to endanger life or property or interfere with the normal use of streets, alleys or other public ways and places, so as to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of the general public and adjoining property owners and so as not to interfere with existing traffic control, street lighting, gas, electric, telephone, water hydrant or other public utility installations and so as to comply with the then current edition of the National Electrical Safety Code, and the Telephone System Practices Governing Joint Attachment Practices and their successor documents, as well as in conformance with all applicable laws, statutes, ordinances, regulations and/or codes of the federal, state and municipal governments. If the Village Engineer determines any of such equipment erected by a franchisee violates the provisions outlined in this subsection, he may require a franchisee to alter or remove any or all of the offending equipment.

(f) Prior to the commencement of construction, a franchisee shall file with the Village maps, plats, and records of the locations and character of all facilities to be constructed, including underground facilities and shall have received prior approval from the Village Engineer for such construction. A franchisee is required to maintain current and accurate maps, plats and permanent records for public inspection and to file such documents with the Village annually.

(g) In the case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalks, driveway, lawn or other surfacing, a franchisee shall, at its expense, promptly replace and restore all such surfacing to its original condition.

(h) The Village may, upon reasonable notice, require a franchisee, at its expense, to protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove a franchisee's equipment from a particular area of the Village's streets if reasonably necessary by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street construction or vacation, change or establishment of communication lines, tracks, traffic signals, street lighting or by reason of other conditions. Reasonable notice for this provision shall be construed to mean at least ten days, except in the case of emergencies.

(i) A franchisee shall have the authority, upon prior approval of the Village Manager or his designated representative, to trim any trees upon and overhanging the streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the Village so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with wires and cables of a franchisee, except that at the option of the Village, trimming may be done by it, or under its supervision and direction, at the expense and liability of a franchisee. In trimming any trees, a franchisee shall not go upon private property without the consent of the owner. Any damage caused to the property of building owners or users, or of any other person, by the franchisee's negligence shall be repaired fully and promptly at a franchisee's sole expense.

(j) Prior to the installation of any portion of the cable system in or onto a building, a franchisee shall obtain from the building department a cable communications installation permit at the request of and on behalf of the owner of the building or premises. The permit shall be required to defray the costs of an electrical inspection to insure compliance with applicable requirements of the Village. A franchisee shall be responsible for payment of applicable permit fees to the Village.

4.07.19. CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS AND TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS

(a) All of a franchisee's plant and equipment, including but not limited to, the antenna site, headend, and distribution system, towers, house connections, structures, poles, wire, cable, fixtures and appurtenances shall be installed, located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained and operated in accordance with good engineering practices, performed by experienced pole line construction crews and so as not to:

(1) Endanger or interfere with the safety of any persons or property,

(2) Interfere with improvements the Village may deem proper,

(3) Interfere in any manner with the rights of any property owner, or

(4) Unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic on Village property.

(b) All of a franchisee's system, including all plant and equipment and all construction, shall meet, at a minimum, all relevant and applicable specifications as set forth in a request by the Village for proposal, a franchisee's application, this chapter, and this Code, when not preempted by higher law. Such specifications, construction standards and performance characteristics shall include, but not be limited to, the following listed construction and technical standards:

(1) Construction standards - Methods of construction, installation and maintenance of the cable communications system shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations.

(2) Technical standards - A franchisee shall comply with all the rules and standards for cable communications operations as adopted by the FCC.

(3) Performance testing.

a. Performance requirements and standards specified in this chapter, and in all FCC requirements and standards, shall be measured at the time of initial testing as provided in subsection (b)(3)b. of this section, to ensure compliance with all specified requirements and standards for construction. Measurements shall be taken and recorded as specified in the Cable Television Information Center specifications. All costs of such tests shall be borne by a franchisee, including all costs associated with the hiring of an independent supervising engineer pursuant to subsection (b)(3)j. of this section.

b. Initial proof of performance testing shall occur within 60 days of the commencement of cable service to each section of the system franchise area as delineated in a construction timetable which shall be submitted with a franchisee's application and bid proposal and also included in the final franchise agreement. Initial proof of performance shall also be tested within 30 days of the commencement of cable service to new subscribers on any extension of the system not specified in the construction timetable, and within 30 days after service has been extended to new subscribers upon any reconstruction of the cable system.

c. All measurements shall be made using instruments which are appropriate for making each performance test. Such instruments shall be sufficiently sensitive to measure each parameter accurately. The accuracy of the instruments must meet those standards developed by the National Bureau of Standards for Test Equipment. Such test equipment and instruments shall know a correction factor for bandwidth and scale position where applicable. All measurements shall be taken at test points to be designated in a franchisee's application, which shall also be included in the franchise agreement.

d. Tests and measurements to ensure compliance with the technical standards shall be performed in a manner that is consistent with the provisions of federal law and regulations.

e. Performance requirements and standards specified in this document, including all FCC requirements and standards, and all local performance guidelines, shall be measured annually to ensure compliance with all specified requirements and standards. Measurements shall be taken and recorded as specified in this subsection (b)(3). All costs of such tests shall be borne by the franchisee.

f. Routine proof of performance tests shall be made on a periodic basis to ensure compliance with applicable performance standards. Measurements shall be taken and recorded as specified in this subsection (b)(3). All costs of such tests shall be borne by the franchisee.

g. When complaints have been made or when other evidence exists which, in the judgment of the Village Council, casts doubt on the reliability or quality of cable service, the Village shall have the right and authority to compel a franchisee to test, analyze and report on the performance of the system. Such test or tests shall be made and the reports of such tests shall be delivered to the Village no later than 14 days after the Village Council formally notifies a franchisee.

h. The Village's rights under subsection (b)(3)g. of this section shall be limited to requiring tests, analysis, and reports covering specific subjects and characteristics based on such complaints or other evidence when and under such circumstances as the Village has reasonable grounds to believe that the complaints or other evidence require that tests be performed to protect the public substandard cable service. All costs for such tests shall be borne by the franchisee.

i. Reports required pursuant to subsection (b)(3)g. of this section shall include information setting forth the nature of the complaint or other evidence which precipitated the special tests; what system component was tested, the equipment used and procedures employed in such testing, the results of the testing and the resolution of the complaint or problem. Any additional information pertinent to the special test or specifically requested by the Village shall be reported.

j. All performance testing shall be done under the supervision and direction of a qualified engineer, not on the permanent staff of the franchisee. The engineer shall be selected by a franchisee and approved by the Village Manager or his designated representative, after reviewing the individual's professional qualifications and a statement, provided by the engineer, indicating all associations or relationships of any nature which that individual may currently have or may formerly have had with the franchisee. All records of performance tests and their results shall be signed and certified by the engineer who shall include in the records a copy of his qualifications and of the statement.

(c) If, at any time, the cable communications system or any portion thereof fails to comply with any of the standards set forth in this section, the Village Engineer shall send written notice to a franchisee listing any deficiencies and requiring a franchisee to repair, alter or correct the deficiencies so as to meet all such standards. A franchisee shall have 30 days after the date of the notice within which to correct the deficiencies. A franchisee's failure to correct the deficiencies within 30 days shall subject it to the penalties provided in section 4.09.16, unless the penalty is waived by the Village Council upon a showing by a franchisee that it has made all reasonable efforts to correct the deficiency but has been unable to do so due to the occurrence of conditions beyond its control. If deficiencies in the cable communications system remain after the 30-day period, the Village Council may direct the engineering department to correct such deficiencies and a franchisee shall pay all reasonable costs associated therewith.

(d) Where the provisions of any codes or regulations referred to in this section are in conflict, the more stringent provisions, as determined by the Village Engineer, shall be deemed to apply.

4.07.20. CHANGES PROHIBITED

(a) A franchisee shall provide its cable system and all services as set forth in the franchise agreement, including all exhibits thereto and all documents and written material incorporated by reference therein.

4.07.21. MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES, EQUIPMENT

A franchisee shall upgrade its facilities, equipment and service so that its system is as advanced as the current state of technology will allow, provided that any necessary upgrade to its facilities, equipment, or service is economically appropriate. A franchisee shall install additional channel capacity as required to keep channel capacity in excess of the demand therefor by users. At all times, the cable system shall be no less advanced than any cable system in the Detroit Dominant Market Area or than any other cable system of comparable size excepting only those cable systems which are experimental, pilot, or demonstration. Such matters shall be a topic of discussion at all review sessions. A franchisee shall submit a five-year plan for upgrading facilities and equipment at each performance review session.

4.07.22. SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY

(a) No signals of a cable communications channel shall be transmitted from a subscriber terminal for purposes of monitoring individual viewing patterns or practices without the express written permission of the subscriber. The request for such permission shall be contained in a separate document with a prominent statement to be signed by the subscriber acknowledging his full understanding of the provisions of the request and permitting the activity to occur. No penalty shall be invoked for a subscriber's failure to provide such an authorization. The authorization shall be revocable at any time by the subscriber without penalty. Such authorization is required for each type or classification of subscriber terminal signal planned; provided, however, that a franchisee may keep such records of viewing or purchasing of services by individual subscribers as are necessary for the billing of the individual subscriber for such services.

(b) A franchisee shall not monitor or tabulate any records or test results in any manner that would reveal the economic status, commercial product preferences or opinions of individual subscribers or their families. A franchisee shall not maintain or tabulate any data on the political, religious, moral or social preferences or opinions of individual subscribers or their families.

(c) A franchisee, or any of its agents or employees, shall not, without the specific written authorization of the subscriber involved, sell, or otherwise make available to any party:

(1) Lists of the names and addresses of such subscribers, or

(2) Any list which identifies the viewing habits of subscribers.

(d) A franchisee shall be constantly alert to possible abuses of any legal right of privacy or other legal rights of any subscriber, programmer or general citizen resulting from any device or signal associated with the cable communications system. The possibility of such abuse shall be discussed at every scheduled review session.

(e) Devices such as electronic locks, scramblers, warning lights, and others designed to inhibit signals originating from a subscriber terminal shall be provided by a franchisee for all two-way system subscribers. Such devices shall additionally be provided as other privacy problems are identified, the technology becomes available and reasonable financial arrangements can be made.

4.07.23. CONTINUITY OF SERVICE

(a) It shall be the right of all consumers and programmers to receive all available services insofar as their financial and other obligations to a franchisee are honored. If a franchisee elects to overbuild, rebuild, renovate, modify or sell the system, or the Village gives notice of intent to terminate or fails to extend or renew this franchise, a franchisee shall act so as to ensure that all consumers and programmers receive continuous, uninterrupted service regardless of the circumstances, for a period not to exceed six (6) months unless a longer period is agreed to by the parties.

(b) Upon a change of franchisee, or if a new operator acquires the system, a franchisee shall cooperate with the Village, new franchisee or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all consumers and programmers. During such period, a franchisee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates the system, and shall be compensated for reasonable costs incurred in providing any services when it no longer operates the system.

(c) If a franchisee fails to operate the system for three (3) consecutive days without prior approval of the Village or without just cause, the Village may, at its option, operate the system or designate an operator until such time as a franchisee restores service under conditions acceptable to the Village or a permanent operator is selected. If the Village fulfills this obligation for a franchisee, the franchisee shall reimburse the Village for all reasonable costs or damages, in excess of revenues from the system received by the Village, that are the result of the franchisee's failure to perform.

4.07.24. ALL CHANNELS EMERGENCY ALERT

A franchisee shall, in the case of any emergency or disaster, make its entire system available without charge to the Village Manager or his representative, or to any other governmental or civil defense agency that the Village shall designate. The system shall be engineered to provide an emergency alert system as set forth in the franchise agreement to allow authorized officials to automatically override the audio signal on all channels, and transmit and report emergency information. The system shall provide for visual transmission of emergency messages.

4.07.25. HOME SECURITY

No home security program shall be promoted, nor shall a home security device be installed, without the prior approval from the Director of Public Safety of the overall home security system design. This provision shall include alarm systems the purpose of which is to detect and warn monitoring agencies of medical emergencies, fires or illegal entry. This section shall be interpreted to cover the general plan and scope of activities, not individual service hookups.

4.07.26 et seq. RESERVED.

4.08 FRANCHISE FEE AND RATES

4.08.1. ESTABLISHMENT OF FRANCHISE FEE

(a) As compensation for the use of the Village's streets, public ways and places, and other facilities, and for the right to construct, operate, maintain, modify, and reconstruct a cable communications system, and for the Village's costs of maintenance, and supervision of the franchise, and for the Village's costs of establishing and conducting the regulatory activities required by virtue of the franchise, a franchisee shall pay to the Village an amount equal to five percent of a franchisee's gross revenues from all sources attributable to the operations of the franchisee within the Village. The franchise fee payment shall be in addition to any tax, permit fee, or other payment owed or service to be provided to the Village by a franchisee.

(b) For purposes of this chapter, gross revenues shall be calculated on an accrual basis.

4.08.2. PAYMENT OF FRANCHISE FEE

(a) Payment of the franchise fee shall be made quarterly at the Village Treasurer's office. Each payment shall be accompanied by a financial statement in a standard form, approved by the Village Treasurer, setting forth the basis for the computation and specifically showing the gross revenues attributable to the franchise during the preceding quarter, as well as such other relevant facts as may be required by the Village.

(b) Each quarterly payment and accompanying financial statement shall be filed in the Village Treasurer's office within 20 days after the last day of the quarter for which the payment is due.

(c) A franchisee shall file, within 120 days of the close of the franchisee's fiscal year, an annual report audited by a certified public accountant, of the annual gross revenues attributable to a franchisee's cable communications operation in the Village as well as such other items of information as may be required of a franchisee. This requirement may be modified by the Village Council in appropriate circumstances. Extension of such period up to 30 additional days may be granted by the Village Council upon request by a franchisee.

(d) The Village shall have the right to inspect a franchisee's financial records, such records to be kept or made available within the Village, and the rights of audit and recomputation of any amounts that may be determined to be payable under this chapter. Any additional amount due the Village as a result of the audit shall be paid within 30 days following written notice to a franchisee by the Village, which notice shall include a copy of the audit report. The cost of the Village's audit shall be borne by a franchisee if it is properly determined that a franchisee's annual payments to the Village for the preceding year are increased thereby by more than three percent.

(e) If any franchise fee payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the applicable due date a late payment fee of $250.00 and a monthly service charge of 1.8 percent of the total unpaid amount shall be paid to the Village by the franchisee.

(f) No acceptance of any payment by the Village shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the Village may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation of a franchisee.

4.08.3. RENOGOTIATION OF FRANCHISE FEES

If the law permits a specified franchise fee greater than the franchise fee set forth in this Chapter, the Village shall have the right to impose such greater fee upon thirty days written notice to a franchisee. If the law removes all limitations on the amount of such fee, the Village shall have the right to increase such fee to eight percent, or more if negotiated, upon thirty days written notice to a franchisee.

4.08.4. RATES AND CHARGES FOR SERVICE

(a) The Village Council shall be empowered to determine, fix, and regulate the charges or rates of the franchisee and from time to time to alter or change such rates.

(b) The Village shall fix and regulate rates for services which shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

(1) Rates for the provision of basic service to subscribers, residential or nonresidential.

(2) Rates for the provision of pay television service to subscribers.

(3) Rates for the connection and installation of services, and for the downgrade or disconnection and/or reconnection of such services.

(4) Rates for nonentertainment services, such as home security, utility meter reading, data transmission, use of access channels, energy management, traffic signalization and other services that may be introduced during the term of the franchise.

(c) Initial maximum rates for services of the cable communications system shall be those delineated in a franchise agreement. Initial maximum rates shall not be increased during the period specified in a franchise agreement except as otherwise permitted by law. If construction of the cable communications system is not timely completed and activated as set forth in a franchise agreement, and an extension is not granted by the Village Council, the rate guarantee shall be extended one day for each day that construction remains incomplete and inactivated beyond the specified construction and activation period.

(d) A franchisee shall have the right to conduct promotional campaigns which permit new subscriptions to the system at lesser rates than those applicable to earlier subscribers provided those promotional rates shall be equally available to all such new subscribers in the Village.

4.08.5. REVISION OF RATES FOR SERVICES

(a) The Village Council, upon request of a franchisee or upon its own initiative, may establish revised rates for services. The following procedures are hereby adopted to provide for a method for the revising of rates:

(1) A franchisee shall file a petition with the Village Council, which petition shall contain full and detailed information concerning the rate revisions being requested and supporting financial documentation for such rate revision.

(2) The Village Council shall establish the date and time for public hearing on such rate revision request no less than 30 days from the date a written request is formally received by the Village Council in a regularly scheduled public meeting and shall render a decision on the request within 30 days following the public hearing.

(3) Notice of the public hearing shall be given in accordance with the provisions of section 4.09.15.

(4) The Village Council may, at its option, employ a consultant or consultants mutually acceptable to a franchisee to aid in the analysis of the requested rate revision. Costs of such consultants shall be borne by a franchisee.

(5) The Village may renegotiate other provisions of the franchise at such times as rate revisions are requested by a franchisee.

(6) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the Village on its own initiative from instituting proceedings to revise rates at the Village's expense.

(b) In making its determination with regard to the setting or revision of rates, the Village Council may direct the Cablecasting Board to review and report on the following items:

(1) The rate request and its supporting financial documentation;

(2) Comparative rates in metropolitan Detroit and the United States;

(3) Performance ratings and subscriber complaints;

(4) System expansion and franchise fee payments;

(5) Comparable services in metropolitan Detroit and the United States; and

(6) Other items as it deems fit.

4.08.6. ESTABLISHMENT OF RATES AND CHARGES SUBJECT TO LAW

The provisions of Sections 4.08.4 and 4.08.5 shall be applicable only if, when, and to the extent, permitted by law.

4.08.7. REFUNDS TO SUBSCRIBERS AND PROGRAMMERS

If a franchisee fails to provide any material service requested by a subscriber or programmer in accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter, a franchisee shall promptly refund all deposits or advance charges paid for the service in question by the subscriber or programmer. This section shall include discontinuance of service for each 24-hour period, as well as lack of service after payment for initial hookup.

4.08.8 et seq. RESERVED

4.09 ADMINISTRATION AND REGULATION

4.09.1. PERFORMANCE REVIEW

(a) In order to monitor a franchisee's performance and adherence to this chapter and the franchise agreement, the Village, through the Cablecasting Board, and a franchisee may hold scheduled review sessions within 30 days after the first, fourth, seventh and tenth anniversary dates of the effective date of the franchise and each three years thereafter during the remaining initial term of the franchise and any extension or renewal thereof. All such review sessions shall be open to the public and notice thereof shall be published not less than ten days nor more than 30 days before each review session in a local newspaper of general circulation. The published notice shall specify the topics to be discussed. Notice shall be given in accordance with the provisions of section 4.09.15.

(b) Unless waived by resolution of the Cablecasting Board in writing four months prior to each scheduled review session, a franchisee shall submit to the Cablecasting Board the results of an independent opinion survey which shall elicit constructive criticisms and identify unmet needs among subscribers and nonsubscribers in the franchise area. The Cablecasting Board shall establish standards and controls with respect to the opinion survey, the preparation and implementation of which shall be without expense to the Village or the Cablecasting Board, and shall approve in advance the survey form and the person conducting the survey.

(c) Special review sessions may be held at any time during the term of the franchise by the Village or by the Cablecasting Board upon not less than 30-days' notice to a franchisee of the time and place of the review sessions and the topics to be covered. All such review sessions shall be open to the public and public notice of the review sessions shall be given in accordance with the provisions of section 4.09.15.

(d) All or any of the following topics may be designated for discussion and review at any review session:

(1) Judicial and federal communications rulings.

(2) Rate structures.

(3) Application of new technology or new developments.

(4) System performance.

(5) System extension policy.

(6) Service provided.

(7) Programming offered.

(8) Customer complaints.

(9) Privacy.

(10) Amendments to the ordinance authorizing the franchise.

(11) Interconnection.

(12) Underground progress.

(13) Public, governmental and educational access programs and performance.

(14) Studio facilities and service.

(15) Insurance.

(16) New services.

Other topics may be added by either party. Members of the general public may also request discussion of additional topics.

(e) The Cablecasting Board at its discretion may utilize the services of a consultant to gain additional information for use during the review sessions. A franchisee shall cooperate with such consultant and the Cablecasting Board in all aspects of the performance review. In the event the consultant's review reveals or leads to the discovery of a significant default or violation of the franchise, the reasonable fees of such consultant relating to such default or violation shall be borne by a franchisee.

(f) The Cablecasting Board shall, at the conclusion of all review sessions, issue a public report to the Village Council announcing its findings and recommendations for enforcement of or modifications to this chapter or the franchise agreement.

4.09.2. SECURITY FUND

(a) Within thirty days after the effective date of franchises between a franchisee and each of the Cablecasting Board's member communities, a franchisee shall deposit with the Cablecasting Board, and maintain on deposit through the term of the franchise, the sum of $10,000. Such sum shall stand as security for the obligations of a franchisee to the member communities of the Cablecasting Board and be administered by the Cablecasting Board as set forth below.

(1) The faithful performance by it of all the provisions of this chapter and the franchise;

(2) Compliance with all orders, permits and directions of any agency, commission, board or department of the member communities having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under the franchise agreements; and

(3) The payment by the franchisee of any claims, liens and taxes due the member communities which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the system.

(b) Within ten days after notice to it that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund, the franchisee shall pay to or deposit with the Cablecasting Board a sum of money in the full amount withdrawn.

(c) If the franchisee fails to pay to the member communities any fees within the time fixed in this chapter; or fails, after ten days' written notice, to pay to the member communities any taxes due and unpaid; or fails to repay the member communities within such ten days, any damages, costs, or expenses which the member communities shall be compelled to pay by reason of any act or default of the franchisee in connection with the franchise, or fails, after three days' notice of such failure, to comply with any provisions of the franchise which the member communities reasonably determines can be remedied by a withdrawal from the security, the member communities may immediately withdraw the amount thereof, with interest and any penalties, or liquidated damages from the security fund. Upon such withdrawal, the member communities shall notify the franchisee of the amount and date thereof.

(d) The security fund deposited pursuant to this section, including all interest thereon, shall become the property of the member communities if the franchise is rescinded or revoked by reason of the default of the franchisee. The franchisee, however, shall be entitled to the return of such security fund, or portion thereof, as remains on deposit at the expiration of the term of the franchise, provided that there is then no outstanding default on the part of the franchisee. Interest earned by the investment of the security fund shall become part of the security fund and unless consumed by the payment of penalties, fees or other charges under this chapter, shall be returned to the franchisee at the expiration of the franchise term, provided that there is then no outstanding default on the part of the franchisee.

(e) The payment of a penalty from the security shall not constitute a cure of any violation or any act of noncompliance. The rights reserved to the member communities with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the member communities whether reserved by this chapter or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such security fund shall affect any other right the member communities may have.

4.09.3. PERFORMANCE BOND/LETTER OF CREDIT

(a) Upon the effective date of the franchise agreement, at the Village's discretion, a franchisee shall file with the Village a performance bond, in favor of the Village, in the sum of $250,000.00, or in any greater amount specified in the franchise agreement, conditioned that the franchisee shall well and truly observe, fulfill and perform each term and condition of this chapter and the franchise agreement. This bond shall be maintained by the franchisee throughout the construction period and until such time as determined by the Village Council. At the request of the Village Council, additional municipalities may be named as additional secured parties in such bond. In lieu of all or part of the amount of such performance bond, at the Village's discretion, a franchisee shall file with the Village an unconditional and irrevocable letter of credit, in form and content satisfactory to the Village, in the sum specified in this section or in any greater amount specified in the franchise agreement. Failure to furnish such bond or letter of credit and to maintain the same in effect in the full amount required hereby during the entire term of the franchise agreement, and any extension or renewal thereof, shall constitute a violation of this section and a material breach of the franchise agreement.

(b) If a franchisee fails to comply with any law, ordinance or regulation governing the franchise, or fails to well and truly observe, fulfill and perform each term and condition of the franchise, including the franchisee's proposal, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally, from the principal and surety of the bond, and/or from the letter of credit, any damages or loss suffered by the Village as a result thereof, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of a franchisee, plus a reasonable allowance for attorney's fees and costs, up to the full amount of the bond or letter of credit.

(c) The Village may, upon completion of initial or subsequent construction, waive or reduce the requirement of the franchisee to maintain such bond or letter of credit. However, the Village may require a performance bond or letter of credit to be posted by a franchisee for any construction subsequent to the completion of the initial service areas, in a reasonable amount and upon such terms as determined by the Village Council.

(d) The bond or letter of credit shall contain the following or substantially similar endorsement: It is hereby understood and agreed that the bond or letter of credit may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 30 days after receipt by the Village, by registered mail, of a written notice of such intent to cancel or not to renew.

4.09.4. INSURANCE

(a) A franchise shall maintain throughout the term of the franchise, insurance insuring the Village and franchisee in the minimum amount of:

(1) Workers' compensation. As required by all applicable federal, state, maritime or other laws including franchisee's liability with a limit of at least $100,000.00 for each occurrence.

(2) Comprehensive general liability and extended coverage endorsement. Including nonownership and hired car coverage as well as owned vehicles, with minimum limits as follows: Bodily injury for each person, $1,000,000.00, and each occurrence, $1,000,000.00; property damage or each occurrence $500,000.00.

(3) Excess liability. Bodily injury and property damage, $5,000,000.00 for each occurrence.

(b) The insurance policies obtained by a franchisee in compliance with this section must be approved by the Village Attorney as being in compliance with this chapter and the franchise agreement within 30 days of the execution of the franchise agreement. Certified copies of such insurance policies, or certificates of insurance in lieu of the policies, along with written evidence of payment of required premiums, shall be filed and maintained with the Village Clerk during the term of the franchise. Such certified copies may be changed from time to time to reflect any increase in liability limits. A franchisee shall immediately advise the Village of any litigation covered by the insurance.

(c) Neither the provisions of this section nor any damages recovered by the Village thereunder shall be construed to limit the liability of a franchisee under any franchise issued under this chapter or for damages.

(d) All insurance policies maintained pursuant to a franchise shall name the Village, its employees, agents, boards and officers as additional named insured parties with respect to all actions, inactions, errors and omissions of the franchisee, its agents or subcontractors, and shall contain the following or substantially similar endorsement: It is hereby understood and agreed that this insurance policy may not be canceled by the insurer nor the intention not to renew be stated by the insurer until at least 30 days after receipt by the Village, by registered mail, of a written notice of such intention to cancel or not to renew.

(e) Each policy of insurance shall be noncancellable except upon giving such notice to the Village. If deemed appropriate by the Village Attorney, the franchisee shall also provide an owners and contractors protective liability policy.

4.09.5. INDEMNIFICATION

(a) A franchisee shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Village, its officers, boards, committees and employees against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments for damages, including but not limited to expenses for reasonable legal fees and disbursements and liabilities assumed by the Village in connection therewith:

(1) In any way arising out of or through the acts or omissions of a franchisee, its servants, agents, or employees, or to which the franchisee's negligence shall in any way contribute with respect to any claim attributable to the operation or existence of any part of the cable communications system.

(2) Arising out of any claim for invasion of the right of privacy, for defamation of any person, or the violation or infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent, or of any other right of any person, excluding claims arising out of or relating to Village programming.

(3) Arising out of a franchisee's failure to comply with the provisions of any federal, state or local statute, ordinance or regulation applicable to the franchisee in its business hereunder.

(b) The foregoing indemnity is conditioned upon the following:

(1) The Village shall give a franchisee prompt notice of the making of any claim or the commencement of any action, suit or other proceeding covered by the provisions of this section.

(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the Village from cooperating with a franchisee and participating in the defense of any litigation by its own counsel at its sole cost and expense.

(3) No recovery by the Village of any sum by reason of the security fund shall be any limitation upon the liability of a franchise to the Village under the terms of this section, except that any sum so received by the Village shall be deducted from any recovery which the Village might have against a franchisee under the terms of this section.

4.09.6. FORECLOSURE

Upon foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the cable communications system, or upon the termination of any lease covering all or a substantial part of the cable communications system, a franchisee shall notify the Village of such fact. Such notification shall be treated as notification that a change in control of the franchisee has taken place, and the provisions of this chapter governing transfer shall apply.

4.09.7. RECEIVERSHIP

A franchise granted under this chapter shall, at the option of the Village, cease and terminate 90 days after the appointment of a receiver, or trustee, to take over and conduct the business of a franchisee, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceedings, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of such 90 days.

4.09.8. REPORTS

(a) On not less than 30 days' advance notice, the franchisee shall submit reports on such matters as the Village or Cablecasting Board may request from time to time. All reports and records of the franchise required under this chapter or the franchise agreement shall be furnished at the sole expense of the franchisee. Any materially false or misleading statement or report made by a franchisee under this chapter or the franchise agreement shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and a material breach of the franchise agreement.

(b) A franchisee shall fully cooperate in making available at reasonable times, and representatives of the Cablecasting Board and the Village Manager or designated representatives shall have the right to inspect, the books, records, maps, plans and other like materials of a franchisee applicable to the cablecasting system, at any time during normal business hours within the Village. Where volume and convenience necessitate, a franchisee may require inspection to take place on its premises within the Village.

(c) The Village and the Cablecasting Board, whenever consistent with its public records ordinance and the state's Freedom of Information Act (MCL 15.231 et seq., MSA 4.1801(1) et seq.), shall attempt to protect, within reasonable limits, the privacy of a franchisee's financial records, unless such records are otherwise available to the public.

4.09.9. OTHER PETITIONS AND APPLICATIONS

Upon request by the Village or the Cablecasting Board, copies of all petitions, applications, communications and reports submitted by a franchisee to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission, or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting cable communications operations authorized pursuant to the franchise, shall be provided no later than the filing date for such petitions, applications, communications and reports.

4.09.10. OTHER BUSINESS ACTIVITIES

In the conduct of a business franchised under this article, neither a franchisee nor its officers, employees, or agents shall directly or indirectly:

(1) Sell, lease, repair, install or maintain; or

(2) Recommend for sale, lease, repair or maintenance television sets or receivers.

Nothing under this section shall be construed to prohibit a franchisee, at a customer's request and without payment, from examining and adjusting the customer's receiver set to determine whether reception difficulties originate in the set or in the franchisee's system.

4.09.11. NONDISCRIMINATION REQUIREMENTS

(a) A franchisee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users, or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, age, handicap, national origin or sex. A franchisee shall comply at all times with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations, and all executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination.

(b) A franchisee shall strictly adhere to the equal employment opportunity requirements of the FCC, federal, state, and local regulations, as amended from time to time.

4.09.12. COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS

Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, a franchisee shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations of the federal, state, county and village governments or any administrative agencies thereof. If any such federal, state or county law or regulation shall require a franchisee to perform any service or shall permit a franchisee to perform any service or shall prohibit a franchisee from performing any service in conflict with the terms of the franchise or of any law or regulation of the Village, then as soon as possible following its knowledge thereof, a franchisee shall notify the Village Council of the point of conflict believed to exist between such regulation or law and the laws or regulations of the Village or the terms of the agreement. The Village Council shall review the possible conflict and determine what action, if any, it shall take regarding the point of possible conflict.

4.09.13. THEFT OF SERVICES AND TAMPERING

(a) No person shall intentionally or knowingly:

(1) Damage or cause to be damaged any wire, cable, conduit, equipment, apparatus or appurtenance of a franchisee of commit any act with intent to cause such damage.

(2) Tap, tamper with or otherwise, connect any wires or device to a wire, cable, conduit, equipment, apparatus or appurtenances of a franchisee with the intent to obtain or send a signal or impulse from the cable system without authorization from or compensation to the franchisee, or to obtain or send cable television or other communication service with intent to obtain or send cable television or other communication service with intent to defraud a franchisee of any lawful compensation to which it is otherwise entitled.

(b) Each day's violation of this section shall be considered a separate offense.

4.09.14. APPROVAL BY VILLAGE ENGINEER

Where provisions of this chapter require approval of the Village Engineer, the Engineer shall grant approval only upon the Engineer's determination that the proposed construction, installation or other activity for which approval is required will not endanger or adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare.

4.09.15. PUBLIC NOTICE

Unless otherwise specifically set forth in this chapter, minimum public notice of any public hearing relating to a franchise shall be by publication, at least once per week, in a local newspaper of general circulation beginning 15 days prior to the meeting, and by announcement, in a format approved by the Village Council, on at least two channels of the cable communications system between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. for five consecutive days prior to the hearing.

4.09.16. CHARGE TO SECURITY FUND

The Village shall be entitled to be paid liquidated damages, and may draw upon the security fund, performance bond, or letter of credit, for the same as follows:

(1) For failure to complete initial system construction and for all other construction or activation obligations of a franchisee including, without limitation, upgrades of the system, or provide services, equipment or personnel in accordance with section 4.06.3, 4.07.3, 4.07.7 or 4.07.10, unless the Village Council specifically approves the delay by motion or resolution, due to the occurrence of conditions beyond the franchisee's control, $2,500.00 per day for each day, or part thereof, the deficiency continues.

(2) For failure to provide dates, documents, reports, information as required by sections 4.08.2, 4.09.1 and 4.09.8, $50.00 per day each violation occurs or continues.

(3) For failure to test, analyze and report on the performance of the system following a request pursuant to section 4.07.19, $50.00 per day for each day, or part thereof, that such noncompliance continues.

(4) For failure to restore the cash deposit as required in section 4.09.2 within the specified ten days, $50.00 per day for each day, or part thereof, that such violation continues.

(5) For failure to comply, after 30 days' notice by the Village Engineer with the standards set forth in section 4.07.19, $100.00 per day for each day, or part thereof, that such violations continues, unless the penalty is waived by the Village Council upon a showing by a franchisee that it has made a reasonable effort to correct the deficiency but has been unable to do so, due to the occurrence of conditions beyond its control.

(6) Except as otherwise provided in section 4.11.11, for any other violation or default under the franchise agreement or this chapter, $100.00 per day for each day that such violation or default continues.

4.09.17. PENALTIES AND CHARGES TO TENANTS FOR SERVICES PROHIBITED

Neither the owner of any multiple-unit residential dwelling nor his agent or representative shall penalize, charge or surcharge a tenant or resident or forfeit or threaten to forfeit any right of such tenant or resident, or discriminate in any way against such tenant or resident who requests or receives cable communications service from a franchisee operating under a valid and existing cable communications franchise issued by the Village.

4.09.18. SOLICITATION OF SUBSCRIBERS

Neither a franchisee nor its agents or employees shall solicit subscribers to the cable communications system by any threatening or harassing means. Harassment shall include the following actions when undertaken with the purpose of soliciting a cable communications subscription:
(1) Entry into a dwelling unit without an oral invitation to do so;

(2) A telephone call to a dwelling unit between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.;

(3) A telephone call to a dwelling unit within three months of a prior rejection of a cable communications subscription by any person residing at that dwelling unit, unless some person residing therein has expressly indicated an interest in subscribing to the cable communications system; and

(4) Visiting a dwelling unit within three months of a prior rejection of a cable communications subscription by any person residing at that dwelling unit, unless some person residing therein has expressly indicated an interest in subscribing to the cable communications system.

4.10.19 et seq. RESERVED

4.10 CABLECASTING BOARD

4.10.1. CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP OF BOARD

(a) The Birmingham City Commission and the Village Councils of Beverly Hills, Bingham Farms, and Franklin have established a Cablecasting Board hereinafter called the "Birmingham Area Cable Board". The Board shall continue to consist of thirteen (13) members, seven (7) who are residents of Birmingham who shall be appointed by the City, four (4) who shall be residents of Beverly Hills who shall be appointed by that Village, one (1) who shall be a resident of Bingham Farms who shall be appointed by that Village, and one (1) who shall be a resident of Franklin who shall be appointed by that Village. Each respective authority shall also appoint one (1) alternate representative. In the absence of the representative, the alternate representative shall be entitled to cast the vote for that member. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation and for such terms as their respective authorities shall determine. The City of Birmingham and the Villages shall also have sole power to remove and/or replace their respective appointees. {Ord. 301, 7-18-01}

(b) Each of the Board's member communities is encouraged to appoint an elected or appointed official of that community to act as a liaison to the Board, to attend Board meetings, and to participate in board discussions.

(c) The Birmingham School District and the Baldwin Library are each also encouraged to appoint a representative to act as a liaison to the Board and to participate in Board discussions regarding matters relevant to their respective interests and constituencies.

(d) Seven (7) members of the board shall constitute a quorum and the affirmative vote of a majority of the full Board shall be required for board action.

4.10.2. MEETINGS

Meetings of the Cablecasting Board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine, but not less frequently than once a month. The Board shall adopt rules of procedures and shall keep minutes of its meetings, which shall be a public record. A representative of the franchisee may attend all open sessions of the Board and shall be given a place on the agenda for all regular board meetings and special meetings when deemed appropriate by the Board in order to enable the franchisee to make such reports as it may desire and to respond to questions from Board members and the public.

4.10.3. DUTIES AND POWERS

The Cablecasting Board shall perform the following roles and functions:

(1) Advise the Birmingham City Commission, Beverly Hills Village Council; Bingham Farms Village Council and Franklin Village Council on matters related to cable communications.

(2) Monitor the franchisee's compliance with the franchise agreement and the cable communications ordinance.

(3) Conduct performance reviews as outlined in this chapter.

(4) Act as liaison between the franchisee and the public; hear complaints from the public and seek their resolution from the franchisee.

(5) Advise the Birmingham City Commission, Beverly Hills Village Council; Bingham Farms Village Council and Franklin Village Council on adjustments of rates and services according to the procedure outlined in this chapter and to regulate rates as authorized by the City and Villages and permitted by law.

(6) Advise the Birmingham City Commission, Beverly Hills Village Council; Bingham Farms Village Council and the Franklin Village Council on transfer, renewal, extension or termination of a franchise and change of control of a franchisee.

(7) Appropriate those moneys deposited in an account in the name of the Cablecasting Board by the City of Birmingham, Village of Beverly Hills, Village of Franklin, and the Village of Bingham Farms for:

a. The costs of any consulting and administrative expenses related to the franchise selection process;
b. The costs of any consulting and administrative expense related to performance reviews;
c. Enhancement of the cable access channels; and
d. The costs of any consulting or administrative services under contracts entered into by the Board and other expenses related to the continuing duties and operation of the Cablecasting Board;

and submit an annual budget to the Birmingham City Commission, Beverly Hills Village Council, Franklin Village Council and Bingham Farms Village Council.

(8) Oversee the operation of the educational, governmental and public access channels by:

a. Establishing reasonable user fees.
b. Developing policy guidelines for programming, scheduling and utilization of equipment and facilities.
c. Directing that programming related primarily to the promotion of a business, trade or profession be discontinued or not delivered.
d. Hearing and deciding conflicts between access channel users regarding utilization of equipment, cablecasting time or facilities.

(9) Apprise the Birmingham City Commission, Beverly Hills Village Council, Franklin Village Council, and Bingham Farms Village Council of new developments in cable communications technology.

(10) Hear and make recommendations to the Birmingham City Commission, Beverly Hills Village Council, Franklin Village Council, and Bingham Farms Village Council on any request of a franchisee for modification of its franchise obligations.

(11) Enter into contracts within the Board's budget and such other contracts as may be authorized by the City and the Villages.

(12) Administer contracts entered into by the board and terminate such contracts.

(13) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, hear and decide all matters and disputes relating to or arising under the customer service standards and consumer protection provisions of this chapter, including the assessment of liquidated damages for any violation of such standards or provisions.

(14) Perform such other functions and duties as may lawfully be delegated to it by the Birmingham City Commission, Beverly Hills Village Council, Franklin Village Council and Bingham Farms Village Council, and exercise such additional powers and functions as may be necessary or proper to carry out the duties expressly mandated in subsections (1) through (13) of this section or as may be delegated under this subsection (14).

4.10.4. APPEALS

Any person jointly or severally aggrieved by a decision of the Cablecasting Board shall have the right to appeal to the county circuit court on any matter on which the Cablecasting Board has the power to render a final decision and exercises such power.

4.10.5. AUTHORITY OF MUNICIPALITIES

The Birmingham City Commission, Beverly Hills Village Council, Franklin Village Council, and Bingham Farms Village Council shall retain full authority over all decisions pertaining to the issuance, extension, or renewal of a franchise, franchise transfer or change of control of a franchisee, franchise termination or franchise purchase, appointments to the Cablecasting Board, public access guidelines, and bond or letter of credit reduction.

4.10.6 et seq. RESERVED

4.11 CONSUMER PROTECTION

4.11.1. CUSTOMER SERVICE

(a) A franchisee shall maintain an office which provides the necessary facilities, equipment, and personnel to comply with the following customer service standards under normal conditions of operation:

(1) Sufficient customer service representatives and toll-free telephone line capacity during normal business hours to assure that a minimum of 90 percent of all calls will be answered within 30 seconds and 90 percent of all calls for service will not be required to wait more than 30 seconds after such call has been answered before being connected to a service representative. All incoming customer service lines shall not be simultaneously busy more than three percent of the total time the cable office is open on any business day.

(2) Emergency toll-free telephone line capacity on a 24-hour basis, including weekends and holidays.

(3) A franchisee shall maintain a presence within the franchise area with adequate hours to meet public demand. The Cablecasting Board may require a franchisee to alter or extend these hours if there is significant evidence through subscriber complaints that the posted hours are not adequate. For purposes of this provision only, "franchise area" may include neighboring municipalities acting jointly under an intergovernmental agreement to which the Village is a party.

(4) An emergency system maintenance and repair staff, capable of responding to and repairing malfunctions on a 24-hour basis.

(5) An installation staff, normally capable of installing service to any subscriber within seven days after receipt of a request, in all areas where trunk and feeder cables have been activated.

(b) A franchisee shall furnish each subscriber at the time service is installed or reinstalled, and at least annually thereafter, written instructions and information regarding the franchisee's general policies and practices applicable to subscribers including, without limitation, information regarding products and services, prices and options, installation and service maintenance policies, instructions for using the system, billing and complaint procedures, and such additional matters as may be required by law or as may reasonably be required by the Village or the Cablecasting Board. Such instructions and information shall include the franchisee's business address, applicable phone number, and the name of the appropriate official or department of the franchisee to whose attention the subscriber should direct a request for service, request for billing adjustment or complaint. Such instructions or information shall also include the name, business address, and telephone number of the Cablecasting Board's administrator and the name, business address and telephone number of the Village Manager or other designated Village employee to whom the subscriber can call or write for information regarding the terms, conditions and provisions governing a franchisee's franchise if a franchisee fails to respond within a reasonable period of time to the subscriber's complaint or request for installation, service or billing adjustment.

(1) A franchisee shall furnish revised written instructions to each subscriber whenever the instructions previously provided have been changed, and at least annually.

(2) The written instructions and information provided for in this section shall be subject to the review and approval of the Cablecasting Board which shall not withhold its approval unreasonably. The Board shall have the power to compel changes in such materials if the Board deems the same to be incorrect or inadequate in any material respect, and a franchisee shall promptly institute any changes so required by the board.

4.11.2. CABLE SERVICE

(a) A franchisee shall interrupt programming service only with good cause and for the shortest time possible and, except in emergency situations, only after periodic cablecasting notice of service interruption for two days prior to and on the same channel and at the same time as the anticipated interruption. Programming services may be interrupted between 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. for routine testing, maintenance and repair, without notification, any night except Friday, Saturday, or Sunday, or the night preceding a holiday.

(b) A franchisee shall maintain a written log, or an equivalent stored in computer memory and capable of access and reproduction in printed form, of all subscriber complaints. Such log shall list the date and time of such complaints, identifying the subscribers and the describing the nature of the complaints and when and what actions were taken by the franchisee in response thereto. Such log shall be made available at a location convenient to the Village, reflecting the operations to date for a period of at least three years, and shall be available for public inspection during regular business hours. The franchisee shall submit a copy of such log quarterly to the Cablecasting Board for its review. For purposes of this section, "complaint" means any expression of dissatisfaction or report of a failure or defect, by a subscriber or other user of the cable system to the franchisee relating to any product, service, price, facility of the franchisee, or action or omission of the franchisee relating to the franchisee's status as a cable franchisee of the Village.

(c) For purposes of this section, "subscriber problem" means any malfunction affecting a single subscriber; "outage" means a complete loss of picture and sound affecting more than one subscriber; "system problem" means any problem other than an outage which affects more than one subscriber. With respect to matters within a franchisee's control, a franchisee shall maintain a repair force of technicians so as to resolve any subscriber request for service or to repair any malfunction within the following time frames:

(1) For an outage. Within two hours, including weekends and holidays, after receiving knowledge of such malfunction.

(2) For a subscriber problem. Next business day service and repair, seven days a week, for all complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments. In no event shall the response and repair time for calls received subsequent to 2:00 p.m. exceed 24 hours, including weekends and holidays, from the time of receiving a subscriber's request for service.

(3) For a system problem. Within 24 hours, including weekends and holidays, of receiving a request for service identifying a problem concerning picture or sound quality affecting any two or more subscribers.

(d) Upon receipt of a request for service, a franchisee shall establish a four-hour appointment window with the subscriber or adult representative of the subscriber. A franchisee shall respond to the request for service within such established appointment window.

(1) If access to the subscriber's home is not made available to a franchisee's technician when the technician arrives during the established appointment window, the technician shall leave written notification stating the time of arrival and requesting that the franchisee be contacted again to establish a new appointment window. In such case, the required response time for the request for service shall remain the next business day from the time the franchisee is contacted to establish the new appointment window.

(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a franchisee's technician telephones the subscriber's home during the appointment window and is advised that the technician will not be given access to the subscriber's home during the appointment window, then the technician shall not be obliged to travel to the subscriber's home or to leave the written notification referred to above, and the burden shall again be upon the subscriber, or adult representative of the subscriber, to contact the franchisee to arrange for a new appointment window, in which case the required response time for the request for service shall again be the next business day from the time the franchisee is contacted to establish the new appointment window.

(e) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d) of this section, a franchisee shall be deemed to have responded to a request for service under the provisions of this section only when a technician arrives at the service location, begins work on the problem, and proceeds diligently to complete such work.

(f) No charge shall be made to the subscriber for any service call unless the problem giving rise to the service request can be demonstrated by a franchisee to have been:

(1) Caused by subscriber negligence,

(2) Caused by malicious destruction of cable equipment, or

(3) A problem previously established as having been noncable in origin.

(g) All service personnel of a franchisee or its contractors or subcontractors who have as part of their normal duties contact with the general public shall wear on their clothing a clearly visible identification card bearing their name and photograph. A franchisee shall account for all identification cards at all times. Every service vehicle of a franchisee shall be clearly identifiable by the public.

4.11.3. FRANCHISEE'S BILLINGS

(a) A franchisee's bills to its subscribers shall be clear, concise and understandable and shall be itemized as to each charge reflected thereon. The billing content in use by a franchisee as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be subject to the approval of the Cablecasting Board. Any modification of the content of a franchisee's bills to subscribers shall also be subject to the Board's approval.

(b) The Board shall not withhold its approval of the content of a franchisee's bills unreasonably. If the Board disapproves of any of a franchisee's bills to subscribers, it shall so notify the franchisee and shall specify the basis for such disapproval. A franchisee shall then modify the bills so as to remedy the defects specified by the board. The modification shall be implemented by a franchisee effective with the first billing after the expiration of 45 days after receipt by the franchisee of the Board's notice of disapproval, unless the Board extends such time.

4.11.4. DISCONNECT AND DOWNGRADE CHARGES

(a) A franchisee shall make no charge to any subscriber on account of complete discontinuance of service. Except as may otherwise be provided by a law which preempts this section, a franchisee shall make no charge to any subscriber on account of a net downgrade of service whereby the subscriber requests a lower tier of basic service and/or a reduction in premium service.

(b) A franchisee may only disconnect a subscriber if at least 45 days have elapsed after the due date for payment of the subscriber's bill and a franchisee has provided at least ten days written notice to the subscriber prior to disconnection, specifying the effective date after which cable services are subject to disconnection; provided, however, notwithstanding the foregoing, a franchisee may disconnect a subscriber at any time if the franchisee in good faith and on reasonable grounds determines that the subscriber has tampered with or abused the franchisee's equipment, or is or may be engaged in the theft of cable services.

(c) A franchisee shall promptly disconnect any subscriber who so requests disconnection. No period of notice prior to requested termination of service may be required of subscribers by a franchisee. No charge may be imposed upon the subscriber for any cable service delivered after the effective date of the disconnect request. If the subscriber fails to specify an effective date for disconnection, the effective date shall be deemed to be the day following the date the disconnect request is received by a franchisee.

4.11.5. LATE PAYMENT CHARGES

Late payment charges imposed by a franchisee upon subscribers shall be fair and shall be reasonably related to a franchisee's cost of administrating delinquent accounts. No late payment charge shall be imposed upon a subscriber, and a subscriber shall not be deemed to be in arrears on a bill, until at least forty-five (45) days have elapsed after the due date specified on the bill; and, for purposes of this section and the prior section, the due date specified on the bill shall not be earlier than the first day of the monthly period to which the bill is attributable.

4.11.6. NOTICE OF PROGRAMMING OR CHANNEL CHANGE

Except as may otherwise be provided by federal law, a franchisee shall provide at least 45 days written notice to subscribers prior to discontinuing any channel or programming service or to realigning any channel and shall provide written notice of the same to the Cablecasting Board no later than the franchisee's notice to subscribers. This provision shall not preclude the right of the Village to contest or prohibit any such action by a franchisee if, and to the extent, such rights exists. The foregoing notice requirement shall not apply in cases in which a programming service is discontinued because a nonaffiliated provider thereof discontinues furnishing the same to a franchisee on less than 45 days notice to a franchisee. In any such case a franchisee shall nevertheless furnish notice to its subscribers and the Cablecasting Board promptly upon a franchisee receiving notice of the discontinuance of the programming service from such unaffiliated provider.

4.11.7. NOTICE OF PRICE INCREASE OR REDUCTION OF SERVICE

Except as may otherwise be provided by federal law, a franchisee shall provide at least 45 days written notice to subscribers prior to implementing any increase in subscriber rates or reduction in subscriber services and shall provide written notice of the same to the Cablecasting Board no later than a franchisee's notice to the subscribers. The provisions of this section shall not preclude the right of the Village to contest or prohibit any such action by a franchisee if, and to the extent, such right exists.

4.11.8. FRANCHISEE'S COMMUNICATIONS

Prior to or simultaneously with any communication made by a franchisee to the general public or to a franchisee's subscribers announcing or explaining any increase in subscriber rates or reduction in programming services, a franchisee shall furnish a copy of such communication to the Cablecasting Board. The copy of the communication required to be furnished to the Board under this section shall be deemed to be a report under Sec. 4.09.8 and hence subject to the provisions of Sec. 4.09.8.

4.11.9. DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION ON FRANCHISEE'S COSTS

If a franchisee, in any communication to the general public, to the Village, to subscribers, or to the Cablecasting Board, justifies a price increase or reduction in service on the basis of increased costs to which the franchisee has been subjected, a franchisee, on written request of the Board, shall promptly furnish the Board with the underlying information on which such claim of increased costs is based in such form as the Board may request. The information furnished to the Board pursuant to this section shall be deemed to be a report under Sec. 4.09.8 and hence subject to the provisions of Sec. 4.09.8.

4.11.10. SUBSCRIBER REBATES

(a) Upon a violation of the provisions of this article by a franchisee which results in a subscriber not receiving cable programming service or receiving only significantly impaired service, the Board may order and direct a franchisee to issue a rebate to such subscriber in any amount determined by the Board to provide monetary relief to the subscriber substantially equal to the subscriber's unliquidated detriment or loss resulting from such violation.

(b) Except for planned outages where subscribers are provided reasonable notification in advance, upon a subscriber's request a franchisee shall provide not less than a one-day credit for each day in which there is a period of four hours or more during which the subscriber experienced an outage or significant impairment of cable service not attributable to any action or omission of the subscriber or to any defect in the subscriber's equipment. The credit specified in this section shall be equal to 1/30 of the subscriber's total monthly bill for all services and equipment multiplied by the applicable number of days, but excluding any pay-per-view charges; provided, however, if such monthly bill includes any charge for a pay-per-view program subject to such outage or significant impairment, then the credit shall be increased by the amount of such charge.

(c) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude a subscriber from requesting and receiving from a franchisee a rebate greater than that provided in subsections (a) and (b) of this section.

4.11.11. LIQUIDATED DAMAGES

(a) The Cablecasting Board may assess liquidated damages of up to $100.00 per day against a franchisee for each day a franchisee is in violation of this article. Such assessment may be levied against the security fund specified in Sec. 4.09.2.

(b) Assessment of liquidated damages shall not constitute a waiver by the Village of any other right or remedy it may have under the franchise agreement or applicable law, including the right to recover from a franchisee any costs and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees, which are incurred by the Village on account of a franchisee's violation of this article.

4.11.12. REMEDIES AVAILABLE

If the Cablecasting Board determines that a franchisee has violated this article, the Board may order appropriate rebates to subscribers as provided in section 4.11.10 and/or assess liquidated damages against a franchisee as provided in section 4.11.11. In addition, the Village may pursue any additional or other legal or equitable remedies available to it under the franchise agreement or any applicable law.

4.11.13. APPEAL PROCESS

A franchisee may appeal any action of the Cablecasting Board to the Village by submitting a written appeal within 21 days from the date of the Board's action to which a franchisee objects. Upon such appeal, the Village Council shall conduct a de novo review of the action of the Board being appealed and shall set a hearing date within 45 days of the date of receipt of the appeal. A franchisee may present any information, data or other evidence to the council either prior to or at the time of the hearing. Hearings shall be open to the public and members of the public and members of the Board may also present any evidence or information pertinent to the matter appealed. The Council shall then determine whether to uphold, reverse or modify the action of the Board. The appeal shall stay any further action on the matter appealed until the appeal has been decided by the Council.

4.11.14 et seq. RESERVED. {Ord. 298, 6-7-00}

Chapter 5 - Streets, Alleys & Sidewalks
5.01 WORK IN STREETS
5.02 CULVERTS
5.03 WATER DRAINAGE ONTO STREETS
5.04 DEBRIS IN STREETS
5.05 CONSTRUCTION, RECONSTRUCTION, REPAIR AND CLEANING OF SIDEWALKS
5.06 NATURAL BEAUTY ROAD
5.07 DECLARATION OF SNOW EMERGENCY

5.01 WORK IN STREETS

(a) Permit Required. No person shall begin to construct, reconstruct, repair, alter, or grade any sidewalk, curb, curb-cut, driveway or street, or interfere otherwise with the public streets without first obtaining a permit from the Road Commissioner as provided by this section.

(b) Application. An applicant for a permit hereunder shall file with the Road Commissioner an application showing:

1. Name and address of the owner, or agent in charge of the property abutting the proposed work area;

2. Name and address of the party doing the work;

3. Location of the work area;

4. Attached plans showing details of the proposed alteration;

5. Estimated cost of the alteration;

6. Such other information as the Road Commissioner shall find reasonably necessary to the determination of whether a permit shall issue hereunder.

(c) Fees. The following fees shall accompany an application for a permit hereunder:

1. Filing Fee. In cases where the estimated cost of a project shall exceed One Hundred Dollars ($100), a filing fee of $2 for each $100 of the estimated cost of the project shall accompany an application for a permit hereunder.

2. Inspection and Engineering Fee. The Road Commissioner shall charge a fee for all inspection and engineering services done in behalf of an applicant or permittee hereunder. The inspection and engineering fee shall be computed from a schedule of charges based on anticipated actual costs. Such schedule shall be posted for public inspection in the office of the Road Commissioner or Village Clerk.

(d) Bonds. The following bonds shall accompany an application for a permit hereunder:

1. Construction and Maintenance. In cases where the estimated cost of a project shall exceed One Hundred Dollars ($100) the Road Commissioner shall require a maintenance and construction bond to be filed with the application for a permit hereunder in an amount equal to one-half of the estimated cost of the project and conditioned that such work shall be done in accordance with the Village's Standard Specifications and guaranteeing the same for a period of one year.

a. Failure of Compliance by Permittee. In any case where a permittee hereunder shall be in default or shall fail to comply with the requirements of this section the Road Commissioner shall order the completion of the work by the Village and shall recover the cost from permittee as required by law.

2. Indemnity. The Road Commissioner shall have the authority to require an applicant hereunder to file a bond conditioned to protect and save harmless the Village from all claims for damages or injury to other persons by reason of such alteration work.

(e) Standard for Issuance of Permit. The Road Commissioner shall issue a permit hereunder when he finds:

1. That the work shall be done according to the standard specifications of the village for public work of like character;

2. That the operation will not unreasonably interfere with vehicular and pedestrian traffic, the demand and necessity for parking spaces, and the means of egress to and from the property affected and adjacent properties;

3. That the health, welfare and safety of the public will not be unreasonably impaired.

(f) Supervision of Road Commissioner. All operations for which a permit is granted hereunder shall be under the direction and supervision of the Road Commissioner or his authorized agent.

5.02 CULVERTS

(a) Required. It shall be unlawful to proceed with any excavation or construction within the Village limits or to move any machinery, equipment or materials onto any property preparatory for such excavation or construction until a culvert shall have been installed and covered as hereinafter described, pursuant to permit as hereinafter provided for.

(b) Permit. Application for permit shall be made to the Village Clerk on a form to be provided by the Village, which form shall contain an acknowledgment of the receipt of a copy of this Section, and it shall be unlawful to proceed with any excavation or construction without the permit herein provided for.

(c) Location. The Village Clerk shall notify the Village Engineer who shall determine the size and location of culvert and shall stake location on the property. The cost for this engineering service shall be Twenty-five Dollars ($25) and shall be paid to the Village Clerk by the permit applicant. A plan developer who employs a registered engineer may provide a certificate by this registered engineer covering the staking of ditch and culvert in lieu of the Twenty-five dollar ($25) fee heretofore provided.

(d) Culvert Specifications. Culvert specifications shall be as follows:

1. Sizing: Culverts shall be of sufficient size to carry the design flow of the available grade. Culverts shall be minimum of twelve (12) inches in diameter, and a minimum of eighteen (18) feet long.

2. Grade: Culverts shall be laid on ditch grade.

3. Material: Sixteen (16) gauge corrugated, hot dipped galvanized, copper bearing steel or C75 reinforced concrete pipe shall be used. All culverts shall be fitted with concrete rings per Michigan State Highway Department Specifications. Head wall may be substituted for rings, provided they conform with the Michigan State Highway Department Standards for such head walls.

4. Joints: Sections of galvanized pipe shall be connected with bolted #16 galvanized standard connecting bands not less than 7-1/2 inches wide. Joints in concrete pipe shall be sealed according to the Michigan State Highway Standard Specifications.

5. Laying: Six inches (6") of sand bed must be placed beneath the culvert to insure uniformity of bed. The culverts shall have no less than a six inch (6") cover of 22A gravel, slag or crushed stone. Rip rap shall be placed in ditch at each end of culvert if required by the Village Engineer. Six inch (6") stone size shall be used and rip rap shall conform to the flow line of the ditch.

(e) Driveways. When driveways are constructed they shall conform with the following specifications:

1. Driveway shall be constructed to meet road at shoulder edge elevation.

2. Driveway shall be constructed in such a manner that all water run-off from said driveway shall be diverted into road ditch and at no time allowed to run unto the roadway. This may be done by a flare or other approved means at property line.

3. Driveways shall not lead into street intersections.

(f) Access to Premises. All machinery, equipment and materials must gain access to or be delivered through means of or via the completed culvert and approach, and in no instance shall machinery, trucks or other equipment be moved through unprotected ditches to gain access to any construction site.

Exception to the above rules and regulations may be made by the Road Commissioner during periods when frozen ground makes it impractical or impossible to install permanent culverts properly. Under such conditions, timber bridges may be installed but only in such manner as to not impair or interfere with the proper drainage or run-off of water in such ditches.

(g) Construction Equipment. No machinery, equipment or materials may be stored, stacked or piled on roadway shoulders, ditches or other public property. It is understood that public property includes the area commonly identified as the "Platted right-of-way as indicated on the registered plat".

(h) Work by Village. Where culverts, ditches, and road shoulders have not been provided for access to improved property, or where culverts, ditches, road shoulders, driveways and driveway approaches have been improperly constructed adjacent to improved property, correction may be required by the Village Road Commissioner to maintain proper road maintenance and drainage control. Corrections to comply with this Section shall be done by the Village. The cost of such work shall be borne by the property owner.

5.03 WATER DRAINAGE ONTO STREETS

No owner or occupier of land within the Village shall permit sump pump water or any other water, either naturally or artificially, to drain or flow onto any Village street or road so as to create an icy condition upon the street or road.

5.04 DEBRIS IN STREETS

No person shall own or drive upon a public street any vehicle which is constructed or loaded so as to permit any part of its load or contents to blow, fall, or be deposited upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public or private place, or which deposits from its wheels, tires, or other parts onto the street, alley, sidewalk or other public or private place, dirt, grease, sticky substances or foreign matter of any kind. Any person violating this section shall, in addition to other penalties, be subject to revocation of any and all Village licenses and permits at the discretion of the court. Under circumstances determined by the Village Manager to be in the public interest, the Village Manager may grant persons temporary exemption from the provisions of the subsection conditioned upon cleaning and correcting the violating condition at least once daily and execution of an agreement by such person to reimburse the Village for any extraordinary maintenance expenses incurred by the Village in connection with such violation.

5.05 CONSTRUCTION, RECONSTRUCTION, REPAIR AND CLEANING OF SIDEWALKS

(a) Purpose. The purpose of this policy is to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Village of Beverly Hills by reducing tripping and other hazards on public sidewalks to pedestrians, by repairing and/or replacing required sections of sidewalks, and funding of the same.

(b) Responsibility.

1) The abutting property owner shall keep and maintain the sidewalk along all public streets, avenues, boulevards or lanes within the public rights-of-way, and sidewalk sections that extend from the sidewalk to the curb to facilitate street crossings.

2) Approach walks between the public street and the main sidewalk and driveways and damage to sidewalks directly caused by the abutting property owner or his or her designee, licensee, contractor or other person shall remain the responsibility of the individual owner of the abutting lot or parcel of land. {Ord. 322, 7-15-06}
(c) Repair/Replacement Determinations. A public sidewalk may require repair and/or replacement, under the following conditions:

1) When there is a separation of 2" or greater in the surface elevation between adjoining slabs.
2) When there are cracks or separations that create an uneven surface and are large enough to create a tripping hazard.
3) When the slope of the sidewalk is greater than 10:1.

The Village will cause an inspection such that each section will be inspected on a five year schedule.

(d) Repair/Replacement Methods. The following methods may be employed as acceptable alternatives to repairing public sidewalks:
1) Physical removal of the damaged slab and replace with concrete per Village specifications.
2) The entire section must be replaced if the section break does not occur at the sidewalk joint.
3) Grind or ramp the sidewalk sections to achieve a uniform grade.
4) Level or amend the grade through the use of concrete-or mud-jacking under the walk.

(e) Tree Roots. Where tree roots from trees in the Public Right-of-Way have undermined sections of sidewalk, the Village will inspect the tree to determine if the roots can be cut safely without damaging or destabilizing the tree.

1) If the tree roots cannot be cut, the Village will relocate the walk around and reasonably away from the tree, providing adequate Public Right-of-Way.
2) In the case where the roots can be cut, the Village will remove the offending roots before restoring the sidewalk.

The Village will hold the abutting property owner responsible for repair costs if the offending tree root is located on private property.

(f) Ice, Snow, and Other Obstructions. The owners of property abutting or adjacent to sidewalks shall keep said sidewalk abutting or adjacent to their property free and clear of ice, snow or other obstructions, and if the owner or occupant fails to do so, the Village may do so and assess the cost thereof against the abutting property or owner thereof in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and the Village Charter.

(g) Definitions. The term "sidewalks" as used herein shall be deemed to mean and include any sidewalks or crosswalks adjoining any public street or alley and abutting or adjoining any private property. {Ord. 312; 1-29-03}

5.06 NATURAL BEAUTY ROAD

(a) Definitions. Terms used in this Section mean as follows:

"Administration" means the Administration for the Village of Beverly Hills.

"Council" means the Village of Beverly Hills Council.

"Native Vegetation" means an original or indigenous plant of this Village including trees, shrubs, vines, wild flowers, aquatic plants or ground cover.

"Natural" means in a state provided by nature, without man-made changes, wild or uncultivated.

"Village Major or Local Street" means dedicated public right-of-way other than an alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting residential property and is designated in accordance with 1951 P.A.51, as amended, as a "major or local" Village street.

(b) Petition for Designation, Number and Qualifications of Petitioners; Hearing, Place, Notice, Resolution making Designation.

1. In order to initiate the possible designation of a Natural Beauty Road, petitions requesting this designation containing the signatures of the property owners of record of fifty-one percent (51%) or more of the lineal footage along the portion of road to be designated, and a petition signed by a minimum of twenty-five (25) or more free holders of the Village whose property does not abut the subject road shall be submitted to the Village Clerk. Said petitions shall conform to the standard form petition prepared and available at the office of the Village Clerk for designation of Natural Beauty Roads.

2. Within six (6) months after a petition is received, Administration shall determine the sufficiency of the petitions and make a finding as to whether or not the portion of road proposed for designation meets the criteria adopted for the designation of Natural Beauty Roads; and shall report its findings to the Village Council and notify the Circulator of petitions as to the date said certification and report will be presented to the Village Council.

3. Within forty-five (45) days after the Administration certifies petitions are sufficient and fulfills the criteria for designation, the Council shall hold a public hearing to consider designating the described portion of road as a Natural Beauty Road. The hearing shall be held within the Council Chambers of the Village of Beverly Hills. At the hearing a party or interested person shall be given the opportunity to present their support for or objections to the proposed designation. Notice of hearing shall be given by the council by First Class Mail to all public utilities and all abutting property owners and by causing a notice thereof to be published at least once in each week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village of Beverly Hills, and by posting five (5) notices within the limits of the portion of the road to be designated, in public and conspicuous places therein. The posting shall be done and at least one (1) publication in the newspaper shall be made not less than ten (10) days before the hearing.

4. Within thirty (30) days after the hearing, if the Council deems the designation desirable, it shall file with the Village of Beverly Hills Clerk and Oakland County Register of Deeds, a true copy of its resolution designating that portion of the Village major or local street as a Natural Beauty Road.

(c) Petition for Withdrawal of Designation, Number and Qualifications of Petitioners: Time, Hearing, Withdrawal or Revocation, Notice.

1. If the Council designates a road as a Natural Beauty Road, the property owners of record of fifty-one percent (51%) or more of the lineal footage along the Natural Beauty Road may submit, at any time after the road is so designated, a petition to the Council requesting that the Natural Beauty Road designation be withdrawn and if the petition is valid, the designation as a Natural Beauty Road shall be withdrawn after public hearing in accordance with the procedure described in Subsection (c) and (d) of Section 2.

2. A designation of a Natural Beauty Road also be withdrawn or revoked by the Council after the Council receives a request from the Village Manager and holds a public hearing in accordance with the procedure described in Subsection (c) of Section 2 and makes a determination that revocation of the Natural Beauty Road designation is in the public interest. Within Thirty (30) days after a hearing, if at least five (5) members of the Council determine the revocation necessary, it shall file with the Village of Beverly Hills Clerk and Oakland County Register of Deeds a notice of its determination and publish the notice in a newspaper of general circulation, once in each week for two (2) successive weeks. After publication of the notice, the road previously designated shall revert to its former status.

(d) Uniform and Guidelines and Procedures.

1. The Administration shall develop uniform guidelines and procedures which shall be adopted by the Council for designating, maintaining and preserving Natural Beauty Roads. No guidelines and procedures adopted under the authority of this Ordinance shall prohibit the application of accepted principles of sound forest management in a Natural Beauty Road right-of-way.

2. The Administration shall advise and consult with the Council on the application of the guidelines and procedures.

3. The Council shall provide for a public hearing before an act is permitted which would result in substantial damage to native vegetation in the right-of-way.

4. Nothing is this Ordinance shall affect the right of a public utility to control vegetation in connection with public safety or the maintenance, repair or replacement of public utility facilities, which were constructed in a road prior to its designation as a Natural Beauty Road, or in connection with the construction, maintenance, repair or replacement of public utility facilities crossing a Natural Beauty Road subject to the approval of the Administration.

5. Nothing in this Ordinance shall prohibit public safety from being considered in conjunction with the public hearing, possible designation of a Natural Beauty Road or guidelines for a Natural Beauty Road.

5.07 DECLARATION OF SNOW EMERGENCY. {Ord. 334; 12-26-09}

(a) Purpose. The purpose of this policy is to provide a procedure requiring vehicles to be removed from Village streets in the event of a snow storm as declared by the Village Public Safety Director or his/her designee.

No person shall park or allow to remain parked any vehicle on any portion of any roadway within the Village of Beverly Hills during a snow emergency, or park or allow to remain parked any vehicle in violation of any parking restriction instituted as part of a declared snow emergency as provided in this section. The registered owner of any such vehicle shall be responsible for the cost of removal.

(1) Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section.

a. Director is the director of public safety, or in his absence, his duly authorized representative.

b. Roadway means that portion of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder or berm.

c. Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.

(2) Procedure for declaration of
a. Whenever the director or his representative finds, on the basis of falling snow, sleet, or freezing rain, or on the basis of a forecast by the U.S. Weather Bureau or other weather service that weather conditions will make it necessary that motor vehicle traffic be expedited and that parking on Village streets be prohibited or restricted for snow plowing and other purposes, the director shall put into effect a parking prohibition on all Village streets by declaring it in a manner prescribed in this section.

b. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection a. of this subsection, a parking prohibition shall automatically go into effect on any street on which there has been an accumulation of snow and ice of four inches or more for any one hour or more.

(3) Notice The director, upon declaring a snow emergency, shall cause public announcement of such parking prohibitions and/or restrictions by means of broadcasts and/or telecasts from various commercial stations serving the Village and on the public access channel of any cable television franchisee servicing the Village and he may cause such declaration to be further announced in newspapers of general circulation where feasible.

(4) Record The director shall prepare such declaration of snow emergency and cause it to be posted in the Village offices for such period of time as the snow emergency regulations are in effect.

(5) Enforcement
a. Members of the public safety department are hereby authorized to remove or cause the removal and/or impounding of any vehicle that obstructs or otherwise impedes traffic on any street in the village. Such vehicle may be removed and conveyed by or under the direction of a member of the public safety department by means of towing to a vehicle pound. The director of public safety or his designee is authorized to engage the services of any private operator of towing cars to remove vehicles under the direction of a member of the public safety department where the same are found in violation of traffic ordinances and regulations of the Village.

b. Before the owner or person in charge of such vehicle shall be permitted to remove the same from the custody of the public safety department, he shall furnish evidence of his identity and ownership; he shall sign a receipt and shall pay a fee to cover cost of removal plus the cost of storage; and he shall pay an additional storage fee for each day the vehicle is stored in the vehicle pound in excess of the first 24 hours the vehicle is impounded.

c. Whenever this section is alleged to have been violated, director of public safety or his designee shall have the authority to issue and serve an appearance ticket upon the violator if they have reasonable cause to believe that a violation has been committed. Such appearance ticket shall be in the form subscribed by state law.

(6) Stalled vehicle. Whenever a vehicle becomes stalled for any reason, whether or not in violation of this section, on any city street on which there is a parking prohibition in effect, the person operating such vehicle shall take immediate action to have the vehicle towed or pushed off the roadway. No person shall abandon or leave his vehicle in the roadway, regardless of whether he indicates by raising the hood or otherwise that the vehicle is stalled, except for the purpose of securing assistance during the actual time necessary to go to a nearby telephone or to a nearby garage, gasoline station, or other place of assistance and return without delay.

(7) Termination. Once in effect, a prohibition under this section shall remain in effect until terminated by announcement of the director in accordance with this section, except that any street area which has become substantially clear of snow and ice from curb to curb for the length of the entire block shall be automatically excluded therefrom.

(8) Exemptions. In all areas of the village, an owner of a motor vehicle who resides at premises which do not have a driveway shall be exempted from the requirement to move the motor vehicle in the event of a snow emergency; however, residents in the area are required to park their vehicles as close to the curb as possible to make room for snow plows and other emergency vehicles. Owners of exempt vehicles will be issued identifying stickers which shall be displayed in the rear side window on the driver's side of the vehicle. Motor vehicles with handicapped stickers shall also be exempt from the provisions of this section.

(9) Relationship to other laws. Any provision of this section which becomes effective by declaration of the director or upon the occurrence of certain weather conditions shall, while temporarily in effect, take precedence over other conflicting provisions of law normally in effect, except that it shall not take precedent over provisions of law relating to traffic accidents, emergency travel of authorized emergency vehicles, or emergency traffic directions by a police officer. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to permit parking at any time or place where it is forbidden by any other provision of law.

(10) Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be responsible for a civil infraction, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined no less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such offense, or such fine, in the discretion of the court, together with the costs of such prosecution. Each day that a violation of this Ordinance continues shall be a seperate offence.

a.  Enforcement. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible  for a civil infraction to pay for a civil fine, costs, damages and expenses, the judge or magistrate shall be authorized to issue any judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of this Chapter.

Chapter 6 - Parks
6.01 SUPERVISION
6.02 REGULATIONS
6.03 AMUSEMENT FOR GAIN
6.04 PARK PROPERTY PROTECTION
6.05 OPERATING POLICY
6.06 PICNIC AREAS AND USE
6.07 GENERAL REGULATIONS
6.08 MERCHANDISING, ADVERTISING AND SIGNS
6.09 PROGRAMS
6.10 MOTOR VEHICLES
6.11 PARENTS RESPONSIBILITY
6.12 VIOLATIONS

6.01 SUPERVISION

(a) All parks in the Village of Beverly Hills shall be operated under the supervision of the Village Manager of the Village of Beverly Hills.

(b) The Village Manager shall in addition to his duties prescribed by the Village Charter be Park Superintendent and shall enforce all ordinances, rules and regulations in relation thereto.

6.02 REGULATIONS

It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any regulation governing conduct in the Village parks which has been approved by the Village Council.

6.03 AMUSEMENT FOR GAIN

No amusement for gain or for which a charge is made can be conducted in a park without consent of the Village Council and such amusement must be conducted in accordance with any ordinance pertaining thereto and such further regulation as the Council shall prescribe.

6.04 PARK PROPERTY PROTECTION

It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to:

(a) Disfiguration and Removal. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or remove any building, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, lines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts, or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever either real or personal.

(b) Restrooms and Washrooms. Fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. No person over the age of five years shall use the restrooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex.

(c) Sanitation. Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, pool, or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any storm sewer, or drain, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution or stoppage of said waters.

(d) Rubbish, Refuse and Trash. Have brought in or shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse, or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any fountain or pool, or left anywhere on the grounds of any park, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere.

6.05 OPERATING POLICY

(a) Hours. The public park shall be opened daily to the public during the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M. of any one day; and it shall be unlawful for any person, or persons (except in the instance of prior written approval of the Park Superintendent or his designee or in the case of Village personnel conducting Village business therein), to occupy or be present in said park during any hours in which the park is not open to the public.

Any section, or part of the park, may be declared closed to the public by the Park Superintendent at any time for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular stated intervals.

(b) Group Activity. Whenever any organized group, association or organization desires to use the park facilities for a particular purpose, except the athletic fields, for such as picnics, parties or theatrical or entertainment performances, a representative of the group, association or organization shall first obtain a permit from the Park Superintendent or his designee for such purposes. The Village Council may adopt an application form to be used by the Park Superintendent for such situations.

The Park Superintendent or his designee shall grant the permit if it appears that the group, association or organization will not interfere with the individual members of the public, and if the group, association or organization meets all other conditions contained in the application. The application may contain a requirement for an indemnity bond to protect the Village from any liability of any kind or character and to protect Village property from damage. The Village Council may adopt by resolution a fee schedule for the issuance of a permit.

While non-organized groups may use the park facilities without a permit on a first-come, first-served basis, exclusive use of the park pavilion, in case of conflict, will be given to an organized group or association who has obtained a permit.

6.06 PICNIC AREAS AND USE

No person in a park shall:

(a) Regulations. Picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for that purpose. Attendants shall have the authority to regulate the activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with any directions given to achieve this end.

(b) Nonexclusive. Use any portion of the picnic areas or of any of the buildings or structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such area and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded, except permit holders shall have exclusive use of the pavilion.

(c) Duty of Picnickers. Leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished and before all trash in the nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed in the disposal receptacles where provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, then refuse and trash shall be carried away from the park area by the picnicker to be properly disposed of elsewhere.

6.07 GENERAL REGULATIONS

(a) Costumes. No person in a park shall appear in bathing costume at any place in the parks except within the limits of designated bathing places or areas, and all bathing costumes shall conform to commonly accepted standards.

(b) Animals. No person shall bring or harbor any animals in a park unless the animal is contained on a leash. Animals shall not be allowed in or near the pavilion or playground area. Any animal fecal matter shall be immediately collected and removed from the park.

(c) Liquor and Alcoholic Beverages. No person shall have in his possession, custody or control, any liquor (except beer and wine) in the park or any part thereof. Any person found intoxicated in a public park shall be considered a disorderly person and guilty of disorderly conduct.

6.08 MERCHANDISING, ADVERTISING AND SIGNS

No person in a park shall:

(a) Vending and Peddling. Expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall he station or place any stand, cart, or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing, except as to any regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and under the prior authority and regulation of the Village Council.

(b) Advertising. Announce, advertise, or call the public attention in any way to any article or service for sale or hire except as provided in this section.

(c) Signs. Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign placard, advertisement, or inscription whatever in a park, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands, streets, or highways or roads adjacent to a park.

(d) Pavilion Permit Holders. Pavilion permit holders shall be allowed to place identification banners on the hooks and posts provided.

6.09 PROGRAMS

The Park Superintendent of the Village may conduct or permit sports and/or recreational programs in or on the area generally set out for such purpose. The Parks Superintendent may allow scheduling for the active play facilities, i.e., ball diamonds, volleyball courts, basketball courts, as community conditions warrant. In such event, the Park Superintendent may permit the park to be open during reasonable hours for such purposes, except no regulation or other provisions of this chapter shall be waived or nullified thereby.

6.10 MOTOR VEHICLES

(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle, including motorcycles, minibikes and scooters, in any area other than the designated parking lot.

(b) The Public Safety Department shall place or install suitable signs indicating parking areas under the direction of the Park Superintendent, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle in the park or adjacent streets other than indicated by such signs.

(c) The provisions of Chapter 41 of this code relating to traffic apply to the operation of motor vehicles in the Village parks and all adjacent streets except as to such as is herein promulgated, set forth and modified for park regulation of motor vehicle traffic and parking.

(d) It shall be unlawful for persons to cruise about the park in motorcycles, so-called "mini-bikes," motor scooters and the like. All such vehicles when standing or parked shall have the motor completely shut off so as to emit no sound, noise, fumes or smoke at all.

(e) It shall be unlawful for any person to unnecessarily blow, sound or operate any horn or signaling device or operate or have any device that backfires or creates any sound or noise louder or more disturbing than such device that is originally installed with such motor vehicle by the manufacturer thereof.

(f) No motor vehicle, motorcycle, mini-bike, or motor scooter shall be started up, accelerated, or operated so as to create such disturbance or noise as to attract attention to such operation by the public.

6.11 PARENTS RESPONSIBILITY

Parents shall be responsible for the conduct of minor children.

6.12 VIOLATIONS

Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall subject the violator to the penalties set forth in Section 1.06.

Chapter 7 - Water Service
7.01 DEFINITIONS
7.02 ADMINISTRATION
7.03 WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS
7.04 WATER SERVICES PIPES
7.05 WATER METERS
7.06 WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS
7.07 WATER RATES AND PAYMENTS
7.08 SHUTTING OFF WATER
7.09 OPENING CURB STOPS
7.10 SEPARATE SERVICE LINES
7.11 WASTE OF WATER
7.12 TURNING ON WATER
7.13 STEAM BOILERS
7.14 WATER USE REDUCTION
7.15 AIR CONDITIONING USE
7.16 WATER FOR FIRE PROTECTION
7.17 ACCESS TO PREMISES
7.18 CROSS CONNECTIONS
7.19 LIABILITY OF DEPARTMENT
7.20 VIOLATIONS

7.01 DEFINITIONS

Terms used in this chapter mean as follows

Abbreviations:

(a) MSHD shall mean the Michigan State Health Department.

(b) SOCWA shall mean the Southeastern Oakland County Water Authority.

Council: The Village Council of the Village of Beverly Hills.

Department: The Water Department of the Village of Beverly Hills.

Main: Any pipe or pipes other than service pipes used for conveying or distributing water.

Premises: A single dwelling or apartment occupied by one family only, together with the land connected therewith and such outbuildings as are used exclusively in connection therewith, or a single room or number of rooms or building occupied for business or other purposes by one person, organization, association, firm or corporation.

Residential Property Owner: A residential property owner is a single family residential property or a homeowner's association utilizing village water service. {Ord. 349; 7-5-14}

Secondary Area Maintenance Water Meter: A secondary area maintenance water meter is directed exclusively to a sprinkler system or outside spigot or connection such as, but not limited to, a swimming pool, which water would not enter a sanitary sewer system and will not be applied to the calculation of the sewage disposal bill for the property. {Ord. 349; 7-5-14}

User: A person, firm, association or corporation actually owning or leasing any premises supplied, or to be supplied, with Village water or their duly authorized agent.

Village Manager: The person appointed by the Village Council to manage the Water Department.

Water Service Pipe: Pipe tapped into the water main and extending thence to the meter.

Water Supply System or Water System: Any part of equipment or materials attached to the water mains conveying water furnished by the Village of Beverly Hills except those parts of the water service pipes located on private property.

7.02 ADMINISTRATION

(a) Direction. The supply system of the Village of Beverly Hills including all property and employees in connection therewith shall be known as the "Village of Beverly Hills Water Supply System" and shall be under the direction of the Village Manager, who shall account to the Village Council concerning the operation of the system.

(b) Village Manager's Duties. The Village Manager shall have charge of the maintenance and operation of the water supply system and shall supervise all extensions and alterations to said system as directed by the Council. He shall be responsible for the reading of all water meters, for the enforcement of the payment of water bills and other charges. He shall prepare and present to the Village Council in the manner the Council may designate, a quarterly financial statement of the receipts and expenditures of the system. He shall also enforce the terms of this chapter.

(c) Employees. The Village Manager shall appoint within budgetary appropriations such employees as shall be necessary to maintain and operate such system. Employees shall serve at the pleasure of the Village Manager and shall be paid in accordance with salary schedules as set by budget appropriations.

(d) Finances. All revenues from said system shall be accounted for in a manner satisfactory to the Village Council and shall be deposited forthwith in the depository or depositories designated by the Village Council. A separate system of accounts shall be kept of said system.

(e) Water Supply Control. The Water Department shall control and regulate the supply of water facilities to all private and public premises within the Village.

7.03 WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS

(a) Council Direction. Extensions of, or changes in, the water mains shall be made only by the direction of the Council. Petitions for the extension of old or construction of new mains shall be in accordance with the Village Charter, special assessments provisions.

(b) Agreement. Any person installing water mains at his own expense shall first submit complete plans and specifications, prepared by registered civil engineer, for such work, to the Village Engineer for approval. After such plans and specifications have been approved, the person shall enter into an agreement with the Village guaranteeing the installation of the improvements. Such agreement shall remain in effect for a period of one (1) year after the completion of the installation guaranteeing that the installation conforms to all Village standards and insuring that the job is completed in good workmanlike manner and that the site of the work is left in as good condition as before the job was begun, and agreeing to save the Village harmless from all damages to such improvements during the course of construction of said improvements and any subsequent construction of homes in the improved area.

The agreement is to be secured by satisfactory bond or cash deposit. After execution of said agreement and bond and submittal of four (4) approved sets of construction plans and specifications, the department shall issue a construction permit to a reliable contractor engaged by the person desiring the extension. No construction of water mains by persons other than the department will be allowed without a construction permit.

Construction shall be done under the supervision of the department which shall require such tests made as it considers necessary. The Council shall accept all, or part of such installation for the Village upon the certificate of the department that the installation has passed final inspection. All inspection costs and the costs of reviewing plans and specifications shall be paid by the party installing these water mains in the amount of three percent (3%) of the total cost of construction of the improvements.

The provisions in this subsection shall also apply to any installations of water mains outside the corporate limits of the Village where permission has been granted by the Council to connect to the department mains.

(c) Standards. All water mains, including materials and workmanship hereinafter constructed or installed shall conform to the current standards and specifications of the Detroit Water Supply, the Southeastern Oakland County Water Authority, and the Village of Beverly Hills.

7.04 WATER SERVICES PIPES

(a) All water service pipes on either public or private property, including materials, workmanship and location hereinafter constructed or installed shall conform to the current standards and specifications of the Detroit Water Supply, the Southeastern Oakland County Water Authority and the Village of Beverly Hills.

(b) All applications for use of water through a service pipe, all applications for installation of service pipes and all applications for meters shall be made at the office of the Water Department by the owner or a licensed plumber representing the owner. All new installations will be one inch (1") meters.

(c) All applications shall state in full detail the purposes for which the supply is required, the correct street address, lot number and any other information required by the Water Department.

(d) All expenses incurred by reason of incorrect information given in application shall be charged to and paid by the applicant or his or her agent.

(e) No service shall be installed when the plumber's pipe is in line with a driveway, tree, fire hydrant, catch basin or other obstruction.

(f) All service connections and service pipes from the Village's mains to lot line shall be put in only by properly authorized employees of the Water Department. Before receiving a permit for a service connection, there must be paid such a sum as the Village may require to cover the expense of installing same.

(g) Service connections from the curb stops installed at the lot line by the Water Department to the customer's building shall be installed by a licensed plumber in complete conformity with all these rules and regulations, provided however, that a property owner may make such a service connection himself provided he first obtains a permit to do so from the Water Department, and the work is done in complete conformity herein, followed by inspection by the Water Department.

(h) The water service pipe from the main to the curb stop, also the curb stop and the stop box will be provided in place by the department under the fee for water permit hereinafter provided. Water service pipe, from main to the property line, shall be maintained by the department, but this clause shall not apply to old services installed by private parties. The curb stop, stop box and all water service pipe from the property line to the meter shall be maintained by the owner of the premises.

(i) There shall be no joints between the curb stop and the meter unless commercial lengths are not available to allow for this provision (in the event of excessive building setbacks). All joints between the main and the meter shall be flared type joints. No person shall interfere in any way with water service pipe installed by the department. No person is permitted to turn water on or off at the curb stop except for the purpose of testing his work, in which case the curb stop shall be left in the same condition and position as he found it. Any plumber called upon to shut off water and drain pipes in any premises shall do so inside the building only. The license of any plumber violating the provisions of this paragraph shall be revoked.

(j) A separate gate valve the same size as the meter connections shall be placed on the service pipe on both sides of the meter. Such valves shall be equal in quality to the service cock.

(k) Licensed plumbers shall not interfere in any way with water service pipes installed by the department and are not permitted to turn on or off at the stop cock except for the purpose of testing their work, in which case the stop cock shall be left in the same condition and the position as they found it. Any plumber called upon to shut off water and drain pipes in any premises shall do so inside the building only. The license of any plumber violating provisions of this paragraph may be revoked.

(l) In no case shall there by any connection between water pipes receiving their supply from the Village mains and pumps or tanks receiving their supply from any other service. The use of such a connection is prohibited whether or not it is provided with one or more check valves.

(m) Systems using water from other sources than Village mains must paint a light blue color all pipe lines carrying Village water and all lines carrying water from other sources shall be painted brown. Failure to comply with the above section shall be deemed sufficient cause to discontinue the water supply on any premises where this violation occurs.

(n) A plugged tee or any other accessible outlet between the meter and the main will not be allowed.

7.05 WATER METERS

(a) All premises using Village water shall be metered and shall pay for water at the rate established from time to time by the Village Council. In no case will water be supplied, except for temporary use by Council approval, at other than the established water rate.

(b) The property owner or agent shall pay, at time of application for water service, the cost of water meter furnished by the department, but such meter shall remain the property of the department and will at all times be under its control.

(c) Repair charges shall be made to the customer for all damages occurring to meters due to the carelessness or negligence on the part of the customer. The Village Council may impose a deposit fee charge for a meter by resolution of the Council.

(d) The expense of installing the meter set-up shall be borne by the owner. The meter couplings or flanges will be furnished by the department. The maintenance of the meter will be the obligation of the department, providing that where replacements, repairs or adjustment of the meter are made necessary by the act, neglect or carelessness of the owner or occupant of any premises, the expense to the department caused thereby may be charged against and collected from the owner or occupant of the premises.

(e) The accuracy of any meter installed in any premises will be tested by the Water Department upon written request of the customer, who shall pay in advance a fee of, as determined from time to time by Council Resolution, to cover the cost of the test and agree to come to the meter shop and witness the test. If, on such test, the meter shall be found to register over five percent (5%) more water than actually passes through it, another meter will be installed and the, as determined from time to time by Council Resolution, will be refunded to the customer, and the water bill may be adjusted in such manner as may be fair and just. {Ord. 319; 11-16-04}

(f) In the event that any meter is found defective or fails to register, the customer will be charged the same amount as was charged in the preceding season quarter.

(g) Meters for terraces and apartment houses may have a single connection with meter for all connecting houses, or separate connections to each.

(h) More than one meter may be used for business property occupied by more than one tenant. In case more than one meter is used, an agreement must be signed by the owner protecting the Village in treating this property in its entirety should it necessitate a shut-off to enforce payment of rate.

(i) Meter larger than two inches (2") in size must be of the compound type except in special cases where in the judgment of the Water Department other type of meters would be satisfactory.

(j) Couplings for meter and meter templates will be furnished on receipt at the Water Department office of application blank properly filled out by a licensed plumber.

(k) Upon special permission being granted by the Water Department, meters may be installed in the meter wells of a type approved by the Water Department.

(l) The service meter wells for setting meters one inch (1") or less in size shall be a type suitable for outside service meter settings in cold climates. The meter well shall be standard prefabricated type made of concrete or vitrified clay. The meter wells shall have a minimum inside diameter of twenty inches (20") and a minimum depth of 40 inches (40"). The meter wells shall be equipped with a cast iron frame and double cover suitable for installation on the type of meter well furnished. Meter wells for setting meters larger than one inch (1") in size shall be of a type approved by the Water Department.

(m) All meter wells shall be drained to a sewer if within one hundred feet (100') of sewer and must in such cases have trap next to well. If well is not drained in this manner, it must be provided with sump for pumping water out.

(n) When, due to faulty work, it is necessary to make more than one trip to set a meter, a charge, as determined from time to time by Council Resolution, will be made for each additional trip. {Ord. 319; 11-16-04}

(o) All persons are forbidden to interfere with or move a water meter from any service connection without first receiving permission from the Water Department.

(p) The owner of any premises where a meter is installed shall be held responsible for its care and protection from freezing or damage by hot water and from injury or interference by any person or persons.

(q) Meters and their valves will not be allowed in closets or compartments that are kept locked, or in coal bins, in or under toilet room floors, under buildings, porches, show windows, show boards or where they are difficult of access.

(r) All meters shall be set horizontally in dry, clean, sanitary places, perfectly accessible with valves on both sides, and where a small leak or the spilling of water will do no damage.

(s) All services 1-1/2 inches or larger must have a tee between the meter and outlet valve, to be used for testing the meter without its removal. The size of the side opening of this tee shall be 1-1/2 inch service pipes, 2 inches for all service pipes up to 4 inches, and 3 inches for larger service pipes, according to plans which can be had on application. The side opening of such tee shall be plugged. All meters 1-1/2 inches or larger must be set by the plumber after the settings have been inspected and approved by the Water Department.

(t) By-passes of the same size as meters are required on 1-1/2 inch to 6 inch connections. By-passes will not be allowed on 1 inch meters or smaller. The by-passes shall be constructed according to plans furnished by the Village.

(u) The Village requires all private fire lines and sprinkler systems to be metered. The owner shall purchase the meter and deliver it to the Village for testing and the meter must meet the requirements of the Village.

(v) Secondary Area Maintenance Water Meters. At the option and expense of a residential property owner, an additional water meter, referred to as a secondary area maintenance water meter, may be installed. The secondary area maintenance water meter shall allow for the metering of water that is directed exclusively to a sprinkler system or outside spigot or connection such as, but not limited to, a swimming pool, which water would not enter a sanitary sewer system and will not be applied to the calculation of the sewage disposal bill for the property. The installation, use and other provisions of village ordinances, which apply to a single water meter, shall also apply to the secondary area maintenance water meter. The property owner must comply with all department of public works requirements and pay all associated costs for the installation of a secondary area maintenance water meter. {Ord. 349; 7-5-14}

7.06 WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS

(a) Before any connection shall be made to any water main, application for same shall be made in writing to the department by the owner of the premises to be served, or by his or her authorized agent. Such application shall be made on forms provided by the department. The owner, user, and/or applicant for a water tapping permit by such application impliedly agrees to abide by all rules and regulations of the department in all respects, but more especially with those respecting the responsibility for the payment for water and this paragraph is expressly made a part of such application.

(b) The location of service load at the property line will be designated by the owner and shown on application unless there are, in the opinion of the department, reasons for changing same.

(c) No such connection shall be made until the applicant has paid the necessary deposit, or fee if known, for same in accordance with schedule of rates set forth by the Council from time to time. Such schedule will be available for public inspection at the offices of the department.

(d) Property owners not within the Village corporate limits may connect into the Village water mains only upon the approval of the Village Council. All connections shall comply with this chapter.

(e) At the time application is made for a service connection to a new building, the applicant shall pay a deposit, as determined from time to time by Council Resolution, to guarantee maintenance during the construction period of the water stop-box, which sum shall be retained by the department until final grading of said premises is completed, or upon inspection it shall be determined that the stop-box has been damaged, the department will correct same and apply full deposit for the service so rendered. {Ord. 319; 11-16-04}

(f) No premises shall be served by more than one water service and one meter. A building under one ownership consisting of several premises may be served by more than one water service and meter upon approval by the department, but in no case shall the number of water services and meters exceed the number of premises. In multiple installations, no totalizing meter will be installed or read by the department. When more than one meter is served by one water service, all the meters served by the service must operate from a manifold type arrangement. Failure of one unit in a manifold type arrangement to pay for water received will result in a discontinuance of water to that meter.

(g) Where a building originally built as a single building or premises and fitted with one service pipe shall thereafter be subdivided and each subdivision shall be separately owned, the separate division or divisions so made must be connected to the main by separate service pipes within thirty (30) days after such subdivision.

(h) Automatic underground sprinkling systems for watering grounds must not be installed in the road right-of-way in such a manner that piping will be in the way of Water Department operation. Any damages incurred to such installations is the sole responsibility of the owners and the department will not repair same.

(i) No person shall obstruct or interfere with any stop cock, valves or any appurtenances connected with the Village's water mains by placing in, or about it, building materials, rubbish, soil, snow or other hindrance to easy and free access thereto.

7.07 WATER RATES AND PAYMENTS

(a) The owner or occupant of any land or premises, against which water and/or sewage disposal rates, if any, shall be assessed, and shall pay the same to the Village Treasurer, Water Department or its authorized agent monthly or quarterly according to such rules and regulations as may be adopted by resolution from time to time by the Village Council.

(b) All premises shall be billed quarterly.

(c) The department shall deliver or mail bills to the premises to which the water is supplied, but will assume no responsibility for loss or failure of such bill to reach the proper person. Tenants of premises for which the owner pays the water bills should see that such bill reaches the owner promptly for payment.

(d) Water bills shall be payable on or before due date without discount. Bills not paid on or before the last net payment date, as indicated on the face of the bill, shall be subject to a ten percent (10%) penalty charge. Customers whose bills are unpaid thirty (30) days after due date shall be forwarded a shut-off notice and if bills are not paid within fifteen (15) days after the date of the shut-off notice, the customer's service shall be then turned off immediately without further notice. An additional penalty, as determined from time to time by Council Resolution, will be charged to the customer and shall be paid together with all unpaid charges before service will be turned on again. {Ord. 319; 11-16-04}

(e) All charges for water will be made against the owner of the premises supplied, unless otherwise agreed between the owner and tenant. However, this agreement shall not relieve the owner of the premises from the responsibility for payment for water charges, should the tenant fail to pay for same.

(f) Charges for water supplied shall constitute a lien on the property served, and if not paid within six months shall be certified to the Village Assessor, who shall enter same on the next tax roll. Such deficiency shall be collected in the same manner as provided for the collection of taxes assessed upon such roll and the enforcement of the lien thereon.

(g) No free services shall be furnished by the department to any person, firm or corporation, public or private.

(h) All payments received for water shall be applied to arrears items, if any.

(i) The Village Council shall adopt by resolution a schedule of rates for water furnished by the department. Such schedule and/or any revisions thereof shall take effect for each consumer upon the next billing following the adoption thereof.

(j) Rates for special or temporary supply of water for any purpose shall be fixed by the Water Department.

(k) In the case of temporary vacancy of any premises, the water will be turned off at the stop box and the meter removed by the Water Department upon written request of the owner of the premises to the department. The water will be turned on again and the meter set when requested. The minimum charge for any quarter in which such vacancy occurs will be reduced in proportion to such vacancy, but no rebate will be allowed for a period of less than thirty (30) successive days in any quarterly period. When premises are left unoccupied with water not turned off by the department, no rebate will be allowed nor will any allowance be made for any water registered by the water meter that may leak or waste through the plumbing or fixtures.

7.08 SHUTTING OFF WATER

The Village reserves the right to shut off the supply of water to any customer without any preliminary notice, for any reason whatsoever. The Village reserves the specific right, power and authority to cut off the supply of water any time without incurring any liability or cause of action for damages, any regulation to the contrary notwithstanding, and the Village shall not be liable under any circumstances for a deficiency or failure in the supply of water.

7.09 OPENING CURB STOPS

When new water service pipes are put into any premises the curb stop shall be left closed, and will thereafter be opened by the department only upon request of the owner or his agent. Under no circumstances shall curb stops be opened or closed by any person not an employee or agent of the department except that a licensed plumber may open a curb stop to test his work.

7.10 SEPARATE SERVICE LINES

Water shall be taken and used only through water service pipes under the supervision of the department and no connection through which water may pass from one property to another shall exist even though the ownership of both properties may be the same.

7.11 WASTE OF WATER

Excessive or unnecessary use or waste of water, whether caused by carelessness or by defective or leaky plumbing or fixtures is strictly prohibited. For disregard of, or repeated violation of this requirement, the water may be turned off by the department.

7.12 TURNING ON WATER

Where the water has been turned off by the department for any reason, no person except an authorized employee or agent of the department may turn it on again. When this rule is violated the person so doing shall be liable to the penalties hereinafter provided, and the water may be shut off at the corporation cock at the main, in which case the owner shall, before it is turned on again, pay in advance the charge of the department therefore, which shall be fixed by the department based on time and material plus ten percent (10%).

7.13 STEAM BOILERS

No steam engine boilers shall be directly connected to the water service pipe. The owner shall provide a tank of sufficient capacity to afford a supply for at least ten (10) hours into which the service pipe shall discharge.

7.14 WATER USE REDUCTION

(a) The Village Council is authorized at any time, when in its opinion the interest of the Village will be best served thereby, to restrict, regulate or prohibit any person from utilizing the public water supply system for any type of outdoor use. Notice of such order shall be given by publication thereof in a newspaper published or circulated in the Village of Beverly Hills or by distributing a copy of such notice to business and residential buildings within the Village.

(b) The Village Manager is authorized to restrict, regulate or prohibit any person from utilizing the public water supply system for any type of outdoor use during a "Water Use Reduction Emergency". The beginning, end and extent of any such emergency shall be declared by the Southeastern Oakland County Water Authority (SOCWA) which shall announce such declaration by use of public radio or television and newspapers covering the Village.

7.15 AIR CONDITIONING USE

(a) Permit. No person shall use water in operation of any air conditioning or cooling apparatus except upon written permit from the department. Any such person desiring to use water for such purpose shall file with the Building Inspection Department a written application for such a permit setting forth the premises whereon such water is to be used, the customary use made of such premises, the type of air conditioning, the cooling machinery, or apparatus wherein such water will be used, the approximate hours of the day or night during which the same will be in operation and the maximum water consumption in gallons per minute of such machinery or apparatus when operated at full capacity. Such application shall be referred to the department and it is hereby vested with sole discretion of approving or denying the same, providing that it shall not be authorized to approve any permit where the maximum water consumption at any period shall exceed ten (10) gallons per minute. If such application shall be approved the Building Inspector shall issue a permit to such applicant upon payment to the Village Treasurer of a permit fee, as determined from time to time by Council Resolution. Such a permit shall be subject to revocation by the department upon twelve (12) hours written notice. {Ord. 319; 11-16-04}

(b) Demand Charge. There shall be included in the department's schedule of water rates a demand charge applicable to all water cooled air conditioning equipment used for space cooling for human comfort that is not of the approved water conserving type.

(c) Billing. The demand charge shall be in addition to the current charge for water used and shall be billed and collected in the manner described herein, and otherwise shall be subject to all the rules and regulations of the department in regard to collection of water bills, including penalties for non-payment thereof.

(d) Due Date. The annual demand charge shall be billed in one sum on or about May 1 of each year and be due and payable without penalty charge on the due date indicated on the bill, which date shall be in no case be less than ten (10) days after the bill is properly addressed and placed in the United States mail depository.

(e) Newly Installed Units. The demand charge shall be applicable to all air conditioning units of the type herein described which are installed and connected to the Beverly Hills water system prior to October 1 of the calendar year in question; provided however, that the demand charge for air conditioning units installed and connected to the Beverly Hills water system during the air conditioning season shall apply as follows:

For units installed and connected to the Beverly Hills water system prior to July 1, entire annual charge; between July 1 and July 31, 3/4 of the annual charge; between August 1 and August 31, 1/2 of annual charge; between September 1 and September 30, 1/4 of annual charge; after September 30, no charge for the calendar year.

(f) Disconnected Units. Air conditioning units subject to the demand charge which are permanently disconnected from the Beverly Hills water system or which are converted to the approved water conserving type during the air condition season, shall be subject to the demand charge as follows:

Disconnected or converted prior to May 1, no charge.

Disconnected or converted between May 1 and June 30, 1/4 annual charge.

Disconnected or converted between July 1 and July 31, 1/2 annual charge.

Disconnected or converted between August 1 and September 30, 3/4 annual charge.

After September 30, entire annual charge.

(g) Off-Season Use. Users of air conditioning equipment of the approved water conserving type may, if they so elect, use water as the cooling medium without recirculation between October 1 and May 1, without causing such use of equipment to be subject to the demand charge.

(h) Rated Capacity. The capacity of a unit in tons shall be the greatest of the following:

1. The manufacturers rating in tons per twenty-four (24) hours of equivalent ice making capacity.

2. The twenty-four (24) hour BTU rating of heat removal capacity divided by 288,000.

3. The horsepower rating of the motor driving the refrigerant compressor.

4. Nine-tenths of the horsepower rating of a motor driving both compressor and fan.

5. Where none of the above ratings is available, or where question arises as to the accuracy of any rating, the rating shall be determined by measurement of power input to the compressor motor, the rate of fuel consumption, or other suitable means.

(i) Approved Water Conserving Type. Approved water conserving type shall be one:

1. Which is equipped with cooling tower, atmospheric condenser, spray pond, or other equipment which shall directly or indirectly cool refrigerant, and

2. Which can use water from the Beverly Hills water system for makeup water to replace water lost by evaporation or by flushing of the equipment, and

3. Which uses an average of less than twelve (12) gallons of water from the Beverly Hills water system per hour per ton of cooling capacity when the unit is operating, and

4. Which has no piping connection to allow operation of the air conditioning unit by direct use of water from the Beverly Hills water system either in conjunction with or in place of such cooling tower, atmospheric condenser, spray pond, or other recirculating and heat-exchanging equipment.

7.16 WATER FOR FIRE PROTECTION

(a) Where hose connections for fire apparatus are provided on any pipe, each connection or opening on the pipe shall have not less than twenty-five (25) feet of fire hose constantly attached thereto, and no water shall be taken through such openings or hose for any purpose other than for the extinguishing of fires or testing such fire equipment. Any such test must be conducted under special permit and under the supervision of the Director of Public Safety. Fire lines must be metered as provided for in Section 7.05 (u).

(b) No person shall open or cause to be opened any fire hydrant without first securing written approval from the Director of Public Safety. Written approval from the Director of Public Safety must then be presented to the Water Department and make application for a "Permit to Use Fire Hydrant," specifying what hydrants are to be used and for what purpose. A deposit of fifty dollars ($50) will be required if permit is granted to cover the cost of water, repairs to hydrant (if any), and inspection charge of three dollars ($3) per hydrant per inspection. See Section 27.17.

(c) If the applicant intends to use the hydrant and take water therefrom for not more than two (2) days he shall pay the sum of five dollars ($5); in the event he intends to use the hydrant for a longer period he shall pay the cost of attaching a meter to the hydrant in addition to the sum of ten dollars ($10) on account of the water used. No permit shall be issued without payment as herein set forth. After the use of the hydrant is discontinued, the permittee shall be charged for water consumed at the prevailing rates as shown by the meter. The applicant shall receive a refund if the charge for the water consumed is less than ten dollars ($10); otherwise he shall pay the difference between ten dollars ($10) and the amount actually due. All fees for permits and charges for water shall be paid into the water fund.

(d) Upon issuance of any permit, it shall be the duty of the Director of Public Safety to furnish the Village Manager a copy thereof. The Director of Public Safety shall, when the use of such hydrant has been discontinued, cause said hydrant to be inspected and if any damage has been done to such hydrant the Director of Public Safety shall make a report thereof the Village Manager whose duty it shall be to recover the amount of such damage from the permittee.

7.17 ACCESS TO PREMISES

Any official or authorized employee of the Water Department shall have free access at all reasonable hours to any premises supplied with department water for the purpose of making an inspection thereof, including the examination of the entire water supply and plumbing system on said premises. No person shall refuse to admit the authorized inspectors and employees of the department to any premises for any such purpose. In case any authorized employee is refused admittance to any premises, or being admitted is hindered or prevented in making such examination, the water shall be turned off from such premises after giving twenty-four hours notice to the owner or occupant thereof.

7.18 CROSS CONNECTIONS

(a) The Village of Beverly Hills adopts by reference the water supply cross connection rules of the Michigan Department of Public Health being R325.431 to R325.440 of the Michigan Administrative Code, copies of which Code are available in the office of the Village Clerk for inspection by the public anytime during regular working hours.

(b) It shall be the duty of the Water Department to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply where cross connections with the public water supply is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the department and as approved by Michigan Department of Public Health.

(c) Representatives of the Water Department shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the Village of Beverly Hills for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross connections. Upon request, the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the department any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal to furnish such information or refusal of access, when requested, following reasonable time to comply, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections.

(d) The department is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation of this section exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connections have been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this section.

(e) The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply of the Village of Beverly Hills shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by this section and by the State and Village plumbing codes. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as follows:

WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING

(f) That all testable backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested initially upon installation to be sure that the assembly is working properly. Subsequent testing of assemblies shall be on an annual basis as required by the Village of Beverly Hills and in accordance with Michigan Department of Environmental Quality requirements. Only individuals that are approved by the Village and State of Michigan and certified shall be qualified to perform such testing. That individual(s) shall certify the results of the testing.

(g) That any person or customer found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this ordinance or any written order of the Village of Beverly Hills Water Department, in pursuance thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00 or 90 days in jail. Each day upon which violation of the provisions of this act shall occur shall be deemed a separate and additional violation for the purpose of this ordinance. {Ord. 351; 8-8-14}

7.19 LIABILITY OF DEPARTMENT

Should it become necessary to shut off water from any section of the Village because of accidents or for the purpose of making repairs or extensions, the Water Department will endeavor to give timely notice to the consumers affected thereby, and will, so far as practical use its best efforts to prevent inconvenience and damage arising from any such causes, but failure to give such notice shall not render the department responsible or liable for damages that may result therefrom, or for any other cause.

7.20 VIOLATIONS

Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall subject the violator to the penalties set forth in section 1.06.

Chapter 8 - Sanitary Sewer System
8.01 DEFINITIONS
8.02 OPERATION OF SEWER SYSTEM
8.03 DISPOSITION OF REVENUES
8.04 BASIS OF SEWER RATES
8.05 SEWER SERVICE RATES
8.06 DEBT SERVICE CHARGE
8.07 BILLING
8.08 LIEN FOR CHARGES
8.09 SHUTTING OFF WATER
8.10 SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED
8.11 NOTICE TO CONNECT TO SEWER
8.12 PAYMENT OF CONNECTION CHARGE, SPECIAL ASSESSMENT
8.13 CONSTRUCTION OF SANITARY SEWER LATERALS
8.14 SEWER BUILDERS
8.15 REGULATIONS FOR CONNECTION INTO EVERGREEN INTERCEPTOR SEWER
8.16 PRIVIES, SEPTIC TANKS AND CESSPOOLS
8.17 NOTICE TO CONNECT TO PUBLIC SEWER
8.18 ENFORCEMENT
8.19 SEWER USE AND INDUSTRIAL WASTE ORDINANCE

8.01 DEFINITIONS

Terms used in this chapter have the following meanings:

County: The Oakland County Department of Public Works.

Evergreen Sanitary Sewer: The Evergreen Sanitary Sewer acquired and constructed by the County pursuant to a certain contract between the county and the Village and certain other municipalities dated November 10, 1958, and as amended December 22, 1958 and February 4, 1959.

General Obligation Bonds: The general obligation bonds authorized to be issued by the electors of the Village at the election held on March 14, 1960.

Premises: Any property from which emanates that quantity of sewage ordinarily arising from the occupancy of a residence building by a single family or ordinary size.

Residential Property Owner: A residential property owner is a single family residential property or a homeowner's association utilizing village water service. {Ord. 350; 7-5-14}

Revenues and Net Revenues: Have the meanings as defined in Section 3 of Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended.

Secondary Area Maintenance Water Meter: A secondary area maintenance water meter is directed exclusively to a sprinkler system or outside spigot or connection such as, but not limited to, a swimming pool, which water would not enter a sanitary sewer system and will not be applied to the calculation of the sewage disposal bill for the property {Ord. 350; 7-5-14}

Sewer: Any sanitary or combined storm and sanitary sewer located within the Village.

System: The complete sanitary sewer system of the Village of Beverly Hills, including all sanitary sewers and combined storm and sanitary sewers, all pumping stations and all other facilities now owned or hereafter acquired by the Village, used or useful in connection with collection and disposal of sanitary sewage.

8.02 OPERATION OF SEWER SYSTEM

(a) The system shall be operated on a public utility rate basis, pursuant to the provisions of Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended, and Act 185, Public Acts of Michigan, 1957, as amended. The system shall be operated under the management and direction of the Village Manager, subject to the overall general supervision and control of the Council.

(b) The system shall be operated on the basis of a fiscal year beginning July 1 and ending on the next following June 30.

8.03 DISPOSITION OF REVENUES

The revenues of the system shall be set aside and collected and deposited in such depository or depositories as are named by resolution of the Village Council, and such funds shall be disbursed as directed by the Village Council.

8.04 BASIS OF SEWER RATES

The sewer rates fixed in this chapter are estimated to be sufficient to provide for the payment of the expenses of administration and operation and such expenses for the maintenance of the system as are necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order; to provide for payment of the sewage disposal charges required to be paid to the County; to provide for the payment of the annual payments required to be made to the County in connection with the Evergreen Sanitary Sewer; general obligation bonds; and to provide for such other expenditures and funds for said system as this chapter may require. Such rates shall be fixed and revised from time to time as may be necessary to produce these amounts.

8.05 SEWER SERVICE RATES

The initial rates to users of the system shall be as follows:

(a) Consumption Charge. Each premises within the Village connected to the system shall pay a consumption charge based upon the amount of water used as shown by the water meter installed in each premises as follows:

1. Rates and charges for the use of the sanitary sewer system of the Village of Beverly Hills are hereby established and made against each lot, parcel of land or premises which may have direct or indirect connections to the system or which may otherwise discharge wastewater either directly or indirectly into the system.

2. The rates and charges hereby established shall be based upon a methodology which complies with applicable federal and state statutes and regulations. The amount of the rates and charges shall be sufficient to provide for debt service and for the expenses of operation, maintenance and replacement of the system as necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order. The amount of the rates and charges shall be reviewed annually and revised when necessary to insure system expenses are met and that all users pay their proportionate share of operation, maintenance and equipment replacement expenses.

3. The amount of such rates and charges and the intervals at which users of the wastewater system are billed shall be determined by resolution of the Village Council.

4. The rates and charges for operation, maintenance and replacement hereby established shall be uniform within the area serviced by the Village of Beverly Hills. No free service shall be allowed for any user of the sanitary sewer system.

5. All customers of the Village of Beverly Hills sanitary sewer system shall receive an annual notification, either printed on the bill or in the official Village newsletter, which will show the breakdown of the wastewater disposal bill into its components for:

(a) Operation, maintenance and replacement; and

(b) Debt service.

(b) Maintenance Charge. Each premises within the Village connected to the system shall pay a maintenance charge of Three dollars ($3) per quarter, such charge to commence January 1, 1965.

(c) Debt Service Charge. In addition to the consumption charge as set forth above, each premises within the Village connected to the system shall pay a debt service charge, as follows:

1. Each premises connecting directly or indirectly to the Evergreen Sanitary Sewer shall pay a debt service charge of Two Hundred and Sixty dollars ($260). The charge shall be paid by each premises at the time that connection is made directly to the Evergreen Sanitary Sewer, or at the time that any sewer to which a premises has heretofore been connected is connected to the Evergreen Sanitary Sewer directly or indirectly. As an alternative, said connection charge may be paid by premises on which a building is located on September 19, 1960 over a period of not exceeding ten (10) years. In the event that the owner of such a premises elects to make payment over a period of ten (10) years, the payments shall be made annually the first November 1 following the date when connection is made on November 1 of each year thereafter in accordance with the following schedule:

First year $41.60 Sixth year $33.80
Second year 40.04 Seventh year 32.24
Third year 38.48 Eighth year 30.68
Fourth year 36.92 Ninth year 29.12
Fifth year 35.36 Tenth year 27.56

At any time during the said ten (10) year period, any premises may prepay the balance of said connection charge by paying a sum equal to the product resulting from multiplying a number equal to the difference between ten (10) and the number of installments actually paid in accordance with the foregoing schedule by twenty-six ($26) dollars.

The debt service charge provided for in this paragraph one (1) shall, in this chapter, be referred to as the "Evergreen Charge."

2. In addition to the Evergreen Charge, all premises connecting directly or indirectly to the sewer acquired and constructed from the proceeds of sale of the general obligation bonds shall pay a debt service charge of Two Hundred Twenty-Nine Dollars and Fifty cents ($229.50), said charge to be paid at the time that connection is made to any sewer connecting to said sanitary sewers acquired and constructed from the proceeds of sale of the general obligation bonds, or at the time connection is made directly to said sewer constructed from the proceeds of sale of the general obligation bonds.

As an alternative, said debt service charge may be paid by premises on which a building is located on February 19, 1962 over a period not exceeding fifteen (15) years. In the event that the owner of such premises elects to make payment over a period of fifteen (15) years, the payments shall be made annually on April 1 following the date when connection is made and on April 1 of each year thereafter, in accordance with the following schedule:

First year $29.07 Eighth year $22.64 Second year 28.15 Ninth year 21.73
Third year 27.23 Tenth year 20.80
Fourth year 26.32 Eleventh year 19.89
Fifth year 25.40 Twelfth year 18.97
Sixth year 24.48 Thirteenth year 18.05
Seventh year 23.56 Fourteenth year 17.14
Fifteenth year 16.22

At any time during the said year period, any premises may prepay the balance of said connection charge by paying a sum equal to the product resulting from multiplying the number of installments actually paid in accordance with the foregoing schedule by Fifteen dollars and Thirty cents ($15.30). The debt service charge provided for in this paragraph two (2) shall, in this chapter be referred to as the "Bond Charge."

(d) New Construction. All new construction shall pay all such debt service charge or charges in full prior to the issuance of a building permit whether or not said system is then available to the property.

(e) Change of Use. Once a property has been connected to the system subsequent changes in the character of the use of said property (including partial or total destruction, removal or abandonment of any or all improvements thereon) shall not abate the obligation to continue the payments of the debt service charge assigned at the time of connection; and if subsequent changes in the use of the property increase the amount of the sewage emanating from the property, the Village Council may increase the debt service charge assigned to said property and the debt service charge computed on the basis of the increased use shall be payable during the remainder of the period hereinbefore provided.

(f) Special Rates. For miscellaneous services for which a special rate should be established, or for services not covered by the provisions of this chapter such as for any parcels of property used for other than single family residential purposes, the Council shall establish a special rate.

6. The sewage rate for the sewage disposal system shall not apply to a residential property owner where water is separately metered and used for secondary area maintenance. {Ord. 350; 7-5-14}

8.06 DEBT SERVICE CHARGE - TWELVE TOWN RELIEF DRAIN, ENCLOSURE OR RED RUN DRAIN NO. 2 AND SOUTHEASTERN OAKLAND COUNTY SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM-DEQUINDRE INTERCEPTOR

(a) The "Twelve Town Relief Drain," "Enclosure of Red Run Drain No. 2" and "Southeastern Oakland County Sewage Disposal System-Dequindre Interceptor" are those systems acquired and constructed by Oakland County pursuant to contract with the Village.

(b) In addition to any consumption or other charge, each presently developed premises connecting directly or indirectly with storm water or sanitary flow, within the limits of the Twelve Town Relief Drain or Southeastern Oakland County Sewage Disposal System-Dequindre Interceptor, shall pay a debt service charge as hereinafter provided.

(c) Premises within the limits of the Twelve Town Relief Drain district may pay a debt service charge of One Thousand Thirty-Five dollars and Seventy-four cents ($1,035.74) on or before May 15, 1963. All such premises not paying said debt service charge by May 15, 1963 shall pay a debt service charge, payable quarterly thereafter, for a period not exceeding thirty (30) years at a rate of Eleven Dollars and Forty cents ($11.40) per quarter. The first billing hereunder shall be June 1, 1963 for the quarter ending May 31, 1963.

(d) Premises within the Southeastern Oakland County Sewage Disposal System-Dequindre Interceptor district may pay a debt service charge of Fifty-three Dollars and Sixty-five cents ($53.65) on or before May 15, 1963. All such premises not paying such debt service charge by May 15, 1963 shall pay a debt service charge, payable quarterly thereafter, for a period of not exceeding thirty (30) years at the rate of Sixty cents ($.60) per quarter. The first billing hereunder shall be June 1, 1963 for the quarter ending May 31, 1963.

(e) Any premises not presently developed within the limits of the Twelve Town Relief Drain district, shall at the time permit is taken out for development, pay debt service charge by paying the Village in cash an amount equal to the number of years times Forty-five dollars and Sixty cents ($45.60) elapsed since the date of April 8, 1963. Any part of a year shall be considered as a whole year for this purpose. Thereafter, the premises shall be billed quarterly as provided in subsection (c).

(f) Any premises not presently developed within the limits of Southeastern Oakland County Sewage Disposal System-Dequindre Interceptor district shall at the time permit is taken out for development, pay debt service charge by paying the Village in cash an amount equal to the number of years times Two dollar and Forty cents ($2.40) elapsed since April 8, 1963. Any part of a year shall be considered as a whole year for this purpose. Thereafter said premises shall be quarterly as provided in subsection (d).

(g) Current debt service charge shall become a lien on such premises on its due date which date is the 1st day of the month following each quarter. If any such debt service charge, including penalty, is not paid by the following May 1, the Village official in charge of the collection thereof shall certify such delinquency to the Village Assessor, whereupon such delinquent debt service charge, including penalty, shall be by him entered upon the next tax roll as a charge against such premises and shall be collected and the lien thereof enforced in the same manner as general Village taxes against said premises are collected and the lien thereof enforced.

(h) A penalty of ten percent (10%) of the debt service charge shall be added on any debt service charge not paid within fifteen (15) days of its due date.

(i) Two separate depository accounts designated as Twelve Town Relief Drain and Dequindre Interceptor Contract Payment Fund (hereinafter referred to as "Contract Payment Fund"), the monies on the deposit therein from time to time to be used for the purpose of paying the contractual payments required to be paid by the Village to the Village and certain other municipalities entered into for the purpose of acquiring, constructing and financing the Twelve Town Relief Drain and Enclosure of Red Run Drain No. 2 as well as the Dequindre Interceptor. There shall be deposited in the Contract Payment Fund all of the revenues from the debt service charge, the money to be deposited in the Contract Payment Fund at the time that the monies are collected. Money shall be transferred from the Contract Payment Fund at such times as shall be necessary to meet the annual contractual payments required to be paid by the Village to the County in connection with the Twelve Town Relief Drain and Enclosure of Red Run Drain No.2 as well as the Dequindre Interceptor. Monies in such fund may be invested in obligations of the United States of America, with maturity so scheduled as to make available to the Village monies required to meet its obligation to the County under said contracts.

(j) Except as changed by the provisions of this subsection, all the provisions of this chapter shall apply to the Twelve Town Relief Drain, enclosure of Red Run Drain No. 2 and Southeastern Oakland County Sewage Disposal System-Dequindre Interceptor.

8.07 BILLING

Bills for the consumption charge shall be rendered quarterly during each operating year and shall represent charges for the quarterly period immediately preceding the date of rendering the bill. The Evergreen Charge and the Bond Charge shall be paid annually on the dates indicated above. Said bills shall become due and payable within fifteen (15) days from the date thereof and for all bills not paid when due, a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the payment of such bill shall be added thereto.

8.08 LIEN FOR CHARGES

The charges and rates for sewer services provided above which are under the provisions of Section 21, Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended, made a lien on all premises served thereby, unless notice is given that a tenant is responsible, are hereby recognized to constitute such lien, and whenever any such charge against any piece of property shall be delinquent for six (6) months, the Village official or officials in charge of the collection thereof shall certify annually, on May 1 of each year, to the Assessor of the Village, the fact of such delinquency, whereupon such charge shall be by him entered upon the next tax roll as a charge against such premises and shall be collected and the lien thereof enforced in the same manner as general Village taxes against such premises are collected, and the lien thereof enforced; provided, however, where notice is given that a tenant is responsible for such charges and service as provided by Section 21 of Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended, no further service shall be rendered such premises until a cash deposit of not less than Twenty Dollars ($20) shall have been made as security for payment of such charges and service.

8.09 SHUTTING OFF WATER

In addition to other remedies provided, the Village shall have the right to shut off and discontinue the supply of water to any premises for non-payment of sewer rates when due. If such charges are not paid within thirty (30) days after the due date thereof, then water services to such premises shall be discontinued. Water services so discontinued shall not be restored until all sums then due and owing shall be paid, plus a turn-on charge of Five Dollars ($5).

8.10 SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED

(a) Except as provided in Section 8.11 (b) it shall be unlawful for the owner or his agent or other person having charge of or occupying any building constructed for residential, commercial or industrial use on any lot, tract or parcel of ground abutting on any street, alley or easement in the Village in which a public sewer is in existence, after the owner or his agent or other person having charge of or occupying the said property has been given notice as herein provided that a public sewer is available to receive connections therewith and ninety (90) days notice shall have expired, to have the plumbing in such building remain unconnected to the public sewer.

(b) Within ninety (90) days after the service of the notice for which provision is herein made, except as provided in section 8.11 (b), the owner, agent or other person having charge of or occupying any such building, must disconnect all plumbing from any river, stream, drain, body of water, cesspool or septic tank, other than such public sewer, and fill all cesspools and privy vaults with fresh earth or suitable material and connect all plumbing in such building with the public sewer.

8.11 NOTICE TO CONNECT TO SEWER

(a) Service. When a public sewer is available to receive connections therewith, the Council shall cause appropriate notice to be served upon the owner, agent or other person having charge of or occupying the property, that a public sewer is ready and available to receive connections therewith and that after ninety (90) days from the service of said notice the use of privy vaults, septic tanks or cesspools on said property must be discontinued, the plumbing disconnected therefrom, and all cesspools and privy vaults filled with fresh earth or other suitable material, and that all plumbing must be connected with the public sewer. Said notice shall be served either personally on the owner, agent or other person having charge of or occupying the property or by first class United States mail, postage prepaid, in sealed envelopes addressed to the owner at his regular place of residence, or to agent or other person occupying or having charge of the property, where said agent or other person lives upon the property the plumbing of which is to be connected with the public sewer.

(b) Exception. Where such property serviced by a septic tank has upon it a building which lies four hundred feet (400') beyond the nearest part of a public sewer and the owner, agent or other person having charge of or occupying the property certifies to the Village Council such fact, and in addition, presents to the Village Council a certificate from the Oakland County Health Department that such septic tank, or the use thereof, is not polluting the ground or surface as to constitute a hazard to the health of occupants or of the public, the Village Council may except said property from connecting to the system, provided that any such property excepted from connecting to the system by the Council shall be excepted from so connecting only so long as there is no such pollution from the septic tank or the use thereof, and provided further, that to insure freedom from pollution, the owner, agent or other person having charge of or occupying the property shall be required to renew the certificate from the Oakland County Health Department annually, or at such other time as the Council may determine.

8.12 PAYMENT OF CONNECTION CHARGE, SPECIAL ASSESSMENT

Where a parcel has been specially assessed by the Village and more than the assessed units are to be connected, directly or indirectly, for such excess unit or units, there shall be paid to the Village at the time of issuing of sewer permit a connection charge in amount equivalent to what the excess unit or units would have been assessed in the first instance, which connection charge shall be in addition to the charges therein contained.

8.13 CONSTRUCTION OF SANITARY SEWER LATERALS

(a) Applicability. This section shall apply to all sanitary sewers, connections, leads or pipes carrying sewage from a point outside of the foundation walls of any building, residence, structure, or lot which are so constructed or connected as to flow directly or indirectly into the internal sewer system of the Village of Beverly Hills or the intercepting sewer system of the County of Oakland.

(b) Regulations. The construction of all sanitary sewers, connections, leads or pipes carrying sewage from a point outside of the foundation walls of any building, residence, structure or lot which are so constructed or connected as to flow directly or indirectly into the internal sewer system of the Village of Beverly Hills or the intercepting sewer system of the County of Oakland shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this section, any applicable resolutions or ordinances of the Village of Beverly Hills or the Oakland County Department of Public Works, either hereinbefore or hereinafter passed and the engineering specifications of the Village of Beverly Hills which are on file with the Village Clerk.

(c) Licensed Contractor. No person shall lay, alter, or repair any sewer, connection, leads or pipes, or make any connection whatever with a sewer, drain, manhole or building belonging to or connected to any sewer or sewers of the Village of Beverly Hills or the County of Oakland, or do any kind of work connected to the laying of house sewers, or make repairs or additions to, or alterations of any sewer constructed or connected as to flow directly or indirectly into the internal sewer system of the Village of Beverly Hills or the intercepting sewer system of the County of Oakland, unless regularly licensed by the Village Council, except that the owner of property involved need not obtain such a license provided he does not hire or contract with any person to do any of such work and he complies with all other requirements of this chapter, any applicable resolutions or ordinances of the Village of Beverly Hills or the County of Oakland, and such work is actually done by the owner.

(d) Surface Water Drainage. After September 19, 1960, except as hereinafter provided, no surface, roof, footing drains or ground water from any source shall be allowed to enter the sanitary sewer system by any device or method and no connection shall be permitted which allows other than sanitary sewage to flow thereinto. All buildings constructed after September 19, 1960 shall be constructed in such a manner that no surface, roof, footing drains or ground water from any source shall be allowed to enter the sanitary sewer system by any device or method whatever and no connection shall be permitted which allows other than sanitary sewage to flow thereinto.

(e) Disconnecting Storm Drainage. All construction existing on September 19, 1960 that is then served by sanitary sewer alone, not a combined sewer, shall, prior to connecting to the interceptor sewer, disconnect any yard drain, catch basins or downspouts from the sanitary sewer system or systems. However, weep tile or footing drains from existing construction shall not be required to disconnect from the sanitary sewer system. All construction existing on September 19, 1960 that is then served by a combined sewer shall not be required to disconnect downspouts, footing drains or weep tile prior to connection of the interceptor sewer.

(f) Material and Joints. House connection sewer from lateral sewer in street or easement to within five feet (5') from house shall be minimum six inch (6") diameter vitrified sewer pipe with rubber joint or minimum six inch (6") diameter asbestos cement pipe with ring tight rubber joint, or equal. All joints shall be tight and when tested for infiltration, shall not exceed five hundred (500) gallons per inch of diameter, per mile, per twenty-four (24) hours.

(g) Sealing Joints. The crock to iron joint shall be sealed by an approved bituminous joint filler, encased in concrete to provide a watertight seal. The iron pipe inside the building shall be plugged and leaded and remain plugged and watertight until such time as the plumbing is carried on the first floor, thereby providing that no water from the excavated basement will enter the sanitary sewer.

(h) Permit. No such house connection sewer shall be installed without a permit having been issued for same by the Building Inspector of the Village of Beverly Hills; the fee for such permit shall be Five dollars ($5) to cover cost of inspection. Opportunity for such inspection shall be provided after all pipe are in place and before the backfilling of any trench or the covering of such pipe.

(i) Work by Owner. Nothing herein contained shall prevent any bona fide owner from personally installing a house connection sewer in his own building, residence or structure provided that said owner shall:

1. Apply for and secure a permit covering the work proposed.

2. Pay the required fee.

3. Do the work himself in accordance with this chapter and with all other applicable resolutions or ordinances of the Village of Beverly Hills or the County of Oakland.

4. Apply for inspection.

5. Receive approval of the Building Inspector.

8.14 SEWER BUILDERS

(a) License Required. Any person desiring to do business as a sewer builder in connection with the sewer system of the Village of Beverly Hills or the County of Oakland shall file in the office of the Village Clerk an application giving the names of the individual or firm and place of business, and asking to be licensed by the Village Council as a sewer builder. Such application must be signed by two responsible citizens of the Village of Beverly Hills vouching for the business capacity and reputation of the applicant, and that he, the applicant, is willing to be governed in all respects by the rules and regulations which are or may be adopted by the Council of said Village.

(b) Bond and Fee. Each applicant for a license shall execute and deposit in the office of the Village Clerk, with an application, an annual fee of Five dollars ($5) and a surety company bond with sufficient surety or sureties to be approved by the Council in the sum of One Thousand dollars ($1,000), conditioned that he will indemnify and save harmless the Village of Beverly Hills from all accidents and damages caused by any negligence in protecting his work, or by any unfaithful, imperfect, inadequate, incomplete, careless or unskilled work done by him, and that he will also promptly and at a proper time replace and restore the street and ground surface over any opening he may have made to as good a state and condition as he found previous to opening the same, and to keep and maintain the same in good order to the satisfaction of the Village Engineers, for a period of one (1) year next thereafter, and that he will pay all fines imposed upon him for a violation of any of the rules or regulations prescribed by this chapter or any other applicable resolution or ordinance of the Village. The applicant shall also file a surety company bond running to the People of the State of Michigan, in the sum of One Thousand dollars ($1,000) with sufficient surety or sureties to be approved by the Council, conditioned that he will indemnify and save harmless the People of the State of Michigan from any and all damages caused by any unfaithful, imperfect, inadequate, incomplete, careless, or improper work done by him as sewer builder and for the period of one (1) year from the completion of such work; and anyone injured or damaged as aforesaid may bring action on such bond for the recovery of such damages.

(c) Names and Location. On receiving his license, the licensee shall have recorded in the office of the Village Clerk his actual place of business and the name under which the business is transacted, and shall immediately notify the clerk of any change in either thereafter. No license shall be granted to expire on the 1st day of July.

(d) Revocation of License. The Village Council may on their own initiative, for incompetency or for any unlawful act, or any improper work or conduct, suspend or revoke any license issued under this section, and the finding of the Village Council shall be conclusive and final. The Village Engineers may, for any of the causes enumerated in this section, suspend any license granted under this section for a period of ten (10) days and cause such license to be delivered up to him, and he shall forthwith report such action to the Village Council. At such meeting of the Village Council, the holder of such license must appear before the Council and shall be heard, and the Council after hearing the facts, if deemed advisable, shall revoke the license permanently.

8.15 REGULATIONS FOR CONNECTION INTO EVERGREEN INTERCEPTOR SEWER

In addition to the requirements of the Village of Beverly Hills set forth in this chapter, prior to connections either directly or indirectly into any sewer connecting into the Evergreen Interceptor Sewer of the County of Oakland, the following requirements shall be met by owner or contractor with satisfactory proof of such to be furnished to the village:

(a) A connection permit shall have been obtained by the owner or contractor from the Oakland County Department of Public Works in accordance with the provisions of the regulations of the Oakland County Department of Public Works.

(b) A suitable bulkhead to prevent construction water, sand, silt, etc. from entering the existing sewer system shall be installed by the owner or contractor, such bulkhead to be left in place until its removal is authorized by Oakland County Department of Public Works.

(c) A test for water infiltration into the system shall be performed by the owner or contractor in accordance with Oakland County Department of Public Works procedures. Ground water infiltration at any time shall not exceed five hundred (500) U.S. gallons per inch of pipe diameter per mile of sewer per twenty-four (24) hours for the overall project nor shall the infiltration exceed five hundred (500) U.S. gallons per inch of diameter per mile of pipe per twenty-four (24) hours for any individual run between manholes. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or the contractor to have a test performed for the above infiltration and shall arrange for the results of said test to be verified by the Oakland County Department of Public Works. If, in the opinion of the Oakland County Department of Public Works, ground water conditions at the time of testing would not provide for a conclusive test to the extent of infiltration, then an exfiltration test shall be required, and the maximum exfiltration rate shall be required, and the maximum exfiltration rate shall be the same as that permitted from infiltration.

(d) Yards drains, patio drains, catch basins, downspouts, weep tile, perimeter drains or any other structure used for the collection and conveyance of storm water shall not be permitted to discharge into any sanitary sewer connected directly or indirectly to the County system except that weep tile or perimeter drains for buildings existing on or before February 19, 1968 that were permitted and connected to a sanitary sewer system prior to February 19, 1968 shall not be required to disconnect from the sanitary sewer system.

(e) House connection sewer from lateral sewer in street or easement to within five feet (5') of the house (except as provided below) shall be:

1. Six inch (6") full diameter extra strength vitrified sewer pipe, manufactured in accordance with current N.C.P.I. designation ER 4-67 standards, or equal, with D.P.W. approved premium joint, or

2. Six inch (6") diameter class twenty-four hundred (2400) asbestos cement pipe with ringtite, fluid-tite, or D.P. W. approved joint, or

3. Six inch (6") diameter, service strength, cast iron soil pipe with hot poured lead joint, or approved equal, or

4. Other pipe and joints as may be approved by the Oakland County Department of Public Works.

House connection sewer shall be six inch (6") minimum diameter, except that four inch (4") pipe of comparable strength and joint material may be used. All joints shall be tight and when tested for infiltration shall not exceed the infiltration requirements of this section.

(f) Individual building sewers which are connected directly into the County Sanitary Sewer System shall conform to all requirements of this section. A connection permit shall be obtained from Oakland County Department of Public Works prior to such connection being made, such connection to be made in workmanlike manner and in accordance with procedures established by Oakland County Department of Public Works including inspection thereof.

(g) The crock to iron joints shall be sealed by an approved bituminous joint filler, encased in concrete to provide a watertight seal. Flexible adaptor fitting such as those manufactured by Fernco Joint Sealer Company or D.P.W. approved equal, may be used without concrete encasement. The iron pipe inside the building shall be plugged and leaded and remain plugged and watertight until such time as the plumbing is carried onto the first floor, the basement backfill and the roof is on the building thereby providing that no water from the excavated basement will enter the sanitary sewer.

(h) Roof waters from buildings permitted and where existing on or before February 19, 1968 that have the weep tile or perimeter drains connected to the sewer system shall not discharge into any flower or shrub bed adjacent to building wall nor upon the ground within five feet (5') of the building wall. Downspout piping shall be permanently affixed to the building wall and shall be anchored at the discharge end by an eight inch (8") by eight inch (8") concrete block which shall encase the piping and shall extend to a minimum depth of two feet (2') below grade or to undisturbed earth; however, other methods may be used if such methods receive the prior approval of the Oakland County Department of Public Works.

(i) The surface of the ground around buildings that have weep tile or perimeter drains existing on or before February 19, 1968 shall be sloped in such a manner as to provide positive drainage of all roof and surface waters away from the building. Said slope shall be uniform and shall be such that the elevation of the surface of the ground at a point ten feet (10') from the face of the building wall is a minimum of six inches (6") lower than the ground elevation at the face of the building wall.

(j) The intent of this section is to incorporate herein the requirements of the Oakland County Department of Public Works under its resolution of February 19, 1968 amending the Evergreen Sewage Disposal System Rule and Regulations.

8.16 PRIVIES, SEPTIC TANKS AND CESSPOOLS

It shall be unlawful for the owner or his agent or other person having charge of or occupying any building constructed for residential, commercial or industrial use on any lot, tract or parcel of ground abutting on any street, alley or easement in the Village in which a public sewer is in existence to construct or permit to be constructed any privy vault, septic tank or cesspool to which said building is to be connected.

8.17 NOTICE TO CONNECT TO PUBLIC SEWER

Except as provided in Section 8.11 (b) it shall be unlawful for the owner or his agent or other person having charge or occupying any building heretofore or hereafter constructed for residential commercial or industrial use on any lot, tract or parcel of ground abutting on any street, alley or easement in the Village in which a public sewer is in existence after such owner or his agent or other person in charge thereof has been given notice as herein provided that a public sewer is available to receive connection therewith and ninety (90) days shall expired, to maintain or use or cause or permit to exist any privy vault, septic tank or cesspool to which said building is connected or which is used by the occupants of said building, or to permit sewage from such building to be discharged into any river, stream, drain or body of water or other place of disposal other than such public sewer.

8.18 ENFORCEMENT

The provision of this chapter may be enforceable through the bringing of appropriate action for injunction, mandamus, or otherwise, in any court having jurisdiction, and it shall be the duty of the council and its officials, officers and agents to do all the things necessary and to bring all actions necessary for the prompt and vigorous enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

Any violation of the provision of this chapter is hereby declared a nuisance per se and shall subject the violator to the penalties set forth in Section 1.06.

8.19 SEWER USE AND INDUSTRIAL WASTE ORDINANCE

The Beverly Hills Village Council adopted Ordinance No. 306 at its regular meeting of October 1, 2001 which amended Chapter 8 of the Municipal Code to comply with an amended consent judgment entered in the U.S. District Court which requires communities to pass sewer use and industrial waste ordinances consistent with or at least as stringent as the City of Detroit's Ordinances. The Ordinance provides for the regulation of private and public sewage disposal systems; sewer connections; waste pretreatment facilities; discharge limitations; pollutant limitations; data collecting, monitoring and sampling; and providing for penalties for the violation thereof. Copies of the complete Ordinance are available for review or purchase in the Village Office during regular business hours. {Ord. 290, 12-15-97} {Ord. 306, 10-31-01}.

Chapter 9 - Emergency Preparedness Policy
9.10 DEFINITIONS
9.20 INTENT AND PURPOSE
9.30 ORGANIZATIONS FOR EMERGENCY SERVICES
9.40 EMERGENCY SERVICES COORDINATOR; ASSISTANTS
9.50 MANAGER; POWERS; DUTIES
9.60 EMERGENCY SERVICES COORDINATOR; POWERS; DUTIES
9.70 RIGHTS OF VILLAGE EMPLOYEES
9.80 NO GOVERNMENTAL OR PRIVATE LIABILITY
9.90 CONFLICTING ORDINANCES, ORDERS RULES AND REGULATIONS SUSPENDED
9.95 VIOLATIONS
9.10 DEFINITIONS

For the purpose of this ordinance, certain words and terms used herein are defined as follows:

Coordinator: Shall mean a person appointed to coordinate emergency planning and services within the Village of Beverly Hills or as prescribed in this ordinance. In the absence of an appointed person, "Coordinator" shall mean the Manager.

Disaster: Means an occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or man-made cause, including but not limited to fire, flood, snow, ice or wind storm, wave action, oil spills, water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, utility failure, hazardous peacetime radiological incident, major transportation accident, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot, or hostile military or paramilitary action. Riots and other civil disorders are not within the meaning of this term unless they directly result from and are an aggravating element of the disaster.

District Coordinator: Means the State Police District Emergency Services Coordinator or his authorized representative.

Emergency Operations Plan: Means the Village of Beverly Hills Emergency Operations Plan which has been prepared under Section 9.60 (b) (1.) of this ordinance to coordinate disaster response and recovery within the Village of Beverly Hills.

Emergency Services: Shall have a broad meaning to include preparations for, and relief from, the effects of natural and man-made disasters as defined herein, and to include Civil Defense.

Emergency Services Forces: Means all disaster relief forces; all agencies of the municipal government, private and volunteer personnel, public officers and employees; and all other persons or groups of persons having duties or responsibilities under this ordinance or pursuant to a lawful order or directive authorized by this ordinance.

Emergency Services Volunteer: Shall mean any person duly registered and appointed by the Coordinator and assigned to participate in the Emergency Services activity.

Emergency Situation: Means any situation confronting a community requiring emergency actions of a lesser nature than a disaster, as defined above, to include, but not limited to, civil disturbances, labor strikes, visits by national or international dignitaries, and build-up activities prior to an actual disaster.

Manager: Shall mean the Chief official of the Village of Beverly Hills; and the "Council" shall mean the Village Council of the Village of Beverly Hills.

State of Disaster: Means a declaration by executive order or proclamation by the Governor under the provisions of Act 390 Public Acts of 1976, which activates the disaster response and recovery aspects of state, local and interjurisdictional disaster emergency plans and authorizes the deployment and use of any forces to which the plan or plans apply.

State of Emergency: Means a declaration by the Manger pursuant to this ordinance which activates the disaster response and recovery aspects of the Village of Beverly Hills Emergency Operations Plan and authorizes the deployment and use of any municipal forces to which the plan applies.

This Ordinance means this chapter of the Beverly Hills Municipal Code.

9.20 INTENT AND PURPOSE

(a) The intent and purpose of this ordinance is to establish an organization that will insure the complete and efficient utilization of all municipal resources during periods of emergency and disaster.

(b) The Village of Beverly Hills Office of Emergency Services will be the coordinating agency responsible for Village wide emergency preparedness; it will provide the means through which the Village Council and the Manager may exercise the authority and discharge the responsibilities vested in them by this ordinance and Act No. 390, Public Acts of 1976.

(c) This ordinance will not relieve any elected officials or municipal departments of the normal responsibilities or authority given by general law or local ordinance, nor will it affect the work of the American Red Cross or other volunteer agencies organized for relief in a natural disaster.

9.30 ORGANIZATION FOR EMERGENCY SERVICES

(a) The Manager, with the approval of the Council, is hereby authorized and directed to create an organization to prepare for community disaster utilizing to the fullest extent existing agencies within the municipality. The Manager, as executive head of the Village government, shall be the director of the Emergency Services Forces of the Village and shall be responsible for their organization, administration and operation, working through the Coordinator.

(b) The organization for providing emergency services shall consist of the following:

1. An Office of Emergency Services established within Village government. The Office of Emergency Services shall have an administrative head appointed who will be known as the Coordinator, Office of Emergency Services. Such assistants and other employees as are deemed necessary for the proper functioning of the organization will be employed.

2. The employees, equipment and facilities of all municipal departments, boards, institutions and commissions suitable for, or adaptable to emergency services activities may be designated as part of the total Emergency Services Forces. Such designations shall be by the Manager with the approval of the Council.

(c) All officers and employees of departments, commissions, boards, institutions and other agencies of the Village government designated by the Manager, with the approval of the Council, as Emergency Services Forces shall cooperate with the Emergency Services Coordinator in the formulation of the Emergency Operations Plan, and they shall assist the Coordinator in all matters pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance.

9.40 EMERGENCY SERVICES COORDINATOR; ASSISTANTS

(a) The Manager, with the approval of the Council, shall appoint an Emergency Services Coordinator who shall be a person with the personal attributes, experience, and training needed to coordinate the activities of the agencies, departments, and individuals within the Village to protect the public health, safety and welfare during emergency situations and disasters.

(b) Assistant Coordinators shall be designated to work with the Coordinator on emergency planning matters. Assistant Coordinators shall be selected and shall serve as follows:

1. There shall be one such Assistant Coordinator appointed from each Village department designated by the department head, with the approval of the Manager, as part of the Emergency Services Forces.

2. Assistant Coordinators shall assume the duties of the Coordinator whenever he is unavailable during disasters or emergency situations in the order of designation by the Manager, acting upon the recommendation of the Coordinator.

9.50 MANAGER; POWERS; DUTIES

(a) The Manager may exercise the emergency power and authority as specified herein. Whenever a situation requires, or is likely to require, that the Manager invoke such power and authority, he shall, as soon as reasonable expedient, convene the Council to perform its legislative and administrative duties as the situation demands, and shall report to that body relative to emergency activities. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as abridging or curtailing the powers of the Council unless specifically provided herein.

(b) Under the following circumstances, the Manager may declare a state of emergency exists in the Village of Beverly Hills and may assemble and utilize the Emergency Services Forces in accordance with the Village of Beverly Hills emergency Operations Plan, and he may prescribe the manner and conditions of the use of such Emergency Services Forces:

1. Whenever, on the basis of information received from authoritative sources, he feels that a large-scale disaster or emergency situation in the Village or State is imminent.

2. During any period of disaster in the Village or State and thereafter as long as he shall deem it necessary.

(c) Whenever the Manager deems that any condition in the Village is beyond the control of local public or private agencies or has attained or threatens to attain the proportions of a major disaster, he may request the Governor to declare a state of disaster exists therein by instructing the Coordinator to contact the District Coordinator in accordance with Section 14, Act 390, Public Acts of 1976.

(d) The Manager, with the approval of the Council, is hereby empowered and has the authority:

1. To appropriate and expend funds, make contracts, obtain and distribute equipment, materials, and supplies for disaster purposes.

2. To provide for the health and safety of persons and property, including emergency assistance to the victims of a disaster.

3. To assign and make equipment available for duty, the employees, property, or equipment of the municipality relating to fire fighting, engineering, rescue, health, medical, and related services, police, transportation, construction, and similar items or service for disaster relief purposes within or without the physical limits of the municipality.

4. In the event of a foreign attack upon this State, to waive procedures and formalities otherwise required by law pertaining to the performance of public work, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment permanent and temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase and distribution with or without compensation of supplies, materials, and facilities, and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds.

5. The Manager shall establish procedures for the succession of government during emergencies where officials are unavailable for exercising the powers and discharging the duties of their respective offices.

6. The Manager may make regulations permitting the Coordinator to assemble and utilize the Emergency Services Forces and provide disaster relief aid as prescribed in Sections 9.50 (b), (c), and (d) above.

7. When obtaining formal approvals would result in delay of relief activity, the Manager may, until the Council convenes, waive procedures and formalities otherwise required pertaining to the performance of public works, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase and distribution of supplies, materials and facilities and expenditure of existing funds, and the Council is also empowered to waive any such procedures and formalities.

8. In the event the Manager cannot be contacted for execution of the Powers and Duties under this Section, the Director of Public Safety shall have the authority to execute the powers and perform the duties until the Manager is available.

9.60 EMERGENCY SERVICES COORDINATOR; POWERS; DUTIES

(a) The Emergency Services Coordinator shall be responsible for the administration, planning, coordination and operation of all emergency preparedness activities in the Village. He shall maintain liaison with county, state, and federal authorities, and the authorities of adjacent and nearby political subdivisions so as to insure the most effective emergency operations.

(b) His duties shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

1. Development of the Village of Beverly Hills Emergency Operations Plan, and any other appropriate disaster plans, for the immediate use of all the facilities, equipment, manpower, and other resources of the Village for the purpose of minimizing or preventing damage to persons or property; and protecting and restoring to usefulness governmental services and public utilities necessary for the public health, safety, and general welfare.

2. Coordinating the recruitment and training of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the personnel and facilities of the Village for emergency purposes.

3. Through public information programs, educating the population as to actions necessary and required for the protection of persons and property in case of a disaster.

4. Conducting practice alerts and exercises to insure the efficient operation of the Village's emergency organization and to familiarize residents of the Village with emergency regulations, procedures, and operations.

5. Coordinating the activity of all other public and private agencies engaged in any emergency or disaster relief programs.

6. Negotiating with owners or persons in control of buildings or other property for the use of such buildings or property for emergency or disaster relief purposes, and designating suitable buildings as public shelters.

7. Establishing and maintaining administrative control over a local radiological defense program, to include emergency preparations for both peacetime radiation incidents and international wartime disasters.

8. Coordinating municipal emergency preparedness activities with those at the County level and adjacent municipalities.

(c) Volunteers; Appointments; Records.

1. The Coordinator may enlist volunteer citizens to form the personnel of an emergency service for which the Village has no counterpart, or to temporarily augment personnel of the Village engaged in emergency activities. The Coordinator shall maintain formal records of all such volunteers for workman's compensation purposes.

2. Each department, commission, board, or other agency of Village government may at any time appoint or authorize the appointment of volunteer citizens to augment the personnel of such Village department, commission, board or agency in time of emergency. Such individuals shall be enrolled as Emergency Services Volunteers and shall be subject to the rules and regulations set forth by the respective department, commission, board, or agency head for such volunteers.

9.70 RIGHTS OF VILLAGE EMPLOYEES

Village employees assigned to duty as part of the Emergency Services Forces pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance shall retain all of the rights, privileges, and immunities of Village employees, and shall receive the compensation incident to their employment.

9.80 NO GOVERNMENTAL OR PRIVATE LIABILITY

(a) This ordinance is an exercise by the Village of its governmental functions for the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare. As such, neither the Village nor agents and representatives of the Village, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, nor trustee, nor any of the agents thereof acting in good faith carrying out, complying with, or attempting to comply with this ordinance shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons or property as a result of said activity.

(b) Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants the Village the right to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during a disaster or during an authorized practice disaster exercise, shall not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission, or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person.

9.90 CONFLICTING ORDINANCES, ORDERS RULES AND REGULATIONS SUSPENDED

At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this ordinance shall be in effect, they shall supersede all other existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations, insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith.

9.95 VIOLATIONS

It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any Emergency Services Forces in the enforcement or accomplishment of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this ordinance, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this ordinance. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or other means of identification as a member of the Emergency Services Forces of the Village of Beverly Hills unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by proper officials. Convictions for violations of the provisions of this ordinance shall be punishable as set forth in Section 1.06.

Chapter 10 - Public Utilities Franchises
10.01 CONSUMERS POWER COMPANY GAS FRANCHISE

10.01 PURPOSE

An Ordinance granting to Consumers Power Company, its successors and assigns, the right, power and authority to lay, maintain and operate gas mains, pipes and services on, along, across and under the highways, streets, alleys, bridges and other public places, and to do a local gas business in the Village of Beverly Hills, Oakland County, Michigan.

(a) Grant of Franchise. The Village of Beverly Hills, Oakland County, Michigan, hereby grants to the Consumers Power Company, a Michigan corporation, its successors and assigns, hereinafter called the "Grantee", the nonexclusive right, power and authority to lay, maintain and operate gas mains, pipes and services on, along and under the highways, streets, alleys bridges and other public places, and to do a local gas business in the Village of Beverly Hills, Oakland County, Michigan.

(b) Performance by Grantee. In consideration of the rights, power and authority hereby granted, said Grantee shall faithfully perform all things required by the terms hereof.

(c) Work in Right-of-Way. No highway, street, alley, bridge or other public place used by said Grantee shall be obstructed longer than necessary during the work of construction or repair, and shall be restored to the same order and condition as when said work was commenced. All of Grantee's pipes and mains shall be so placed in the highways and other public places as not to unnecessarily interfere with the use thereof for highway purposes.

(d) Village Hold Harmless. Said Grantee shall at all times keep and save the Village free and harmless from all loses, costs and expense to which to may be subject by reason of the negligent construction and maintenance of the structures and equipment hereby authorized. In case any action is commenced against the Village on account of the permission herein given, said Grantee shall, upon notice, defend the Village and save it free and harmless from all loss, costs and damage arising out of such negligent construction and maintenance.

(e) Grantee Responsibilities. Said Grantee shall construct and extend its gas distribution system within said Village, and shall furnish gas to applicants residing therein in accordance with applicable laws, rules and regulations.

(f) Franchise Not Exclusive. The rights, power and authority herein granted, are not exclusive. Either manufactured or natural gas may be furnished hereunder.

(g) Rates Approved by Michigan Public Service Commission. Said Grantee shall be entitled to charge the inhabitants of said Village for gas furnished therein, the rates as approved by the Michigan Public Service Commission, to which Commission or its successors authority and jurisdiction to fix and regulate gas rates and rules regulating such service in said Village, are hereby granted for the term of this franchise. Such rates and rules shall be subject to review and change at any time upon petition therefor being made by either said Village, acting by its Village Council, or by said Grantee.

(h) Revocation. The franchise granted by this Ordinance is subject to revocation upon sixty (60) days written notice by the party desiring such revocation.

(i) Grantee Subject to Michigan Public Service Commission. Said Grantee shall, as to all other conditions and elements of service not herein fixed, be and remain subject to the reasonable rules and regulations of the Michigan Public Service Commission or its successors, applicable to gas services in said Village.

Chapter 10 - Public Utilities Franchises
10.01 CONSUMERS POWER COMPANY GAS FRANCHISE

10.01 PURPOSE

An Ordinance granting to Consumers Power Company, its successors and assigns, the right, power and authority to lay, maintain and operate gas mains, pipes and services on, along, across and under the highways, streets, alleys, bridges and other public places, and to do a local gas business in the Village of Beverly Hills, Oakland County, Michigan.

(a) Grant of Franchise. The Village of Beverly Hills, Oakland County, Michigan, hereby grants to the Consumers Power Company, a Michigan corporation, its successors and assigns, hereinafter called the "Grantee", the nonexclusive right, power and authority to lay, maintain and operate gas mains, pipes and services on, along and under the highways, streets, alleys bridges and other public places, and to do a local gas business in the Village of Beverly Hills, Oakland County, Michigan.

(b) Performance by Grantee. In consideration of the rights, power and authority hereby granted, said Grantee shall faithfully perform all things required by the terms hereof.

(c) Work in Right-of-Way. No highway, street, alley, bridge or other public place used by said Grantee shall be obstructed longer than necessary during the work of construction or repair, and shall be restored to the same order and condition as when said work was commenced. All of Grantee's pipes and mains shall be so placed in the highways and other public places as not to unnecessarily interfere with the use thereof for highway purposes.

(d) Village Hold Harmless. Said Grantee shall at all times keep and save the Village free and harmless from all loses, costs and expense to which to may be subject by reason of the negligent construction and maintenance of the structures and equipment hereby authorized. In case any action is commenced against the Village on account of the permission herein given, said Grantee shall, upon notice, defend the Village and save it free and harmless from all loss, costs and damage arising out of such negligent construction and maintenance.

(e) Grantee Responsibilities. Said Grantee shall construct and extend its gas distribution system within said Village, and shall furnish gas to applicants residing therein in accordance with applicable laws, rules and regulations.

(f) Franchise Not Exclusive. The rights, power and authority herein granted, are not exclusive. Either manufactured or natural gas may be furnished hereunder.

(g) Rates Approved by Michigan Public Service Commission. Said Grantee shall be entitled to charge the inhabitants of said Village for gas furnished therein, the rates as approved by the Michigan Public Service Commission, to which Commission or its successors authority and jurisdiction to fix and regulate gas rates and rules regulating such service in said Village, are hereby granted for the term of this franchise. Such rates and rules shall be subject to review and change at any time upon petition therefor being made by either said Village, acting by its Village Council, or by said Grantee.

(h) Revocation. The franchise granted by this Ordinance is subject to revocation upon sixty (60) days written notice by the party desiring such revocation.

(i) Grantee Subject to Michigan Public Service Commission. Said Grantee shall, as to all other conditions and elements of service not herein fixed, be and remain subject to the reasonable rules and regulations of the Michigan Public Service Commission or its successors, applicable to gas services in said Village.

Chapter 11 - Retiree Health Care Benefits Plan and Trust
11.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
11.02 HEALTH CARE BENEFIT PLAN
11.03 DECLARATION OF TRUST

Chapter 12 - Noxious Weeds
12.01 NOXIOUS WEEDS

(a) Removal by Owner. It shall be the duty of every owner, occupant or person having charge of subdivided lands in the Village to cut down or cause to be cut down all Canada thistle (Circium arvense), dodders (any species of Cuscuta), mustards (charlock, black mustard and Indian mustard, species of Brassica or Sinapis), wild carrot (Daucus carota), bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis), perennial sow thistle (Sonchus arvensis), hoary alyssum (Berteroa incana), ragweed (ambrosia elatior 1.) and poison ivy (rhus toxicodendron), poison sumac (toxicodendron vernix) or other noxious weeds growing thereon in each and every year, so often as shall be sufficient to prevent any such weeds going to seed.

(b) Notice to Remove. The Road Commissioner is hereby appointed Commissioner of Weeds for a two year term and until a successor is appointed and qualified, pursuant to Act No. 359 of the Public Acts of 1941 as amended. He shall notify by certified mail with return receipt requested, the owners, agents or occupants of any subdivided lands within the Village which subdivisions have buildings on sixty percent (60%) of the lots in said subdivision or the owners, agents or occupants of lots along all improved streets in common usage, for a depth of ten (10) rods or the depth of the lots, whichever is lesser, on which noxious weeds are found growing. The notice shall be mailed to the owners, agents or occupants of such lands as shown by the addresses on the latest confirmed assessment roll of the Village. In the event that the owners, agents or occupants of said lands shall refuse or fail, after ten (10) days notice, to destroy the weeds then the Room Commissioner or his authorized agent or agents may enter upon the lands and destroy such noxious weeds. In addition to other rights and remedies, the Village shall have a lien upon such lands for all expenses incurred in carrying out the provisions of this section, and such lien may be enforced in the manner provided by the Charter of the Village for the enforcement of tax liens.

(c) Collection of Cost of Removal. The Commissioner shall keep an accurate account of the expenses incurred in carrying out the provisions of this section with respect to each parcel of land entered upon under the terms of this section. The amount of such expenses incurred in the destruction of such weeds shall constitute a debt to the Village by the person so failing to comply with the order of the Commissioner to remove such noxious weeds. In the event the cost of destroying such weeds as hereinbefore provided remains uncollected or unpaid on the 15th day of September following the cutting of such weeds, the unpaid amount shall be certified by the Commissioner to the Village Manager, who shall forthwith report such amount and the owners of the lands delinquent in the payment of the same to the Village Council. The Village Council shall cause an assessment roll to be prepared by the Assessor in the same manner as other special assessments are made under the Charter of the Village. The charges for the removal and cutting of noxious weeds shall become a lien upon said lands from and after the certification by the Commissioner to the Village Manager, and a copy of such certification shall be filed by the Commissioner with the Village Clerk.

Chapter 13 - Solid Waste
13.01 DEFINITIONS
13.02 GENERAL OBLIGATIONS
13.03 DUTY OF COLLECTION
13.04 PREPARATION OF ADDITIONAL REGULATION FOR COLLECTION; POSTING; OPEN BURNING
13.05 OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED
13.06 SCATTERING PROHIBITED
13.07 RESPONSIBILITY AND ENFORCEMENT FOR ACCUMULATE RESIDENTIAL OR COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE ON OCCUPIED PRIVATE PROPERTY
13.08 RESPONSIBILITY AND ENFORCEMENT FOR RESIDENTIAL OR COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE ON VACANT PRIVATE
PROPERTY
13.09 UNAUTHORIZED COLLECTION OF RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE; ANTISCAVENGING
13.10 SOLID WASTE CONTAINERS: RESPONSIBILITY FOR FURNISHING
13.11 LOCATION OF SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING CONTAINERS; YARD WASTE COMPOST; HOURS OF PLACEMENT; ENFORCEMENT
13.12 CLEANING UP BUILDER'S REFUSE; ASSESSMENT AGAINST PROPERTY
13.13 BACKYARD COMPOSTING

13.01 DEFINITIONS

Terms used in this chapter mean as follows:

Ashes: Residue from fireplaces or from fires used for cooking and for heating buildings.

Backyard compost: The process of layering and mixing grass clippings or other green nitrogen material, chopped leaves or other brown carbon material or soil and water to produce a rich humus or soil amendment used in landscape practices.

Builder's or contractor's refuse: Forms of refuse generated from building construction, alterations or repairs by contractors or tradesmen.

Building: A structure used in whole or in part of human habitation, manufacturing, sales, or other purposes.

Bulk refuse: Items too large to handle in the regular rubbish truck, such as white goods and brown goods as further defined by the adopted rules.

Collection System: A contractors. duly authorized by agreement to collect solid waste within the Village of Beverly Hills.

Combustible: Any materials capable of igniting or maintaining a burn.

Commercial solid waste: A solid-waste material resulting from the operation of mercantile enterprises; it includes garbage and rubbish and excludes all hazardous waste.

Curbside recycling collection: The regular collection of glass, metal, plastic, batteries, newspapers, and magazines of the specific types delineated by the adopted rules.

Garbage: Animal, vegetable or fruit waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of foods and all other putrescible solid waste, but not dead animals.

Municipal solid waste: Bulk refuse, yard waste, yard waste compost, recyclables, garbage, and rubbish; excluding hazardous, medical, industrial, builder's or contractor's waste, collected within the Village.

Open burning: A fire from which the products of combustion are emitted directly into the air without passing through a stack or chimney filter.

Recyclables: Glass, metal, plastic, batteries, newspapers, magazines, and yard waste compost, of the specific types delineated by the adopted rules.

Recycling container: A durable or disposable storage container approved by the Village Manager or his/her designee for collecting recyclables. Recycling containers shall come in two or more configurations: a yard-waste-compost container with a village-approved sticker or a village-approved bag; the other, a city-provided bin used for recyclables.

Refuse: Forms of waste as defined in this section, excluding all recyclables as defined in this section.

Residential solid waste: Waste materials resulting from the usual routine of housekeeping; it includes garbage and rubbish and excludes all hazardous waste.

Rubbish: Miscellaneous waste materials resulting from housekeeping and ordinary commercial enterprises, including such materials as waste paper, ashes, plate or window glass, crockery, and rubber, but excluding hazardous waste.

Solid-waste container: A durable or disposable container approved by the Village Manager or his/her designee for collecting solid waste, including yard waste compost.

Yard waste: Tree branches, logs, stumps, bushes, heavy brush clippings, sticks, vines, shredded or small twigs, and general yard waste.

Yard waste compost: Leaves, grass clippings, wood chips, garden vegetables, and old potting soil free of debris.

13.02 GENERAL OBLIGATIONS

It shall be mandatory that all persons dispose of their residential solid waste through the Village of Beverly Hills authorized collection system. Residential solid waste shall be segregated as provided by resolution of the Village Council, from all other solid waste produced and separately bundled and contain such items for proper collection, disposal, and recycling according to the provision herein. The Village shall collect and dispose of only those solid wastes which have been properly segregated and contained in conformance with the rules adopted by the Village Council. Solid wastes left at the curb because of non-conformance with adopted rules must be removed by 7:00 a.m. on the day following the scheduled pick-up day.

13.03 DUTY OF COLLECTION

The Village shall collect and dispose of all solid waste, ashes, bulk refuse, garbage, rubbish, yard waste, yard waste compost, and recyclables not builder's or contractor's refuse., from only residential properties in accordance with the Village of Beverly Hills authorized
collection system. This solid waste shall be properly prepared and placed for collection according to the adopted regulations of this chapter and those promulgated pursuant thereto.

13.04 REPARATION OF ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR COLLECTION; POSTING; OPEN BURNING

The Village Manager shall promulgate rules to be adopted by the Village Council concerning the preparation for collection, specifications for solid waste containers, days for collection of solid waste containers, the location, place and times where solid waste and recyclables containers are to be placed for collection. These regulations shall be conspicuously posted in one or more areas in the Village which are accessible to the public and in which public notices are regularly posted, and, published in a newspaper of local circulation.

13.05 OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED

No person shall cause or permit any open burning of fuel, garbage or other combustible refuse or waste material, including leaves, brush, tree trimmings and grass. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit fires of charcoal or of a non-ash-producing fuel when used for the exclusive preparation of food for human consumption.

13.06 SCATTERING PROHIBITED

No person shall by himself, or by another, scatter, leave, distribute or deposit, except in proper containers, any form of solid waste in any street, alley, park or public place or upon the property of another within the corporate limits of the Village. No paper, lawn cuttings or rakings, leaves, weeds, ashes, other residential or commercial solid waste, hazardous waste, or builder's or contractor's refuse shall be thrown or swept into any street, gutter, intake, alley, vacant lot or other public or private property.

13.07 RESPONSIBILITY AND ENFORCEMENT FOR ACCUMULATED RESIDENTIAL OR COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE ON OCCUPIED PRIVATE PROPERTY

a. It shall be the duty of every proprietor, tenant, lessee or occupant of occupied private property to maintain at all times such property in a clean and orderly condition, permitting no deposit or accumulation of residential or commercial solid waste, other than those materials ordinarily attendant upon the day-to-day use for which such property is legally intended.
b. If residential or commercial solid waste is allowed to accumulate, other than in proper containers or in an approved compost pile, on occupied private property, or upon a sidewalk or boulevard, or in the alley of rear thereof, the proprietor, tenant, lessee or occupant shall remove such solid waste forthwith.
c. The Village Manager or his/her designee may order the owner, proprietor, tenant, lessee or occupant of such occupied private property to remove solid waste material by 7:00 a.m. the day following receipt or posting of notice requiring same. Such order may be served either by certified mail or posting of the property in a conspicuous place on the property.

If such waste is not removed by 7:00 a.m. the day following notice, or by such time as may be required by the notice, the Village Manager or his/her designee shall cause the waste to be removed and disposed of by Village personnel or independent contractor; the cost thereof, including reasonable inspection fees and costs of notice, shall be paid by the property owner; if not paid within 30 days of mailing of an invoice to the person responsible for the property at the address indicated in the latest tax or assessment roll, the cost shall be confirmed by the assessor and assessed as a lien upon the property in the manner provided in the Village Charter for tax liens.

13.08 RESPONSIBILITY AND ENFORCEMENT FOR RESIDENTIAL OR COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE ON VACANT PRIVATE PROPERTY

The owner of vacant private property, as reflected in the roll maintained by the Village Assessor, shall cause residential or commercial solid waste that accumulates on the property, the sidewalk or boulevard in front of such property or in the alley in the rear thereof to be removed forthwith upon notice by the Village Manager or his/her designee. If such solid waste is not removed within the ten 10. days after notice is mailed, the Village Manager or his/her designee shall cause it to be removed and disposed of by Village personnel or by independent contractor; if not paid within thirty 30. days of the mailing of an invoice to the owner of the property as shown in the latest tax or assessment roll, the cost shall become a lien against the property in the manner provided by Chapter 2.02z. Section 2 of the Municipal Code of the Village of Beverly Hills. If the Director of Public Safety, sanitation inspector, or Village Manager or his/her designee determines that such solid waste presents an immediate danger to the public health, safety or welfare, the Village Manager shall cause the solid waste to be removed forthwith using reasonable means to effectuate such removal; the cost of such inspections, notices, removal and disposal shall be paid by the owner. In the event of failure to pay, any amounts due shall become a lien against the property which may be enforced in the manner provided above.

13.09 UNAUTHORIZED COLLECTION OF RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE; ANTI-SCAVENGING

It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person not authorized by the Village to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up Municipal solid waste set out for Village collection. Each collection in violation hereof from a collection point or stop shall constitute a separate, distinct offense.

For the purpose of this Section, any person or entity not a party to a collection contract with the Village of Beverly Hills, shall be presumed to be an unauthorized collector.

13.10 SOLID-WASTE CONTAINERS: RESPONSIBILITY FOR FURNISHING

a. The proprietor, tenant, lessee or occupant of private property shall provide and maintain suitable containers for storing all forms of solid waste generated on such property. Exception: The Village or its agent will distribute the first recycling container to each private property.
b. The head of each household residing in a building arranged for one 1. or two 2. families shall provide his/her household unit with approved solid-waste containers sufficient to hold all residential solid waste generated by his/her household between regular collection periods.
c. The owner of a building constructed for three 3. or more families shall provide and maintain solid-waste and recycling containers sufficient to hold all residential solid waste generated by the occupants of the building between regular collection periods. The owner shall also provide and maintain said recycling containers or dumpsters for recyclable refuse. Containers provided by the owner shall be approved by the Village Manager in accordance with the guidelines established in the rules adopted by Village Council.

13.11 LOCATION OF SOLID-WASTE AND RECYCLING CONTAINERS; YARD WASTE COMPOST; HOURS OF PLACEMENT; ENFORCEMENT

a. Location of solid-waste and recycling containers: Between each collection period the proprietor, tenant, lessee, or occupant of a property shall provide a suitable place on such property to store solid waste. Solid-waste and recycling containers shall be protected so that they cannot be easily disturbed by animals; they shall be placed at the rear of each building or structure at a place that is reasonably inconspicuous and away from places occupied by other persons and from streets.
b. Hours of placement: Residential solid waste shall be set out on designated collection days and at such places as shall be specified in the solid-waste regulations approved by the Village Manager. For weekly collection, such solid waste shall not be placed in any street prior to 5:00 p.m. of the day preceding the scheduled collection day except by arrangement with the Village Manager or his/her designee.
c. Enforcement: The Village Manager or his/her designee may order the proprietor, tenant, lessee, or occupant of a private property to remove forthwith such solid waste placed out for collection in violation of Section 13.11b. of this chapter. The order to remove such solid waste shall be either served upon one of the above occupants of the private premises or posted in a conspicuous place thereat. Should another violation of Section 13.11b. of this chapter occur at such property, the Village Manager or his/her designee may cause such solid waste to be removed; the cost thereof, including inspections and notice, shall be paid by the proprietor or assessed against the property in the manner provided by Chapter 2, Section 2.02z. of the Municipal Code of the Village of Beverly Hills.
d. Once emptied, solid-waste and recycling containers placed in any street shall be removed therefrom by the proprietor, tenant, lessee, or occupant of a property no later than 7:00 a.m. of the day following the scheduled pick-up day.

13.12 CLEANING UP BUILDER'S REFUSE; ASSESSMENT AGAINST PROPERTY

a. A landowner or a contractor involved in construction or repair work shall remove from the premises within a reasonable time surplus builder's refuse, construction and building material.
b. If the same is not removed within the forty-eight 48. hours after notice is given to the owner or contractor by the Village of Beverly Hills, the Village Manager or his/her designee may order it to be removed; the cost thereof will be assessed against the land or taken from the deposit made for such purposes under the provisions of Section 22.36.020 of the Beverly Hills Municipal Code.

13.13 BACKYARD COMPOSTING

a. Compost piles may include a combination of yard and garden waste, such as weeds, branches, bark, grass clippings, leaves, stalks and stems, brush or vines; wood ashes; wood chips; coffee grounds; tea leaves; shredded raw fruit and vegetable waste; eggshells; and nutshells.
b. Compost piles shall not include such products as meat and fish scraps, dairy products, bones, cooked food, vegetable oils, salad dressing, peanut butter, or animal manure.
c. Compost piles shall not exceed four feet by eight feet 4' x 8'. or six feet 6'. in diameter and shall not exceed four feet 4'. in height. Double compost piles may be used if the total size does not exceed the above.
d. Compost piles shall be placed only in the rear yard and maintained in a manner that does not emit offensive odors or impair the health, comfort, or welfare of the people.

Chapter 14 - Dogs and Other Animals

14.01 DEFINITIONS
14.02 DUTY TO KEEP DOG UNDER REASONABLE CONTROL
14.03 BARKING DOG
14.04 VICIOUS DOG
14.05 LOCATION AND HOUSING
14.06 FECAL MATTER
14.07 TREATMENT OF ANIMALS
14.08 CRUELTY
14.09 DEAD ANIMALS
14.10 LICENSE REQUIRED
14.11 LICENSING PROCEDURE
14.12 VIOLATION TICKET
14.13 FEES
14.14 TERM OF LICENSE
14.15 APPLICATION FOR KENNEL LICENSE
14.16 RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGES
14.17 DOG POUND
14.18 IMPOUNDING OF DOGS
14.19 RELEASE OF DOGS
14.20 UNCLAIMED DOGS
14.21 CONFINING DOG FOR OBSERVATION
14.22 DOG BITTEN BY ANOTHER DOG
14.23 QUARANTINE
14.24 HORSES
14.25 CATS
14.26 ENFORCEMENT
14.27 AUTHORITY TO INQUIRE
14.28 VIOLATION NOTICES
14.29 ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS
14.30 PENALTIES
14.31 SEVERANCE CLAUSE


14.01. DEFINITIONS

The following terms when used in this Ordinance shall have the meanings set forth in this Section:

( A ) "Dog" shall mean any dog, whether male, female, or unsexed.

( B ) The word "owner" shall include every person having a right or property in a dog, and every person who keeps or harbors a dog or cares for it, and every person who permits a dog to remain in or about their premises occupied or owned by such person, for a period of five days or more.

( C ) For the purposes of this Ordinance, a dog shall be deemed to be under "reasonable control" when said dog is held securely by a leash of suitable strength and length, by the owner, possessor, harborer hereof or any other responsible person of suitable age and strength, in an enclosed vehicle or container or on the owner's occupied property.

( D ) The words "Animal Control Officer" when used herein shall include the person or persons employed by the Township of Southfield for the purpose of enforcement and administration of the provisions of this Ordinance.

( E ) For purposes of this Ordinance "Township of Southfield" includes the unincorporated areas of Southfield Township and the incorporated areas of Villages of Beverly Hills, Franklin, and Bingham Farms.

( F ) "Adequate Care" means the provision of sufficient food, water, shelter, sanitary conditions, exercise and veterinary medical attention in order to maintain an animal in a state of good health.

( G ) "Sanitary Conditions" means space free from health hazards including excessive animal waste, overcrowding of animals, or other conditions that endanger the animal's health.

( H ) "Shelter" means adequate protection from the elements and weather conditions suitable for the age and physical condition of the animal so as to maintain the animal in a state of good health. Shelter for a dog shall include one or more of the following:

(I) The residence of the dog's owner or other individual;

(ii) A doghouse that is an enclosed structure with a roof and of appropriate dimensions for the breed and size of the dog. The doghouse shall have dry bedding when the outdoor temperature is or is predicted to drop below freezing;

(iii) A structure, including, but not limited to, a garage, barn, or shed that is sufficiently insulated and ventilated to protect the dog from exposure to extreme temperatures or, if not sufficiently insulated and ventilated, contains a doghouse as provided under subparagraph (ii) that is accessible to the dog.

( I ) "State of Good Health" means freedom from disease and illness, and in a condition of proper body weight and temperature for the age and species of the animal, unless the animal is undergoing appropriate treatment.

( J ) "Tethering" means the restraint and confinement of a dog by use of a chain, rope or similar device.

14.02. DUTY TO KEEP DOG UNDER REASONABLE CONTROL

No person owning a dog shall permit or allow the same to leave said person's premises, except when such dog is under reasonable control as defined in this Ordinance. No dog shall be permitted or allowed to run at large.

14.03. BARKING DOG

No persons shall own any dog which by loud or frequent or habitual barking or yelping or howling becomes a nuisance to occupiers of neighboring property.

14.04. VICIOUS DOG

No person shall own a fierce or vicious dog, or a dog that has been bitten by any animal known to have been afflicted with rabies. A dog may be deemed fierce or vicious if the Village of Beverly Hills and the Township of Southfield have received more than one bite report involving the same dog. Any dog found to be vicious or afflicted with rabies shall be destroyed unless otherwise disposed as provided herein.

14.05. LOCATION AND HOUSING

All dog houses shall be in a strategically located place so as to provide adequate shade in the summer months and shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, devoid of rodents, vermin, debris, excrement, and free from objectionable odors. Yards and/or exercise of dog runs shall be kept free of dog droppings, uneaten food and maintained in a sanitary manner so as not to be a nuisance because of odor, or attraction for flies and vermin.

14.06. FECAL MATTER

It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a dog owned, harbored or possessed by that person to deposit fecal matter in any place other than the premises where the dog is harbored and kept, unless such fecal matter is immediately collected and removed to the premises where the dog is harbored or kept.

14.07. TREATMENT OF ANIMALS

An owner, possessor or person having charge or custody of an animal shall not do any of the following:

( A ) Fail to provide the animal with adequate care.

( B ) Cruelly drive, work, or beat an animal, or cause an animal to be cruelly driven, worked or beaten.

( C ) Carry or cause to be carried in or upon a vehicle or otherwise any live animal having the feet or legs tied together, other than an animal being transported for medical care, or a horse whose feet are hobbled to protect the horse during transport or in any other cruel and inhumane manner.

( D ) Carry or cause to be carried a live animal in or upon a vehicle or otherwise without providing a secure space, rack, car, crate, or cage in which livestock may stand and in which all other animals may stand, turn around and lie down during transportation.

( E ) Abandon an animal or cause an animal to be abandoned, in any place, without making provisions for the animal's adequate care, unless premises are temporarily vacated for the protection of human life during a disaster. An animal that is lost by an owner or custodian while traveling, or walking, shall not be regarded as abandoned under this section when the owner or custodian has made a reasonable effort to locate the animal.

( F ) Willfully or negligently allow any animal, including one who is aged, diseased, maimed, hopelessly sick, disabled, or non-ambulatory to suffer unnecessary neglect, torture or pain.

( G ) Tether a dog unless the tether is at least three times the length of the dog as measured from the tip of its nose to the base of its tail and is attached to a harness or non-choke collar designed for tethering.

14.08. CRUELTY

( A ) No person shall by use of any pit, pitfall, deadfall, snare, trap, net, baited hook or any similar device, or of any drug, poison, chemical or explosive, injure or kill any bird or fur bearing animal; nor shall any person or persons at any time or in any manner whatever molest, harass, or annoy any bird or fur bearing animal within the limits of the Village of Beverly Hills and Southfield Township.

( B ) No person shall willfully, maliciously and without just cause or excuse kill, torture, mutilate, maim, or disfigure an animal or who willfully and maliciously and without just cause or excuse administer poison to an animal, or expose an animal to any poisonous substance, other than a substance that is used for therapeutic veterinary medical purposes, with the intent that the substance be taken or swallowed by the animal.

( C ) No person shall intentionally or negligently cause or permit an animal to suffer unnecessary pain.

( D ) No person shall molest, injure, kill or capture any wild bird, or disturb the nest of any wild bird, unless otherwise permitted by law.

( E ) Every person lawfully keeping any animal shall maintain the premises in which it is kept in a sanitary condition and free of insects, vermin or obnoxious odors and to that end shall in any structure housing a horse:

(1) Construct a 10 inch clay floor.

(2) Keep manure in a container or trailer not less than 175 feet from any dwelling, except that of the owner, and dispose thereof at least once each week.

(3) Treat both the floor and manure accumulation daily with hydrated lime or such other chemical as will prevent odor.

14.09. DEAD ANIMALS

The owner of any dead dog or other animal shall promptly dispose of the remains in such manner as not to cause a nuisance.

14.10. LICENSE REQUIRED

It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess or harbor any dog four months of age or older in the Village of Beverly Hills and Township of Southfield, unless such dog is licensed as hereinafter provided, or to own, possess, or harbor any dog four months of age or over that does not at all times wear a collar or harness with current Township of Southfield, Michigan, metal license tag attached, as hereinafter provided. Such license tag shall be nontransferable to any other dog.

14.11. LICENSING PROCEDURE

Licenses to own dog shall be issued by the Township Clerk or authorized agent upon application made therefore, together with payment of the license fee provided in this Ordinance.

It shall be the duty of any person owning a dog, on the 1st day of January of any subsequent year thereafter, or on or after any dog becoming four months of age, or forthwith upon becoming a resident of the Village of Beverly Hills and Township of Southfield, or becoming an owner of such dog, to make application to the Township Clerk, giving the full name and residence of the applicant and presentation of a current certificate of vaccination for rabies, with a vaccine licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture, signed by an accredited veterinarian. The certificate shall state the month and year of expiration for the rabies vaccination, in the veterinarian's opinion. A license shall not be issued if the dog's current rabies vaccination will expire more than 30 days before the date on which the requested license would expire. Such application shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of such dog, the owner's name and address, and the name and address of the last previous owner. Upon payment of the license fee, and if all other requirements have been satisfied, the Township Clerk or authorized agent shall issue to each applicant a license to own or harbor a dog for the term commencing at the date of such license and terminating the 31st day of December following. For each license the Township Clerk shall at the time and before issuing the same and for each renewal thereof, collect from each applicant a license fee set by the Village Council and Township Board by resolution, from time to time, for each dog four months of age or over.

14.12. VIOLATION TICKET

When a violation ticket is issued for "failure to obtain a dog license", the owner, possessor or harborer must purchase a current license from the Township Office and show proof of same to the Court Office before violation payment will be accepted.

14.13. FEES

License fees shall be set by resolution of the Village Council and Township Board of Trustees. There shall be a fee for each dog, in case of a dog which has been duly licensed in another county, township, city or village in the State of Michigan, if application is made by the owner of such dog within 30 days after taking up residence in the Village of Beverly Hills and Township of Southfield, and at least 60 days prior to the expiration of his foreign license, the Township Clerk shall collect a fee for each dog. The Township Clerk shall retain and file such foreign license, but shall return it to the owner on demand if at any time the owner returns to his former jurisdiction or for any other cause desires the return of his license and deposits with the Township Clerk his Township of Southfield license in exchange therefor. Any person becoming the owner of any dog after the 1st day of April of any year, shall forthwith apply for and secure a license for such dog, which license shall be issued without penalty, in the event such application be made within 30 days after applicant has acquired such dog or after such dog has reached the age of four months. Any owner of a dog failing to obtain a license as provided herein prior to March 31st shall pay a double fee for such license. In situations where a dog is acquired or becomes four months of age, or a dog owner begins residing in the Village and Township after July 1st, the owner shall only be required to pay one-half of the annual fee.

Duplicates of license shall be issued upon payment of the required fee. All monies received by the Township Clerk shall be turned over to the Township Treasurer. No person shall keep more than two dogs of the age of four months or over on any property in the Village of Beverly Hills and Township of Southfield.

14.14. TERM OF LICENSE

All licenses issued under the provisions of this Ordinance shall be valid and operative for a term beginning the date of such license in the calendar year for which such license is issued and terminating on the 1st day of December of said year.

14.15. APPLICATION FOR KENNEL LICENSE

No person shall own or operate any dog kennel in the Township of Southfield or Village of Beverly Hills in a residential zone. For the purpose of this Ordinance, a kennel shall be construed as an establishment wherein or whereon any person keeps three or more dogs, six months old or older, regardless of whether any remuneration is received therefor. A kennel may be operated in a non-residential district within the Village of Beverly Hills if an authorized use in that zone district.

14.16. RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGES

Every owner, possessor or harborer of an animal shall be liable for damages, any and all injuries to person or property caused by such animal, to be determined and collected in appropriate civil proceedings, and nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to impose any liability upon the Village of Beverly Hills and the Township of Southfield, its officers, agents or employees for any damages to persons or property caused by such animal.

14.17. DOG POUND

The Village of Beverly Hills and the Township of Southfield will not establish a dog pound, but will use the facilities of area veterinarians when and where approved and available.

14.18. IMPOUNDING OF DOGS

It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to take up, seize and place in the dog pound all dogs that may be found running at large or being kept or harbored in any place within the Village of Beverly Hills and Township of Southfield contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance.

14.19. RELEASE OF DOGS

No dog shall be released from the pound unless the owner, possessor or harborer or authorized agent shall pay a fee as set forth in the following schedule:

( A ) For release of a licensed dog, properly immunized against rabies, the sum of $15.00.

( B ) Payment of the cost of boarding such dog, at the rate of $3.00 for each day including the first day.

( C ) The owner, possessor or harborer of any unlicensed dog must present proof of immunizations within 72 hours of release of said dog, or be subject to the issuance of an ordinance violation for owning, possessing or harboring an unlicensed dog. The cost of immunization and licensing shall be paid by the owner, possessor or harborer, in addition to the fees herein provided.

( D ) The Animal Control Officer shall keep a careful record of all dogs received with a description thereof and the disposition of the same, which record will be filed with the Township Clerk monthly or oftener should the Township Clerk require such.

14.20. UNCLAIMED DOGS

All dogs not claimed and released to the owner within four days, not including the first day of impoundment, shall be destroyed, or if the animal is deemed valuable by the Animal Warden, the same may be sold for the total amount of fees for boarding, provided that said dog be properly immunized and licensed at the cost of the purchaser.

14.21. CONFINING DOG FOR OBSERVATION

Any person who shall own a dog which has contracted rabies, or which has been subjected to same, or which is suspected of having rabies, or which has bitten any person, shall upon demand of the Animal Control Officer produce and surrender up such dog to the Animal Control Officer to be held at a licensed veterinarian or at the owner's home for treatment and observation for whatever period is necessary to ascertain the extent of the rabies; such confinement shall be the sole expense of the owner of said dog, and without expense or risk on the part of the Village of Beverly Hills and the Township of Southfield. In lieu of such delivering up of such dog as aforesaid, such person shall have the option of delivering such dog to an approved veterinarian for treatment and observation for rabies, and shall furnish to the Animal Control Officer, written evidence that such dog has been so delivered, such confinement shall be at the sole expense of the owner of said dog.

14.22. DOG BITTEN BY ANOTHER DOG

It shall be the duty of any person owning a dog which has been attacked or bitten by another dog or another animal showing symptoms of rabies, to immediately notify the Animal Control Officer that such person has possession of such a dog and such persons shall comply with all lawful orders and requirements of the Animal Control Officer regarding treatment of such dog for rabies.

14.23. QUARANTINE

The Animal Control Officer is hereby authorized to require that any dog be quarantined or that a quarantine be established by the Village of Beverly Hills and the Township of Southfield for a defined period, whenever in his opinion such measures are necessary in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people of the Village of Beverly Hills and the Township of Southfield.

14.24. HORSES

All horses shall be confined unless being led or ridden on public lands.

14.25. CATS

( A ) Cat Control. It shall be unlawful for any person, in the Village of Beverly Hills, to have possession or custody of any cat, without having it under control and/or confined to his premises at all times; provided that the provisions of this Section shall not apply to possession or custody of any cat less than six months of age, when proof of age can be, and on request, is submitted to either the Public Safety Officer or Animal Control Officer.

( B ) Cat License. It shall be unlawful for any person, in the Village of Beverly Hills, to possess, harbor, shelter or keep any cat over six months of age, without having said cat licensed pursuant to any and all regulations set forth by the Township of Southfield. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to have possession or custody of any such cat without having it inoculated against rabies and/or any other diseases, as designated by the Township of Southfield and/or the Animal Control Officer of Southfield Township.

( C ) Cat Possession. It shall be unlawful for any person, in the Village of Beverly Hills, to possess, harbor, shelter, or keep adult cats in a greater number than can be cared for in a sanitary and proper manner in compliance with the public health code. For the purpose of this Ordinance, an adult cat shall be deemed to be any cat six months of age or older. It shall also be unlawful to maintain any cat or cats so as to create a nuisance by way of noise, odor or otherwise.

( D ) Cat Enforcement. Any Public Safety Officer, Animal Control Officer, Health Inspector, or any other person designated by the Village, is authorized to impound any cat found running at large within the Village of Beverly Hills. The impounding of any cat and the enforcement of this Ordinance shall be on a complaint basis only.

( E ) Cat Impoundment. Diligent efforts shall be made to contact by certified mail and telephone the owner of each licensed and/or otherwise identified cat which is impounded. Any impounded cat without identification or license, not redeemed within 96 hours, and any impounded cat which is licensed and/or otherwise has identification not redeemed within 168 hours shall be disposed of in such a manner as previously agreed upon between the Village of Beverly Hills, the Township of Southfield and the owner and/or manager of an Animal Hospital or shelter. The owner and/or manager of the hospital or shelter is made an agent of the Village of Beverly Hills for this purpose, and his actions in this regard are declared to be for a governmental purpose. A minimum daily charge shall be assessed against the cat owner for the feeding and shelter of each cat so impounded as promulgated by Council resolution.

( F ) Cat Impoundment Agreements. The Village Manager is instructed to enter into necessary agreements with Animal Hospital owners and/or managers to carry out the terms of this Ordinance.

14.26. ENFORCEMENT

The Township of Southfield may employ Animal Control Officers to enforce and administer the provisions of this Ordinance. The Animal Control Officer shall be invested with such powers of a special police officer by the Township Clerk as are necessary for the limited purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Ordinance and its amendments. The provisions of this Ordinance may be enforced by members of the public safety officers of Village of Beverly Hills within their respective boundaries.

14.27. AUTHORITY TO INQUIRE

It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to make diligent inquiry as to the dogs owned, harbored or kept within the Village of Beverly Hills and the Township of Southfield and whether such dogs are licensed, and whether such owner, possessor or harborer is in violation of any other provisions of this Ordinance. Any dog found unlicensed may be seized and impounded by the Animal Control Officer. If the owner, possessor or harborer of such dog be known, the Animal Control Officer may issue a notice of violation to appear at the Township Clerk's office, or his agent, within 72 hours, not including Saturdays, Sundays, or holidays, to procure a license for such dog. Failure of owner, possessor or harborer to appear and procure such license may result in the issuance of an ordinance violation by the said Animal Control Officer for violation of the licensing section of this Ordinance, Section 8.01.

14.28. VIOLATION NOTICES

All violation tickets to be handled by the 46th District Court at the City of Southfield.

14.29. ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS

The Animal Control Officer is hereby authorized, upon witnessing of violation of this Ordinance, in addition to seizing and impounding such dog, to issue to the owner, possessor or harborer of such dog, an ordinance violation which shall include the date, time and location of the offense, and shall include the applicable section number of the ordinance of which the owner, possessor or harborer of such dog is in violation, wherein the Animal Control Officer has determined that the owner, possessor or harborer of such dog has been in violation of the same offense one or more times within the previous one year period. All further proceedings shall be had in accordance with the rules and practices of the District Court of Michigan.

14.30. PENALTIES

Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be responsible for a civil infraction, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined no less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such offense, or such fine in the discretion of the court, together with the costs of such prosecution. Each day that a violation of this Ordinance continues shall be a seperate offense.

(A) Enforcement. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and expenses, the judge or magistrate shall be authorized to issue any judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce, or enjoin viloation of this Chapter.

14.31. SEVERANCE CLAUSE

If any section, clause or provision of this Ordinance shall be declared to be inconsistent with the constitution and laws of the State of Michigan and voided by any court of competent jurisdiction, said section, clause or provision declared to be unconstitutional and void shall thereby cease to be a part of this Ordinance, but the remainder of this Ordinance shall stand and be in full force. {Ord. 293, 5-17-99}

Chapter 15 - Nursing Homes
15.01 REGULATIONS ADOPTED
15.02 AMENDMENTS TO REGULATIONS
15.03 PURPOSE
15.04 NOTICE
15.05 NUISANCE; ABATEMENT
15.01 REGULATIONS ADOPTED

The Village of Beverly Hills hereby adopts by reference the regulations for homes for aged and nursing homes promulgated and adopted by the Commissioner of the Michigan State Police of the State of Michigan on February 28, 1964 with the following amendments.

15.02 AMENDMENTS TO REGULATIONS

(a) Section 1.4 of the Commissioner's Regulations adopted by this chapter is amended to read as follows:

Any person or his authorized agent, confronted with practical difficulties in carrying out the strictest letter of these rules, may apply to the Director of Public Safety in writing for modification thereof. Only such modifications as will not constitute a definite hazard to life or property will be considered. The decision of the Director of Public Safety, including the particulars of any such application, shall be entered upon the records of the Village of Beverly Hills and a signed copy thereof sent to the applicant.

(b) Section 1.5 of the Commissioner's Regulations is amended to read as follows:

A complete set of plans and specifications prepared by a registered architect or engineer, for any proposed home for the aged or nursing home building, addition, remodeling, or alteration to an existing home for aged or nursing home building shall be submitted to the Director of Public Safety. If the plans and specifications conform with this chapter, approval will be given for such construction or addition. When construction has been completed, the owner shall notify the Director of Public Safety and an inspection will be made to determine if this chapter has received compliance. If the construction has been found to be in compliance with this chapter, approval for the use and occupancy of the building or addition shall be given. Nothing in these regulations shall be construed to waive any other ordinance or regulation which may be more restrictive.

(c) Section 1.7 of the Commissioner's Regulations is amended to read as follows:

On completion of any construction, addition or conversion of a home, the first inspection shall be made by or in company with the Director of Public Safety or his authorized representative.

(d) Section 2.11 of the Commissioner's Regulations is amended to read as follows:

The word "Commissioner" shall mean the Director of Public Safety or his authorized representative.

(e) Section 11.5 of the Commissioner's Regulations is amended to read as follows:

All gas appliances having an input BTU rating of 500,000 per hour or more shall be equipped with combustion safety controls as recommended in the Standards of the Factory Insurance Association. Appliances having an input BTU rating of less than 500,000 per hour shall be equipped with safety combustion controls in accordance with the Standards of the American Gas Association.

(f) Section 23.1 of the Commissioner's Regulations is amended to read as follows:

Only such oil and gas burners as are approved by Underwriters Laboratories Incorporated or the American Gas Association, shall be approved for use in homes for aged or nursing homes. All oil and gas burners having an input BTU rating of 500,000 per hour or more shall be equipped with safety combustion controls as recommended in the Standards of the Factory Insurance Association. Burners having an input BTU rating of less than 500,000 per hour shall be equipped with safety combustion controls in accordance with the Standards of the American Gas Association.

15.03 PURPOSE

The purpose of the regulations promulgated and adopted by the Commissioner of the Michigan State Police of the State of Michigan is to provide for the prevention of fire and to protect persons and property in nursing homes and homes for the aged.

15.04 NOTICE

Notice is hereby given that printed copies of said regulations are kept in the office of the Village Clerk available for public inspection and distribution at all times.

15.05 NUISANCE; ABATEMENT

Any building or structure which is erected, altered or converted, or any use of premises or land which is begun or changed after December 21, 1964 and in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se and notwithstanding the penal provisions of this code, the Village may resort to a court to abate such nuisance.

Chapter 16 - Landfills
16.01 WATER SOURCE CONTROL
16.02 PROHIBITED FILL
16.03 LICENSE REQUIRED
16.04 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE
16.05 MAP OF LANDFILL AREA
16.06 LICENSE FEES
16.07 INVESTIGATION AND ISSUANCE OF LICENSE
16.08 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE
16.09 REVOCATION OF LICENSE
16.10 VIOLATIONS
16.01 WATER SOURCE CONTROL

All streams, drains, sewers, springs or other water source courses shall be controlled as approved by the Village Council.

16.02 PROHIBITED FILL

The filling of land with garbage or burnable waste matter is prohibited. The term "garbage" shall include all waste particles of animal, fruit or vegetable matter incident to the use, preparation and storage of food for human consumption.

16.03 LICENSE REQUIRED

It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any filling, dumping, depositing or disposal operations within the Village by means of top soil, sand, dirt, clay, gravel, unburnable rubbish, refuse, debris, junk and waste material or substances, whether household, commercial, industrial or otherwise upon lands or premises within the Village without first having obtained a license as hereinafter provided.

16.04 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE

Application for licenses hereunder shall be made to the Village Clerk and shall be in writing and shall contain the following information:

1. Name, residence, telephone and business address of the applicant.

2. Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the land or premises involved.

3. The full description of the land or premises upon which the filling, dumping or depositing is to take place.

4. The kind of business applicant was previously engaged in, the place or places where and the length of time the same was conducted.

5. The exact purpose for which license is desired including operation or activity intended, extent and scope thereof, contracts or agreements involved, the length of time operation or activity will consume.

6. The number, license number and description of all motor vehicles and of all other equipment or facilities intended to be used and the places where the same is presently located.

7. The financial status of applicant relating to the ability to fulfill duties in the operation activity.

8. Any and all other information that may be required at the time to enable the Village to determine the ability and qualifications of applicant to conduct such business in compliance with the ordinances of the Village, State and County laws and regulations, and in such manner as will not be deleterious to public health, safety and welfare, and so as not to create a public or private nuisance.

9. The application shall contain an agreement by applicant to obey, abide by and comply with all of the provisions of this chapter, all health requirements, and all other ordinances, rules and regulations applicable to the conduct of said business, now in force or which may hereafter be adopted.

16.05 MAP OF LANDFILL AREA

There shall be filed with such application, if involving any filling, dumping, depositing or disposal other than minor or small fills, a map of the premises showing contour lines of at least the lowest and highest elevation before any filling operation begins and the proposed contour lines resulting from such filling or depositing in relation to the topography of the premises and existing public roads or easements and also information governing the nature and kind of soil on the premises before filling or depositing. Such map shall also show existing streams, springs, drains and water sources.

16.06 LICENSE FEES

Upon filing such application and information, there shall be paid to the Village Clerk a license fee based upon the estimate of the Village Manager and/or the Village Engineers for the costs of reviewing such plans and information.

Fees for work of the Village Engineers and Village Administrative Staff shall be as established by resolution by the Village Council.

16.07 INVESTIGATION AND ISSUANCE OF LICENSE

(a) Upon receipt of said application in proper form, the same shall be referred to the Village Manager and to other proper departments for inquiring, investigation, and review.

(b) All of such persons or departments reviewing such application shall attach their recommendations and note whether the proposed activities would create or be likely to create a public or private nuisance, or a hazard to the public health, welfare or safety.

(c) Upon receipt of the application, information, and recommendations, the Village Council shall, at any regular or special meeting consider the same, and if, after due consideration, the Council shall be of the opinion that the proposed application shall not create conditions inimical to the public health or safety, nor create any drainage, sewerage, or other problems or conditions of danger, nor constitute or cause a traffic hazard, it shall authorize the Village Clerk to issue proper license to applicant.

16.08 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE

Any license granted shall be subject to the following limitations, standards and conditions:

(a) The licensee must furnish all labor, materials, tools, vehicles, equipment, supplies and incidental items to fulfill and complete the operation or activity in accordance with the obvious intent of said license.

(b) In the discretion of the Village Council, licensee may be required to furnish a bond to the Village up to an amount of Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars ($25,000) to secure the faithful performance of the operation permitted.

(c) Any license issued hereunder shall include provision requiring inspections by or on behalf of the Village at least once a month or more, if in the judgment of the Village Manager and/or the Village Engineers it is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.

For such additional inspections there shall be imposed a fee for the cost thereof.

Fee for work of Village Engineers and Village Administrative Staff shall be established by resolution by the Village Council.

(d) All requirements of the Village Zoning Ordinance and any other applicable ordinances of the Village shall be complied with before application is made for license hereunder.

(e) The operation shall be conducted so that proper landfill procedures are followed. The Council may require that the working area be fenced to prevent the blowing and scattering of materials and to exclude unauthorized persons. Adequate drainage shall be maintained at all times. No scavenging shall be allowed. No chemicals or septic tank wastes are permitted to be emptied on the premises. The dumping of stumps, broken concrete, radioactive wastes, industrial and toxic wastes, paint, lacquer thinner, turpentine or similar materials is prohibited unless prior written approval is obtained from the Village Manager. No burning shall be permitted except by prior written approval obtained from the Village Manger. Either the approved trench method or progressive slope method of landfill shall be used, and in either case the deposits shall be continually "worked" by a bulldozer or front end loader thoroughly compacting it. After completion of the fill, the grade in land elevation shall comply with the topographical map attached to the original application. Full access to premises is granted to Village officials at all times.

(f) Vehicles used in transportation shall be kept clean and in good repair and so maintained and operated that no portion of contents therefrom shall be spilled or allowed to remain on the public highways.

16.09 REVOCATION OF LICENSE

Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter and amendments thereto may be revoked upon just cause.

16.10 VIOLATIONS

Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared a nuisance per se. Upon application to a court of competent jurisdiction, the court may order the nuisance abated or the violation, or threatened violation, restrained and enjoined. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall also subject the violator to the penalties set forth in Section 1.06.

Chapter 17 - Trees
17.01 DEFINITIONS
17.02 PERMIT REQUIRED
17.03 PROTECTION OF TREES AND SHRUBS
17.04 PROHIBITED SPECIES
17.05 PLANTING REGULATIONS
17.06 REMOVAL OF OTHER TREES
17.07 DUTY OF PRIVATE OWNERS
17.08 INFECTED ELM TREES
17.01 DEFINITIONS

(a) Owner. Any person, firm or corporation having fee simple title, joint or common tenancy, equitable ownership or interest of a mortgagee in possession. Any person, firm or corporation whose name appears on the last preceding assessment roll for the property shall be deemed the prima facie owner of the property within this ordinance.

(b) Person. Any human individual, group of individuals, firm, association, or corporation.

(c) Plant. A young tree, vine, shrub, or herb planted or suitable for planting.

(d) Public Place. A place to which the general public has the right to occupy; not necessarily a place devoted solely to the uses of the public, but a place which is in point of fact public rather than private, including but not limited to, traffic islands and cul-de-sacs.

(e) Right-Of-Way. Land which has been purchased by or dedicated to the public for the purpose of transportation or utility placement.

(f) Shrub. A low, small plant, the branches of which grow directly from the earth with any supporting trunk, or stem. Any tree with a potential growth of less than fifteen feet (15') shall be considered a shrub.

(g) Trees. A woody plant, the branches of which spring from, and are supported upon, a trunk or body which, at its greatest potential growth, exceeds fifteen feet (15') in height.

(h) Vegetation. A plant whose stem requires support and which climbs by tendrils or twining or creeps along the ground.

17.02. PERMIT REQUIRED

(a) Tree Planting or Removal.

1. No person shall hereafter plant, transplant, or remove any tree upon or from any right-of-way, traffic island or public place in the Village of Beverly Hills, nor cause such act to be done by others without first obtaining a written permit from the office of the Village Clerk.

2. Persons receiving such permit shall abide by the ordinances and policies adopted by the Village of Beverly Hills.

3. Whenever any tree shall be planted in conflict with the provisions of the permit, it shall be lawful for the Director of Public Services or his designee to cause removal of the same, and the cost for removal shall be assessed to the permittee as provided by law in the case of special assessments.

(b) Application for Permits. Applications for permits must be made at the office of the Village Clerk.

(c) Permit Expiration.

1. Each permit granted shall contain an expiration date, and the work shall be completed in the time allowed in the permit, and in the manner therein described.

2. Any permit issued shall be void if its terms are violated, or if the work described is not substantially completed by its expiration date.

3. Permit extensions will be considered if conditions warrant.

(d) Permit Contents.

1. Every permit issued by the Village Clerk shall describe work to be done, or state the number of trees to be removed or planted and the location, size, species, or variety of each tree, the method of planting and other information that the Director of Public Services or his designee requires to insure that the work will be done in accordance with this ordinance.

2. Organizations or civic groups applying for an "overall tree planting permit" shall include with their permit application a list of tree planting locations with specie and/or variety of tree to be planted. Such planting shall be performed by professional landscape contractors, licensed by the State of Michigan and shall be staked out prior to application for permit. The Director of Public Services, or his designee, shall inspect such staked locations and determine the advisability of the proposed work.

(e) Permit Fee and Supervision.

1. No charge shall be made for any permit unless it is necessary to retain a consultant to supervise the provisions of the permit, and in such case, the Village Clerk shall determine the charge for the service based on actual cost plus an additional one percent (1%) of the actual cost of the service for Village administrative purposes.

2. In issuing any and all permits, the Village Clerk shall act promptly and shall keep duplicate records of all permits issued and of compliance therewith.

3. Permits for all tree management activities will be issued only after the Director of Public Services of his designee makes a thorough investigation as to the advisability of the proposed work.

(f) Conditional Permit for Removal of Trees and Shrubs. As a condition to any permit issued for the removal of any tree or shrub the Director of Public Services or his designee may require that the permit holder plant, at his/her expense, a tree or shrub designated by said Director of Public Services or his designee in place of the ones removed at the removal site or at any alternate site located in a public area immediately adjoining the permit holder's property.

17.03 PROTECTION OF TREES AND SHRUBS

It shall be unlawful for any persons to do the following to any trees in or upon any rights-of-way, parks or other public places:

(a) Fasten any sign, card, or poster by wire, rope, nail or other hardware, around or through, any tree or its guard, except in emergencies such as storms or accidents, except for any nursery tag identifying its species or care;

(b) Remove, break, injure, mutilate, deface, kill, cut, peel or destroy any tree or shrub by any means or in any manner;

(c) Permit any fire to burn where such fire will injure any portion of any tree or shrub;

(d) Permit any toxic chemical to seep, drain, or to be emptied on or about any tree or shrub;

(e) Deposit, store, place or maintain, on any street, highway, or other public place, any brick, sand, stone, concrete or other material which may impede free passage of water, air, and fertilizer to the roots of any tree or shrub growing therein;

(f) Knowingly permit any electrical wires to come into contact with any tree or shrub;

(g) Allow excavations and driveways to be place with five feet (5') of any tree without written permit from the Village Clerk. Any person making such excavation or construction shall protect any tree within six feet (6') thereof with a good substantial frame box to be approved by the Director of Public Services or his designee and all building materials or other debris shall be kept at least four feet (4') from any tree during and after construction.

(h) Plant any prohibited species of tree as set forth under Section 4.01, and as determined by the Director of Public Services or his designee.

17.04 PROHIBITED SPECIES

The owner of land abutting on any street may not plant trees of the following species in that part of said street butting his/her land not used for public travel: Poplar (All Varieties) - Populus spp, Tree of Heaven - Ailanthus altissima, Catalpa (All Varieties) - Catalpa spp, Box Elder -Acer negundo, Silver Maple - Acer saccharinum, Black Walnut - Juglans nigra, Willow (All Varieties) - Salix spp, Mulberry (All Varieties) - Morus spp, Black Locust - Robinia pseudacacia, Chinese Elm - Ulmus parvifolia, Slippery Elm - Ulmus rubra, Siberian Elm - Ulmus pumila, American Elm - Ulmus americana, Sycamore - Platanus occidentalis, and/or other trees, shrubs or vines listed on the Prohibited Species Master List on file with the Director of Public Serivces.

17.05 PLANTING REGULATIONS

(a) Trees planted in any street right-of-way shall be spaced not less than forty feet (40') apart; however, special permission may be secured from the Director of Public Services or his designee to have a tree planted closer, but in no case shall such planting be within thirty feet (30') of an existing tree, within the right-of-way.

(b) No tree shall be planted in any street right-of-way less than two and one half feet (2-1/2') from the sidewalk.

(c) Trees on private property adjacent to the sidewalk shall be planted not less than two and one half feet (2-1/2') therefrom.

(d) No tree or shrub shall be planted nearer to the intersection of any streets than twenty-five feet (25') from the corner of such intersection.

(e) Exceptions to the above will be by special written permission from the Director of Public Services or his designee.

(f) All trees shall be free of infectious diseases.

(g) When planted, trees shall have a diameter of at least one and a half inches (1-1/2") at a distance of one foot (1') from the ground level.

(h) Planting distance from the road shall follow the existing configuration.

17.06 REMOVAL OF OTHER TREES

(a) Trees or shrubs within the public area may be removed by the Village which are not dead or infected with any disease when such trees are of an undesirable species, but only upon notice to the owner of the abutting property, and if such owner shall file written objection with the Village Clerk within seven (7) days after service of such notice a public hearing on such removal shall be had before the Village Council and the abutting owner shall be notified of the time and place of such hearing in writing.

(b) The Director of Public Services or his designee is hereby authorized to direct removal of any tree growing within any street, park or public place, when such tree interferes with fire hydrants, sewer and water mains, visibility of street intersections, traffic control devices or construction within street rights-of-way.

(c) Healthy trees that homeowners want taken down, with approval via a permit, shall be removed by the homeowner at his/her expense and stump removed by said homeowner within a reasonable period of time.

(d) Any tree removed by the Village shall have the stump removed on a cost/effective basis.

(e) Exceptions to the above shall be by special written permission from the Director of Public Services or his designee.

17.07 DUTY OF PRIVATE OWNERS

It shall be the duty of any person growing a tree or shrub within a public place or responsible for a tree or shrub growing on property abutting a public right-of-way supporting trees or shrubs to trim his/her/their trees and shrubs so as not to cause a safety or health hazard to public places, pedestrians, motorists and bicycle travelers.

17.08 INFECTED ELM TREES

Trees of all species and varieties of elm infected with the fungus Ceratostomella ulmi (Dutch elm disease) are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and must be eradicated and burned or buried with a ten (10) day period following the discovery of such infection.

(a) Selling or Transporting Infected Trees. It shall be unlawful to sell, give away or transport all or any parts of trees infected with the aforementioned fungus, provided wood, branches and roots of such trees may be transported to a safe place for burning or burying.

(b) Dead or Dying Elm Trees. Trees or parts thereof of elm in a dead or dying condition, whether standing or cut wood, that may serve as breeding places for any carrier of the fungus are hereby declared public nuisances and it shall be unlawful for a property owner to possess the same.

(c) Hazardous Trees or Shrubs. Any tree or shrub which interferes with the use of any public highway, sidewalk, park or public place, or is unsafe and constitutes a hazard to the health, safety and welfare, on public or private property is hereby declared a public nuisance and the owner or occupant of the property upon which any such tree or shrub is located shall be required to eliminate the interference with use of any public highway, sidewalk, park or public place or eliminate the hazard to the health, safety and welfare, on public or private property. The procedure to be followed in such cases is as set forth in Section 17.08(e).

(d) Enforcement. The Village Manager or his authorized agent is charged with the duty of making reasonable periodic investigations to determine whether or not trees of all species and varieties of elm located upon any private or public property of the Village have become infected with the fungus Ceratostomella ulmi (Dutch elm disease). Wherever such infection is found upon trees located upon public property, the Village shall forthwith cause such public nuisance to be abated, by destroying such tree or wood.

(e) Inspections, Notice, and Removal of Trees.

1. The Village Manager of his duly authorized agent, may enter upon private property at all reasonable hours for purposes of inspecting trees thereon, and may remove such specimens as are required for analysis to determine whether the same are infected. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent any such agent from entering on private property for purposes of carrying out his duties hereunder, or to interfere with any such agent in the lawful performance of this duties hereunder.

2. Whenever any tree on private property is found to be infected the Village Manager or his authorized agent may cause notice to be sent to the owner and any other parties in interest in the premises where such tree is situated concerning the existence of such disease, and requiring the removal and burning or burying of such tree within a period of ten (10) days following such notice. Such notice shall also notify the owner of said premises that unless such tree is removed and burned or buried within such ten (10) day period, the Village will proceed with such removal and burning and assess the cost thereof against the property. Service of such notice shall be made upon each owner of or party in interest in the property in question, whose name appears upon the last local tax assessment records, by mailing by first class mail, addressed to such owner or party at the address shown on the last tax assessment roll for ad valorem tax purposes which has been reviewed by the Board of Review, as supplemented by any subsequent changes in the names or addresses of such owners or parties listed thereon.

3. It shall thereupon become the duty of the owner of said premises and other parties in interest to cause such tree to be removed and burned or buried under the direction and supervision of the Village Manager or his authorized agent. In lieu thereof, such owner or other parties in interest may request in writing that such removal and burning or burying be done by the Village, in which case the cost of such removal and burning or burying shall be tendered to the Village prior to such removal and burning or burying. In any instance where it appears that the owner or other parties in interest are financially unable to immediately bear the cost of such removal and burning or burying, the work may be performed by the Village and the costs thereof assessed against the property, and in such case the Village Council shall first hold a public hearing at which it shall consider both the necessity of removing the tree or trees in question and the costs to be assessed prior to removal. Notice of such hearing shall be given to the owner of the premises and other parties in interest in the premises by first class mail at least ten (10) days prior to the date of such hearing. After the holding of such hearing, the Village Council may confirm the special assessment and make same payable in yearly installments over a period not exceeding eight (8) years, with interest on the unpaid balance at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum. Upon confirmation of any such special assessment, the Village shall have a lien upon the premises in question in the amount of such assessment, to be enforced and collected in the manner provided in Chapter XI of the Village Charter for the collection of special assessments for public improvements. It shall be lawful for the Village to contract with an independent contractor for the removal and burning or burying of trees, in which case the contractual costs of removal and burning or burying shall be assessed in the manner heretofore set forth.

4. In the event more than one infected, dead, dying or hazardous trees or shrubs are found on a lot or parcel, the Village Manager or his authorized agent shall report such findings to the Village Council, who shall review the situation, and following a public hearing granted to the owner or occupant, upon at least ten (10) days notice, determine the effect thereof upon the public health, safety and welfare, and shall order such relief as shall be appropriate under the circumstances.

Chapter 18 - Swimming Pools
18.01 DEFINITION
18.02 PERMIT
18.03 ENCLOSURE OF SWIMMING POOL AND SIDE YARD
18.04 CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATION
18.05 VIOLATIONS
18.01 DEFINITION

For the purpose of this chapter the term swimming pool shall be defined to mean any artificially constructed, non-portable pool, to be used or used for swimming or bathing, having a depth of two (2) feet or more and intended to be used in connection with a single family residence by the occupant thereof and his guests.

18.02 PERMIT

Before any swimming pool shall be constructed, application for a building permit shall be made to the Building Department, which application shall be accompanied by a complete and detailed set of plans and specifications evidencing compliance with the provisions of the Building Code of the Village and of this chapter. Before any building permit shall be issued for the construction of a swimming pool, the plans and specifications shall be approved by the Building Department and the Health Department. Before a swimming pool shall be used, it shall be finally inspected and approved by the Building Department and Health Department. The fees for such a permit shall be set by resolution of the Village Council.

18.03 ENCLOSURE OF SWIMMING POOL AND SIDE YARD

In order to protect the general public and to prevent accidents and uncontrolled access to pools by small children, on all single family residential lots with swimming pools, the following regulations shall apply:

(a) Each pool shall be completely surrounded by a fence or wall or privacy screen or combination of the foregoing enclosures. A side of a building may substitute for the above enclosures.

(b) All parts of such enclosure, including gates, shall be four feet (4') above the elevation of the ground level, as measured outside of the enclosed, within one foot (1') of the base of the enclosure.

(c) Such fence, wall or screen shall be constructed so as not to have openings, holes, or gaps more than four inches (4") in width and provided that the longest side of the opening is perpendicular to the ground and at least thirty-six linear inches (36") in length. Any cross members of any enclosure shall be designed to prevent their use as a ladder by children.

(d) All pedestrian or vehicular openings in such enclosures shall be equipped with a self-closing, self-latching gate or door which shall be equipped with a lock.

(e) Out-of-door swimming pools may be constructed or erected provided no part thereof shall approach nearer than six feet (6') from the side or rear lot lines measured to the water's edge.

18.04 CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATION

The following regulations shall apply to the construction and operation of swimming pools:

(a) The pool construction shall conform to the Building Code, the Plumbing Code and the Electrical Code of the Village.

(b) Fiberglass and plastic pools may be permitted, provided the same meet the accepted safety and construction standards.

(c) Any accessory building which houses pumping and filtering equipment must conform to the provisions of the zoning ordinance and Building Code of the Village.

(d) Illuminating lights shall be so erected, installed and shielded so as to eliminate direct rays and minimize reflected rays upon adjoining premises.

(e) No electric wires shall be permitted over a swimming pool at any height. All electric wires near a swimming pool shall meet the requirements specified in Chapter 25 ELECTRICAL CODE.

(f) All plumbing shall be installed by a licensed plumber and shall conform to the requirements of the Plumbing Code of the Village.

(g) There shall be no direct cross-connection with the Village or home water supply and the water supply for the pool. There shall be provided, an air-gap delivery connection at least six inches (6") above the floor rim of the pool or make-up tank.

(h) Scum drain troughs and lines shall be in proportion to the size of the pool and should be vented at the extreme ends. A back water valve shall be installed in the scum drain before connecting to the sewers.

(i) The water for the pool shall be filtered, chlorinated and recirculated at least every twelve (12) hours. Hair and lint strainers must be provided so as to protect pumps. Chlorination shall be by automatic feed carrying from 0.2 to 0.5 parts per million residual chloride. No hand or slug feeding of chlorine will be allowed. The acidity-alkalinity residual (PH factor) shall be maintained between 7.2 and 7.6. Testing devices capable of accurately measuring both the chlorine residual and the PH factor shall be provided.

(j) The swimming pool shall be kept drained or covered with a cover capable of sustaining a two hundred (200) pound weight in any one location during the times when the house or residence is vacated or when the residents are away from the house for any extended period.

(k) During water shortage, the filling of swimming pools shall be regulated by the ordinance regulating the use of water supply for lawn sprinkling.

(l) No swimming pool shall be drained during period of excessive rainfall so as to overload the Village sewer system.

(m) No person shall maintain a swimming pool on his premises without providing adequate supervision at all times when the pool is in use.

18.05 VIOLATIONS

Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall subject the violator to the penalties set forth in Section 1.06.

Chapter 19 - Revenue Bonds
19.01 DEFINITIONS
19.02 NECESSITY; APPROVAL OF PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS
19.03 COSTS; USEFUL LIFE
19.04 PAYMENT OF COST; BONDS AUTHORIZED
19.05 ISSUANCE OF SERIES 2004 BONDS; DETAILS
19.06 REGISTRATION AND TRANSFER
19.07 PAYMENT OF BONDS; SECURITY
19.08 BONDHOLDERS' RIGHTS; RECEIVER
19.09 MANAGEMENT; FISCAL YEAR
19.10 RATES AND CHARGES
19.11 NO FREE SERVICE OR USE
19.12 FIXING AND REVISING RATES, RATE COVENANT
19.13 FUNDS AND ACCOUNTS; FLOW OF FUNDS
19.14 PRIORITY OF FUNDS
19.15 DEPOSITARY AND FUNDS ON HAND
19.16 INVESTMENTS
19.17 BOND PROCEEDS
19.18 BOND FORM
19.19 COVENANTS
19.20 ADDITIONAL BONDS
19.21 APPLICATION TO MDEQ AND AUTHORITY
19.22 COVENANT REGARDING TAX EXEMPT STATUS OF BONDS
19.23 REPEAL, SAVINGS CLAUSE
19.24 SEVERABILITY, PARAGRAPH HEADINGS; AND CONFLICT
19.25 PUBLICATION AND RECORDATION
19.26 EFFECTIVE DATE
19.01 DEFINITIONS

Whenever used in this Ordinance, except when otherwise indicated by the context, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

(a) "Act 94" means Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended.

(b) "Adjusted Net Revenues" means for any operating year the excess of revenues over expenses for the System determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, to which shall be added depreciation, amortization, interest expense on Bonds and payments to the Issuer in lieu of taxes, to which may be made the following adjustments:

(i) Revenues may be augmented by the amount of any rate increases adopted prior to the issuance of additional Bonds or to be placed into effect before the time principal or interest on the additional Bonds becomes payable from Revenues as applied to quantities of service furnished during the operating year or portion thereof that the increased rates were not in effect.

(ii) Revenues may be augmented by amounts, which may be derived from rates and charges to be paid by new customers of the System.

The adjustment of revenues and expenses by the factors set forth in (i) and (ii) above shall be reported upon by professional engineers or certified public accountants or other experts not in the regular employment of the Issuer.

(c) "Authority" means the Michigan Municipal Bond Authority.

(d) "Authorized Officers" means the President, Village Manager, Treasurer, and Village Clerk.

(e) "Bond" or "Bonds" means the Series 2004 Bonds, together with any additional Bonds of equal standing hereafter issued.

(f) "Issuer" means the VILLAGE OF BEVERLY HILLS, County of Oakland, State of Michigan.

(g) "MDEQ" means the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.

(h) "Project" means the additions, extensions and improvements to the System together with appurtenances and attachments thereto.
(i) "Reserve Amount" means the amount required to be on deposit in the Bond Reserve Account with respect to any subsequent series of Bonds, which may not exceed the lesser of (1) the maximum annual debt service due on the Bonds in any year, (2) 125% of the average annual debt service on the Bonds, or (3) 10% of the principal amount of the Bonds.

(j) "Revenues" and "Net Revenues" mean the revenues and net revenues of the System and shall be construed as defined in Section 3 of Act 94, including with respect to "Revenues", the earnings derived from the investment of moneys in the various funds and accounts established by this Ordinance.

(k) "Series 2004 Bonds" means the Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System Revenue Bonds, Series 2004, of the Issuer in the principal amount of not to exceed $3,690,000 authorized by this Ordinance.

(l) "Sufficient Government Obligations" means direct obligations of the United States of America or obligations the principal and interest on which is fully guaranteed by the United States of America, not redeemable at the option of the Issuer, the principal and interest payments upon which, without reinvestment of the interest, come due at such times and in such amounts as to be fully sufficient to pay the interest as it comes due on the Bonds and the principal and redemption premium, if any, on the Bonds as it comes due whether on the stated maturity date or upon earlier redemption. Securities representing such obligations shall be placed in trust with a bank or trust company, and if any of the Bonds are to be called for redemption prior to maturity, irrevocable instructions to call the Bonds for redemption shall be given to the paying agent.

(m) "System" means the Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System of the Issuer, including such facilities thereof as are now existing, are acquired and constructed as the Project, and all enlargements, extensions, repairs and improvements thereto hereafter made.

19.02 NECESSITY; APPROVAL OF PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS

It is hereby determined to be a necessary public purpose of the Issuer to acquire and construct the Project in accordance with the plans and specifications prepared by the Issuer's engineers, which plans and specifications are hereby approved. The Project qualifies for the State of Michigan Drinking Water Revolving Fund financing program being administered by the MDEQ and the Authority, whereby bonds of the Issuer are sold to the Authority and bear interest at a fixed rate of two and one-half percent (2.5%) per annum.

19.03 COSTS; USEFUL LIFE

The total cost of the Project is presently estimated not to exceed Three Million Six Hundred Ninety Thousand Dollars ($3,690,000) including the payment of incidental expenses as specified in Section 4 of this Ordinance, which estimate of cost is hereby approved and confirmed, and the period of usefulness of the Project is estimated to be not less than twenty (20) years.

19.04 PAYMENT OF COST; BONDS AUTHORIZED

To pay the cost of acquiring and constructing the Project, including payment of legal, engineering, financial and other expenses incident thereto and incident to the issuance and sale of the Series 2004 Bonds, the Issuer shall borrow the sum of not to exceed Three Million Six Hundred Ninety Thousand Dollars ($3,690,000) and issue the Series 2004 Bonds therefor pursuant to the provisions of Act 94.

19.05 ISSUANCE OF SERIES 2004 BONDS; DETAILS

The Series 2004 Bonds of the Issuer, to be designated WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM REVENUE BONDS, SERIES 2004 are authorized to be issued in the aggregate principal sum of not to exceed Three Million Six Hundred Ninety Thousand Dollars ($3,690,000) or as otherwise finally determined by order of the MDEQ for the purpose of paying the cost of the Project, including the costs incidental to the issuance, sale and delivery of the Series 2004 Bonds. The Series 2004 Bonds shall be payable out of the Net Revenues, as set forth more fully herein. The Series 2004 Bonds shall be in the form of a single fully?registered, nonconvertible bond of the denomination of the full principal amount thereof, dated as of the date of delivery of the Series 2004 Bonds, payable in principal installments serially as finally determined by the order of the MDEQ at the time of sale of the Series 2004 Bonds and approved by the Authority and an Authorized Officer. Final determination of the principal amount and the payment dates and amounts of principal installments of the Series 2004 Bonds shall be evidenced by execution of a Purchase Contract (the "Purchase Contract") between the Issuer and the Authority providing for sale of the Series 2004 Bonds, and the Authorized Officers are authorized and directed to execute and deliver the Purchase Contract when it is in final form and to make the determinations set forth above.

The Series 2004 Bonds shall bear interest at a rate of two and one?half percent (2.5%) per annum on the par value thereof or such other rate as evidenced by execution of the Purchase Contract, but in any event not to exceed the rate permitted by law, and the President and Village Clerk are authorized to execute and deliver the Series 2004 Bonds in accordance with the delivery instructions of the Authority. The Bonds shall be signed with the manual or facsimile signatures of the President and Village Clerk and shall have the Issuer's seal impressed or printed thereon.

The Series 2004 Bonds principal amount is expected to be drawn down by the Issuer periodically, and interest on the principal amount shall accrue from the date such principal amount is drawn down by the Issuer.

The Series 2004 Bonds shall not be convertible or exchangeable into more than one fully?registered bond. Principal of and interest on the Series 2004 Bonds shall be payable as provided in the Series 2004 Bond form set forth in this Ordinance.

The Series 2004 Bonds or principal installments thereof will be subject to prepayment prior to maturity with the prior written approval of the Authority in the manner and at the times as provided in the Series 2004 Bond form set forth in this Ordinance.

The Village Clerk shall record on the registration books payment by the Issuer of each installment of principal or interest or both when made and the cancelled checks or other records evidencing such payments shall be returned to and retained by the Village Clerk.

Upon payment by the Issuer of all outstanding principal of and interest on the Series 2004 Bonds, the Authority shall deliver the Series 2004 Bonds to the Issuer for cancellation.

19.06 REGISTRATION AND TRANSFER

Any Bond may be transferred upon the books required to be kept pursuant to this section by the person in whose name it is registered, in person or by the registered owner's duly authorized attorney, upon surrender of the Bond for cancellation, accompanied by delivery of a duly executed written instrument of transfer in a form approved by the transfer agent. Whenever any Bond or Bonds shall be surrendered for transfer, the Issuer shall execute and the transfer agent shall authenticate and deliver a new Bond or Bonds, for like aggregate principal amount. The transfer agent shall require payment by the bondholder requesting the transfer of any tax or other governmental charge required to be paid with respect to the transfer. The transfer agent shall not be required (i) to issue, register the transfer of or exchange any Bond during a period beginning at the opening of business 15 days before the day of the giving of a notice of redemption of Bonds selected for redemption as described in the form of the Series 2004 Bond contained in Section 18 of this Ordinance and ending at the close of business on the day of that giving of notice, or (ii) to register the transfer of or exchange of any Bond so selected for redemption in whole or in part, except the unredeemed portion of Bonds being redeemed in part. The Issuer shall give the transfer agent notice of call for redemption at least 20 days prior to the date notice of redemption is to be given.

The transfer agent shall keep or cause to be kept, at its principal office, sufficient books for the registration and transfer of the Bonds, which shall at all times be open to inspection by the Issuer; and, upon presentation for such purpose, the transfer agent shall, under such reasonable regulations as it may prescribe, transfer or cause to be transferred, on said books, Bonds as hereinbefore provided.

If any Bond shall become mutilated, the Issuer, at the expense of the holder of the Bond, shall execute, and the transfer agent shall authenticate and deliver, a new Bond of like tenor in exchange and substitution for the mutilated Bond, upon surrender to the transfer agent of the mutilated Bond. If any Bond issued under this Ordinance shall be lost, destroyed or stolen, evidence of the loss, destruction or theft may be submitted to the transfer agent and, if this evidence is satisfactory to both and indemnity satisfactory to the transfer agent shall be given, and if all requirements of any applicable law including Act 354, Public Acts of Michigan, 1972, as amended ("Act 354"), being sections 129.131 to 129.134, inclusive, of the Michigan Compiled Laws have been met, the Issuer, at the expense of the owner, shall execute, and the transfer agent shall thereupon authenticate and deliver, a new Bond of like tenor and bearing the statement required by Act 354, or any applicable law hereafter enacted, in lieu of and in substitution for the Bond so lost, destroyed or stolen. If any such Bond shall have matured or shall be about to mature, instead of issuing a substitute Bond the transfer agent may pay the same without surrender thereof.

19.07 PAYMENT OF BONDS; SECURITY

The Series 2004 Bonds and the interest thereon shall be payable from the Net Revenues, and to secure such payment, there is hereby created a statutory lien upon the whole of the Net Revenues which shall be a first lien to continue until payment in full of the principal of and interest on the Series 2004 Bonds payable from the Net Revenues, or, until sufficient cash or Sufficient Government Obligations have been deposited in trust for payment in full of the Series 2004 Bonds then outstanding, principal and interest on such Series 2004 Bonds to maturity, or, if called for redemption, to the date fixed for redemption together with the amount of the redemption premium, if any. Upon deposit of cash or Sufficient Government Obligations, as provided in the previous sentence, the statutory lien shall be terminated with respect to the Series 2004 Bonds, the holders of the Series 2004 Bonds shall have no further rights under this Ordinance except for payment from the deposited funds, and the Series 2004 Bonds shall no longer be considered to be outstanding under this Ordinance.

As additional security for the Series 2004 Bonds sold to the Authority, the Issuer hereby pledges its revenue sharing payments from the State of Michigan for the payment of the principal of and interest on the Series 2004 Bonds. Should the Net Revenues at any time be insufficient to pay the principal of and interest on the Series 2004 Bonds as the same become due, then the Issuer shall advance funds which it receives from the State of Michigan as revenue sharing payments as shall be necessary to pay said principal and interest. The Issuer shall be reimbursed for any such advance from the Net Revenues subsequently received which are not otherwise pledged or encumbered by this Ordinance.

19.08 BONDHOLDERS' RIGHTS; RECEIVER

The holder or holders of the Bonds representing in the aggregate not less than twenty percent (20%) of the entire principal amount thereof then outstanding, may, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, protect and enforce the statutory lien upon the Net Revenues of the System, and may, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, enforce and compel performance of all duties of the officers of the Issuer, including the fixing of sufficient rates, the collection of Revenues, the proper segregation of the Revenues of the System and the proper application thereof. The statutory lien upon the Net Revenues, however, shall not be construed as to compel the sale of the System or any part thereof.

If there is a default in the payment of the principal of or interest on the Bonds, any court having jurisdiction in any proper action may appoint a receiver to administer and operate the System on behalf of the Issuer and under the direction of the court, and by and with the approval of the court to perform all of the duties of the officers of the Issuer more particularly set forth herein and in Act 94.

The holder or holders of the Bonds shall have all other rights and remedies given by Act 94 and law, for the payment and enforcement of the Bonds and the security therefor.

19.09 MANAGEMENT, FISCAL YEAR

The operation, repair and management of the System and the acquiring of the Project shall continue to be under the supervision and control of the Village Council. The Village Council may employ such person or persons in such capacity or capacities, as it deems advisable to carry on the efficient management and operation of the System. The Village Council may make such rules and regulations as it deems advisable and necessary to assure the efficient management and operation of the System. The System shall be operated on the basis of an operating year which shall coincide with the Village's fiscal year.

19.10 RATES AND CHARGES

The rates and charges for service furnished by and the use of the System and the methods of collection and enforcement of the collection of the rates shall be those in effect on the date of adoption of this Ordinance.

19.11 NO FREE SERVICE OR USE

No free service or use of the System, or service or use of the System at less than cost, shall be furnished by the System to any person, firm or corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality, including the Issuer.

19.12 FIXING AND REVISING RATES; RATE COVENANT

The rates now in effect and the rate increases to be placed into effect, if any, are estimated to be sufficient to provide for the payment of the expenses of administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the System as are necessary to preserve the System in good repair and working order, to provide for the payment of the principal of and interest on the Bonds as the same become due and payable, and the maintenance of the reserve therefor and to provide for all other obligations, expenditures and funds for the System required by law and this Ordinance. The rates shall be fixed and revised from time to time as may be necessary to produce these amounts, and it is hereby covenanted and agreed to fix and maintain rates for services furnished by the System at all times sufficient to provide for the foregoing.

19.13 FUNDS AND ACCOUNTS; FLOW OF FUNDS

Commencing upon the adoption of this Ordinance, all funds belonging to the System shall be transferred as herein indicated and all Revenues of the System shall be set aside as collected and credited to a fund to be designated WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM RECEIVING FUND (the "Receiving Fund"). In addition, all Revenues in any accounts of the System shall be transferred to the Receiving Fund and credited to the funds and accounts as provided in this section. The Revenues credited to the Receiving Fund are pledged for the purpose of the following accounts and shall be transferred or debited from the Receiving Fund periodically in the manner and at the times and in the order of priority hereinafter specified:

A. OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE ACCOUNT: Out of the Revenues credited to the Receiving Fund there shall be first set aside in, or credited to, a fund designated OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE ACCOUNT (the "Operation and Maintenance Account"), monthly a sum sufficient to provide for the payment of the next month's expenses of administration and operation of the System and such current expenses for the maintenance thereof as may be necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order.

A budget, showing in detail the estimated costs of administration, operation and maintenance of the System for the next ensuing operating year, shall be prepared by the Village Council at least 30 days prior to the commencement of each ensuing operating year. No payments shall be made to the Issuer from moneys credited to the Operation and Maintenance Account except for services directly rendered to the System by the Issuer or its personnel.

B. BOND AND INTEREST REDEMPTION ACCOUNT: There shall be established and maintained a separate depositary account designated BOND AND INTEREST REDEMPTION ACCOUNT (the "Redemption Account"), the moneys on deposit therein from time to time to be used solely for the purpose of paying the principal of, redemption premiums (if any) and interest on the Bonds. The moneys in the Redemption Account shall be kept on deposit with the bank or trust company where the principal of and interest on the Bonds, or any series thereof, are payable.

Out of the Revenues remaining in the Receiving Fund, after provision for the Operation and Maintenance Fund, there shall be set aside each month commencing April 1, 2004 in the Redemption Account a sum proportionately sufficient to provide for the payment when due of the current principal of and interest on the Bonds, less any amount in the Redemption Account representing accrued interest on the Bonds or investment income on amounts on deposit in the Redemption Account, (including investment income on amounts held as part of the Bond Reserve Account). Commencing April 1, 2004, the amount set aside each month for interest on the Bonds shall be equal to a fraction derived from the number of months from April 1, 2004 to the first interest payment date of the total amount of interest on the Bonds next coming due. Commencing on the first interest payment date, the amount set aside each month for interest on the Bonds shall be 1/6 of the total amount of interest on the Bonds next coming due. The amount set aside each month for principal, commencing April 1, 2004, shall be equal to that amount which is that fraction derived from the number of months from April 1, 2004 to the first principal payment date of the amount of principal next coming due by maturity and the amount set aside each month for principal payment commencing on the first principal payment date, shall be 1/12 of the amount of principal next coming due by maturity. If there is any deficiency in the amount previously set aside, that deficiency shall be added to the next succeeding monthly requirements. The amount to be set aside for the payment of principal and interest on any date shall not exceed the amount which, when added to the money on deposit in the Redemption Account, including investment income thereon, is necessary to pay principal and interest due on the Bonds on the next succeeding principal payment date.

There is hereby established a separate account in the Redemption Account designated BOND RESERVE ACCOUNT (the "Bond Reserve Account"). Any ordinance authorizing the issuance of a subsequent series of Bonds may provide for deposits to the Bond Reserve Account to be made from the proceeds of such series of Bonds or from some other source in an amount that will result in the funds or other assets on deposit in the Bond Reserve Account being equal to the Reserve Amount for the Bonds.
Except as otherwise provided in this section, the moneys or other funding sources credited to the Bond Reserve Account shall be used solely for the payment of the principal and redemption price (if any) of and interest on the Bonds as to which there would otherwise be a default or on the final maturity date for the Bonds of the series to which moneys in the Bond Reserve Account relate. If at any time it shall be necessary to use moneys credited to the Bond Reserve Account for such payment, then the moneys so used shall be replaced from the Revenues first received thereafter in the Receiving Fund which are not required to be deposited in the Operation and Maintenance Account or the Redemption Account.

C. REPLACEMENT ACCOUNT: There shall next be established and maintained an account designated REPLACEMENT ACCOUNT (the "Replacement Account"), the money credited thereto to be used solely for the purpose of making repairs and replacements to the System. Out of the Revenues and moneys of the System remaining in the Receiving Fund each month after provision has been made for the deposit of moneys in the Operation and Maintenance Account and the Redemption Account (including the Bond Reserve Account), there may be deposited in the Replacement Account such additional funds as the Village Council may deem advisable. If at any time it shall be necessary to use moneys in the Replacement Account for the purpose for which the Replacement Account was established, the moneys so used shall be replaced from any moneys in the Receiving Fund which are not required by this Ordinance to be used for the Operation and Maintenance Account or the Redemption Account (including the Bond Reserve Account).

D. IMPROVEMENT ACCOUNT: Out of the remaining Revenues in the Receiving Fund, after meeting the requirements of the Operation and Maintenance Account, the Redemption Account (including the Bond Reserve Account) and the Replacement Account, there may be next set aside in or credited to a fund to be designated IMPROVEMENT ACCOUNT (the "Improvement Account"), which Improvement Account may have several subaccounts therein, such sums monthly as the Issuer may deem advisable to be used for additions, improvements, enlargements or extensions to the System, including the planning thereof.

E. GENERAL OBLIGATION DEBT ACCOUNT: There is hereby established a separate account known as the GENERAL OBLIGATION DEBT ACCOUNT (the "G.O. Debt Account"). Out of the remaining Revenues in the Receiving Fund, there may be next set aside in or credited to monthly after meeting the requirements of the foregoing Accounts, to the G.O. Debt Account, or from other available moneys such sums as shall be necessary to pay debt service on presently existing or future general obligation bond issues of the Issuer or general obligations or contractual obligations of the Issuer incurred or to be incurred for System purposes.

F. SURPLUS MONEYS: Thereafter, any Revenues in the Receiving Fund after satisfying all the foregoing requirements of this Section may, at the discretion of the Issuer, be used for any of the following purposes:

1. Transferred to the Replacement Account, the Improvement Account or both, or

2. Transferred to the Redemption Account and used for the purchase of Bonds on the open market at not more than the fair market value thereof or used to redeem Bonds prior to maturity pursuant to Section 5 of this Ordinance.

19.14 PRIORITY OF FUNDS

In the event the moneys in the Receiving Fund are insufficient to provide for the current requirements of the Operation and Maintenance Account or the Redemption Account, any moneys or securities in other accounts of the System, except the proceeds of sale of the Bonds, shall be credited or transferred, first, to the Operation and Maintenance Account, and second to the Redemption Account.

19.15 DEPOSITARY AND FUNDS ON HAND

Moneys in the several funds and the accounts established pursuant to this Ordinance, except moneys in the Redemption Account (including the Bond Reserve Account) and moneys derived from the proceeds of sale of the Bonds, may be kept in one or more bank accounts at a bank or banks designated by resolution of the Issuer, and if kept in one bank account the moneys shall be allocated on the books and records of the Issuer in the manner and at the times provided in this Ordinance.

19.16 INVESTMENTS

Moneys in the funds and accounts established herein and moneys derived from the proceeds of sale of the Bonds, may be invested by the Issuer in United States of America obligations or in obligations the principal of and interest on which is fully guaranteed by the United States of America and any investments hereafter permitted by law, and moneys derived from the proceeds of sale of the Bonds may also be invested in certificates of deposit of any bank whose deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Investment of moneys in the Redemption Account being accumulated for payment of the next maturing principal or interest payment of the Bonds shall be limited to obligations bearing maturity dates prior to the date of the next maturing principal or interest payment on the Bonds. Investment of moneys in the Bond Reserve Account shall be limited to obligations bearing maturity dates or subject to redemption, at the option of the holder thereof, not later than five years from the date of the investment. In the event investments are made, any securities representing the same shall be kept on deposit with the bank or trust company having on deposit the fund or funds or account from which the purchase was made. Profit realized or interest income earned on investment of funds in the Receiving Fund, Operation and Maintenance Account and Improvement Account shall be deposited in or credited to the Receiving Fund at the end of each fiscal year. Profit realized on interest income earned on investment of moneys in the Redemption Fund including income derived from the Bond Reserve Account shall be credited as received to the Redemption Account.

19.17 BOND PROCEEDS

From the proceeds of the sale of the Bonds there shall be immediately deposited in the Redemption Account an amount equal to the accrued interest and premium, if any, received on the delivery of the Bonds. The balance of the proceeds of the sale of the Bonds when received from the Authority shall be deposited in a bank or banks, designated by the Village Council, qualified to act as depository of the proceeds of sale under the provisions of Section 15 of Act 94, in an account designated CONSTRUCTION FUND (the "Construction Fund"). Moneys in the Construction Fund shall be applied solely in payment of the costs of the Project, including any engineering, legal and other expenses incident thereto and to the financing thereof. Payments for construction, either on account or otherwise, shall not be made unless the registered engineer in charge of such work shall file with the Village Council a signed statement to the effect that the work has been completed in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor; that it was done pursuant to and in accordance with the contract therefor (including properly authorized change orders), that such work is satisfactory and that such work has not been previously paid for.

Any unexpended balance of the proceeds of sale of the Bonds remaining after completion of the Project in the Construction Fund may, at the discretion of the Issuer, be used for further improvements, enlargements and extension to the System, if, at the time of such expenditures, such use is approved by the Michigan Department of Treasury, if such permission is then required by law. Any remaining balance after such expenditure shall be paid to the Redemption Account and may be used for the purpose of purchasing Bonds on the open market at not more than the fair market value thereof, but not more than the price at which the Bonds may next be called for redemption, or used for the purpose of paying principal of the Bonds upon maturity or calling Bonds for redemption.

19.18 BOND FORM

The Bonds shall be in substantially the following form:

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
STATE OF MICHIGAN
COUNTY OF OAKLAND
VILLAGE OF BEVERLY HILLS
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM
REVENUE BOND, SERIES 2004
REGISTERED OWNER: Michigan Municipal Bond Authority
PRINCIPAL AMOUNT: Three Million Six Hundred Ninety Thousand Dollars ($3,690,000)
DATE OF ORIGINAL ISSUE: March 25, 2004
The VILLAGE OF BEVERLY HILLS, County of Oakland, State of Michigan (the "Village"), for value received, hereby promises to pay, but only out of the hereinafter described Net Revenues of the Village's Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System (hereinafter defined), to the Michigan Municipal Bond Authority (the "Authority"), or registered assigns, the Principal Amount shown above, or such portion thereof as shall have been advanced to the Village pursuant to a Purchase Contract between the Village and the Authority and a Supplemental Agreement by and among the Village, the Authority and the State of Michigan acting through the Department of Environmental Quality, in lawful money of the United States of America, unless prepaid prior thereto as hereinafter provided.

During the time the funds are being drawn down by the Village under this bond, the Authority will periodically provide to the Village a statement showing the amount of principal that has been advanced and the date of each advance, which statement shall constitute prima facie evidence of the reported information; provided that no failure on the part of the Authority to provide such a statement or to reflect a disbursement or the correct amount of a disbursement shall relieve the Village of its obligation to repay the outstanding Principal Amount actually advanced, all accrued interest thereon, and any other amount payable with respect thereto in accordance with the terms of this bond.

The Principal Amount shall be payable on the dates and in the annual principal installment amounts set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof, as such Schedule may be adjusted if less than $3,690,000 is disbursed to the Village or if a portion of the Principal Amount is prepaid as provided below, with interest on said principal installments from the date each said installment is delivered to the holder hereof until paid at the rate of two and one-half percent (2.5%) per annum. Interest is first payable on October 1, 2004, and semiannually thereafter and principal is payable on the first day of October commencing October 1, 2005 (as set forth in the Purchase Contract) and annually thereafter.

The Bonds may be subject to redemption prior to maturity by the Issuer only with the prior written consent of the Authority and on such terms as may be required by the Authority.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this bond, as long as the Authority is the owner of this bond, (a) this bond is payable as to principal, premium, if any, and interest at the designated office of Bank One Trust Company, National Association, or at such other place as shall be designated in writing to the Village by the Authority (the "Authority's Depository"); (b) the Village agrees that it will deposit with the Authority's Depository payments of the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on this bond in immediately available funds by 12:00 noon at least five business days prior to the date on which any such payment is due whether by maturity, redemption or otherwise; in the event that the Authority's Depository has not received the Village's deposit by 12:00 noon on the scheduled day, the Village shall immediately pay to the Authority as invoiced by the Authority an amount to recover the Authority's administrative cost and lost investment earnings attributable to that late payment; and (c) written notice of any redemption of this bond shall be given by the Village and received by the Authority's Depository at least 40 days prior to the date on which such redemption is to be made.

Additional Interest
In the event of a default in the payment of principal or interest hereon when due, whether at maturity, by redemption or otherwise, the amount of such default shall bear interest (the "additional interest") at a rate equal to the rate of interest which is two percent above the Authority's cost of providing funds (as determined by the Authority) to make payment on the bonds of the Authority issued to provide funds to purchase this bond but in no event in excess of the maximum rate of interest permitted by law. The additional interest shall continue to accrue until the Authority has been fully reimbursed for all costs incurred by the Authority (as determined by the Authority) as a consequence of the Village's default. Such additional interest shall be payable on the interest payment date following demand of the Authority. In the event that (for reasons other than the default in the payment of any municipal obligation purchased by the Authority) the investment of amounts in the reserve account established by the Authority for the bonds of the Authority issued to provide funds to purchase this bond fails to provide sufficient available funds (together with any other funds which may be made available for such purpose) to pay the interest on outstanding bonds of the Authority issued to fund such account, the Village shall and hereby agrees to pay on demand only the Village's pro rata share (as determined by the Authority) of such deficiency as additional interest on this bond.

For prompt payment of principal and interest on this bond, the Village has irrevocably pledged the revenues of the Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System of the Village, including all appurtenances, extensions and improvements thereto (the "System"), after provision has been made for reasonable and necessary expenses of operation, maintenance and administration (the "Net Revenues"), and a statutory lien thereon is hereby recognized and created.

This bond is a single, fully-registered, non-convertible bond in the principal sum indicated above issued pursuant to Ordinance No. 317 duly adopted by the Village Council of the Village, and under and in full compliance with the Constitution and statutes of the State of Michigan, including specifically Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended, for the purpose of paying part of the cost of acquiring and constructing additions, extensions and improvements to the System.

For a complete statement of the revenues from which and the conditions under which this bond is payable, a statement of the conditions under which additional bonds of superior and equal standing may hereafter be issued and the general covenants and provisions pursuant to which this bond is issued, reference is made to the above-described Ordinance.

This bond is a self-liquidating bond, payable, both as to principal and interest, primarily from the Net Revenues of the Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System. The principal of and interest on this bond are secured by the statutory lien hereinbefore mentioned.

The Village has covenanted and agreed, and does hereby covenant and agree, to fix and maintain at all times while any bonds payable from the Net Revenues of the System shall be outstanding, such rates for service furnished by the System as shall be sufficient to provide for payment of the interest upon and the principal of the bonds of this issue, as and when the same shall become due and payable, and to maintain a bond redemption account (including a bond reserve account) therefor, to provide for the payment of expenses of administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the System as are necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order, and to provide for such other expenditures and funds for the System as are required by said Ordinance.

This bond is transferable only upon the books of the Village by the registered owner in person or the registered owner's attorney duly authorized in writing, upon the surrender of this bond together with a written instrument of transfer satisfactory to the transfer agent, duly executed by the registered owner or the registered owner's attorney duly authorized in writing, and thereupon a new bond or bonds in the same aggregate principal amount and of the same maturity shall be issued to the transferee in exchange therefor as provided in the Ordinance authorizing the bonds, and upon payment of the charges, if any, therein prescribed.

It is hereby certified and recited that all acts, conditions and things required by law to be done precedent to and in the issuance of this bond and the series of bonds of which this is one have been done and performed in regular and due time and form as required by law.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the VILLAGE OF BEVERLY HILLS, County of Oakland, State of Michigan, by its Village Council, has caused this bond to be executed with the facsimile signatures of its President and its Clerk and the corporate seal of the Village to be impressed hereon, all as of the Date of Original Issue.

VILLAGE OF BEVERLY HILLS


By ____________________________
President
(Seal)
Countersigned:

_______________________________
Village Clerk

SCHEDULE A

Based on the schedule provided below unless revised as provided in this paragraph, repayment of the principal of the bond shall be made until the full amount advanced to the Village is repaid. In the event the Order of Approval issued by the Department of Environmental Quality (the "Order") approves a principal amount of assistance less than the amount of the bond delivered to the Authority, the Authority shall only disburse principal up to the amount stated in the Order. In the event (1) that the payment schedule approved by the Village and described below provides for payment of a total principal amount greater than the amount of assistance approved by the Order or (2) that less than the principal amount of assistance approved by the Order is disbursed to the Village by the Authority, the Authority shall prepare a new payment schedule which shall be effective upon receipt by the Village.

Principal Installment Amount of Principal
Due on October 1 Installment

2005 60,000
2006 145,000
2007 150,000
2008 155,000
2009 160,000
2010 165,000
2011 170,000
2012 175,000
2013 180,000
2014 185,000
2015 190,000
2016 195,000
2017 200,000
2018 205,000
2019 210,000
2020 215,000
2021 220,000
2022 225,000
2023 230,000
2024 235,000
_______
$3,690,000


19.19 COVENANTS

The Issuer covenants and agrees with the holders of the Bonds that so long as any of the Bonds remain outstanding and unpaid as to either principal or interest:

(a) The Issuer will maintain the System in good repair and working order and will operate the same efficiently and will faithfully and punctually perform all duties with reference to the System required by the Constitution and laws of the State of Michigan, and this Ordinance.

(b) The Issuer will keep proper books of record and account separate from all other records and accounts of the Issuer, in which shall be made full and correct entries of all transactions relating to the System. The Issuer shall have an annual audit of the books of record and account of the System for the preceding operating year made each year by an independent certified public accountant, and a copy of the audit shall be mailed to the manager of each syndicate or account originally purchasing any issue of the Bonds. The auditor shall comment on the manner in which the Issuer is complying with the requirements of the Ordinance with respect to setting aside and investing moneys and meeting the requirements for acquiring and maintaining insurance. The audit shall be completed and so made available not later than six (6) months after the close of each operating year.

(c) The Issuer will maintain and carry, for the benefit of the holders of the Bonds, insurance on all physical properties of the System and liability insurance, of the kinds and in the amounts normally carried by municipalities engaged in the operation of water supply and sewage disposal systems, including self-insurance. All moneys received for losses under any such insurance policies shall be applied solely to the replacement and restoration of the property damaged or destroyed, and to the extent not so used, shall be used for the purpose of redeeming or purchasing Bonds.

(d) The Issuer will not sell, lease or dispose of the System, or any substantial part, until all of the Bonds have been paid in full, both as to principal and interest or provision made thereof as herein provided. The Issuer will operate the System as economically as possible, will make all repairs and replacements necessary to keep the System in good repair and working order, and will not do or suffer to be done any act which would affect the System in such a way as to have a material adverse effect on the security for the Bonds.

(e) The Issuer will not grant any franchise or other rights to any person, firm or corporation to operate a System that will compete with the System and the Issuer will not operate a system that will compete with the System.

(f) The Issuer will cause the Project to be acquired and constructed promptly and in accordance with the plans and specification therefor.

19.20 ADDITIONAL BONDS

Except as hereinafter provided, the Issuer shall not issue additional Bonds of equal or prior standing with the Series 2004 Bonds.

The right is reserved in accordance with the provisions of Act 94, to issue additional Bonds payable from the Revenues of the System which shall be of equal standing and priority of lien on the Net Revenues of the System with the Series 2004 Bonds but only for the following purposes and under the following terms and conditions:

(a) To complete the Project in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor. Such bonds shall not be authorized unless the engineers in charge of construction shall execute a certificate evidencing the fact that additional funds are needed to complete the Project in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor and stating the amount that will be required to complete the Project. If such certificate shall be so executed and filed with the Issuer, it shall be the duty of the Issuer to provide for and issue additional revenue bonds in the amount stated in said certificate to be necessary to complete the Project in accordance with the plans and specifications plus an amount necessary to issue such bonds or to provide for part or all of such amount from other sources.

(b) For subsequent repairs, extensions, enlargements and improvements to the System or for the purpose of refunding part of any Bonds then outstanding and paying costs of issuing such additional Bonds including deposits which may be required to be made to the Bond Reserve Account. Bonds for such purposes shall not be issued pursuant to this subparagraph (b) unless the Adjusted Net Revenues of the System for the preceding twelve-month operating year shall be equal to at least one hundred percent (100%) of the maximum amount of principal and interest thereafter maturing in any operating year on the then outstanding Bonds and on the additional Bonds then being issued. If the additional Bonds are to be issued in whole or in part for refunding outstanding Bonds, the annual principal and interest requirements shall be determined by deducting from the principal and interest requirements for each operating year the annual principal and interest requirements of any Bonds to be refunded from the proceeds of the additional Bonds. For purposes of this subparagraph (b) the Issuer may elect to use as the last preceding operating year any operating year ending not more than sixteen months prior to the date of delivery of the additional Bonds. Determination by the Issuer as to existence of conditions permitting the issuance of additional Bonds shall be conclusive. No additional Bonds of equal standing as to the Net Revenues of the System shall be issued pursuant to the authorization contained in this subparagraph if the Issuer shall then be in default in making its required payments to the Operation and Maintenance Account or the Redemption Account.

(c) For refunding a part of the outstanding Bonds and paying costs of issuing such additional Bonds including deposits which may be required to be made to the Bond Reserve Account. No additional Bonds shall be issued pursuant to this subsection unless the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing in any operating year after giving effect to the refunding shall be less than the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing in any operating year prior to giving effect to the refunding.

19.21 APPLICATION TO MDEQ AND AUTHORITY

The Authorized Officers are hereby authorized to make application to the Authority and to the MDEQ for placement of the Series 2004 Bonds with the Authority. The Authorized Officers are further authorized to execute and deliver such contracts, documents and certificates including a Purchase Contract, a Supplemental Agreement, an Issuer's Certificate and a Revenue Sharing Pledge Agreement as are necessary or advisable to qualify the Series 2004 Bonds for the Drinking Water Revolving Fund. In the event of a sale of the Series 2004 Bonds to the Authority, an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to make such changes to the form of the Series 2004 Bonds contained in Section 18 of this Ordinance as may be necessary to conform to the requirements of 1985 PA 227 ("Act 227"), including, but not limited to changes in the principal maturity and interest payment dates and references to additional security required by Act 227. In the event the Series 2004 Bonds are sold to the Authority, the taxes collected by the Stat e of Michigan and returned to the Issuer may be pledged for payment of the Series 2004 Bonds, and an Authorized Officer is further authorized to negotiate, execute and deliver an agreement with the Authority for payment of such taxes to the Authority or to a trustee as provided in Section 23 of Act 227.

19.22 COVENANT REGARDING TAX EXEMPT STATUS OF THE BONDS

The Issuer shall, to the extent permitted by law, take all actions within its control necessary to maintain the exclusion of the interest on the Bonds from gross income for federal income tax purposes under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, (the "Code") including, but not limited to, actions relating to any required rebate of arbitrage earnings and the expenditure and investment of Bond proceeds and moneys deemed to be Bond proceeds, and to prevent the Bonds from being or becoming "private activity bonds" as that term is used in Section 141 of the Code.

19.23 REPEAL, SAVINGS CLAUSE

All ordinances, resolutions or orders, or parts thereof, in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are, to the extent of such conflict, repealed.

19.24 SEVERABILITY, PARAGRAPH HEADINGS; AND CONFLICT

If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this Ordinance shall be held invalid, the invalidity of such section, paragraph, clause or provision shall not affect any of the other provisions of this Ordinance. The paragraph headings in this Ordinance are furnished for convenience of reference only and shall not be considered to be part of this Ordinance.

19.25 PUBLICATION RECORDATION

This Ordinance shall be published in full in The Observer & Eccentric, a newspaper of general circulation in the Issuer qualified under State law to publish legal notices, promptly after its adoption, and shall be recorded in the Ordinance Book of the Issuer and such recording authenticated by the signatures of the President and Village Clerk.

19.26 EFFECTIVE DATE

This Ordinance shall be effective upon its adoption.

Adopted and signed this 3rd day of November, 2003.

Chapter 20 - Downtown Development Authority
20.01 DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
20.01 DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY

(a) Organization.

1. The Authority shall be under the supervision and control of a Board consisting of the Village President and eight (8) members appointed by the Village Council. At least five (5) of the members shall be business persons having an interest in property located in the downtown district. Of the members first appointed, two (2) shall be appointed for one (1) year, two (2) for two (2) years, two (2) for three (3) years, and two (2) for four (4) years. Thereafter, a member shall serve for a term of four (4) years. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be made by the Village Council President for the unexpired term only, subject to the approval of Village Council. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses. The Chairperson of the Board and Officers shall be elected by the Board.

(b) Pursuant to notice and after having been given an opportunity to be heard, a member of the Board may be removed for cause by the Village council, subject to review by the Oakland County Circuit Court.

(c) Duties. The Downtown Development Authority -- Village of Beverly Hills as herein created shall be charged with the following duties:

1. Prepare an analysis of economic changes taking place in the downtown district.

2. Study and analyze the impact of a maturing community upon the downtown district.

3. Plan and propose the construction, the renovation, repair, remodeling, rehabilitation, restoration, preservation, or reconstruction of a public facility, which may be necessary or appropriate to the execution of a plan which, in the opinion of the Board, aids in the economic growth of the downtown district.

4. Develop long-range plans, in cooperation with the Village Planning Board, designed to prevent the deterioration of property values in the downtown district, and take such steps as may be necessary to persuade property owners to implement the plans to the fullest extent possible.

5. Implement any plan of development in the downtown district necessary to achieve the purposes of this Ordinance, in accordance with the powers of the Authority as granted by this Ordinance.

6. Make and enter into contracts necessary or incidental to the exercise of its powers and the performance of its duties.

7. Acquire easements or rights-of-way by purchase or otherwise, on terms and conditions and in a manner the Authority deems proper and which is reasonably necessary to achieve the purposes of this Ordinance, and to grant or acquire licenses, easements, and options with respect thereto.

8. Accept grants and donations of property, labor, or other things of value from a public or private source.

(b) Financing. The activities of the Authority shall only be financed from one or more of the following sources:

1. Donations to the Authority for the performance of its functions.

2. Monies borrowed and to be repaid as authorized by Section 13 of Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of 1975, as amended.

3. Proceeds of a tax increment financing plan, established under Sections 14 - 16 of Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of 1975, as amended.

4. Monies obtained from other sources approved by the Council of the Village of Beverly Hills.

5. Monies received by the Authority and not covered under Subsection 1 shall be immediately deposited to the credit of Authority, subject to disbursement pursuant to Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of 1975, as amended. Except as provided in Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of 1975, as amended, the Village shall not obligate itself, nor shall it ever be obligated to pay any sums from public monies, other than monies received by the Village pursuant to this section, for or on account of the activities of the Authority.

(c) Development Plans. When the Board decides to finance a project in the downtown district by tax increment financing as authorized in Section 14, 15, and 16 of Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of 1975, as amended, it shall prepare a development plan. The development plan shall contain:

1. The designation of boundaries of the development area in relation to highways, streets, streams, or otherwise.

2. The location and extent of existing streets and other public facilities within the development area and shall designate the location, character, and extent of the categories of public and private land uses then existing and proposed for the development area, including residential, recreational, commercial, industrial, educational, and other uses and shall include a legal description of the development area.

3. A description of existing improvements in the development area to be demolished, repaired, or altered, a description of any repairs and alterations, and estimate of the time required for completion.

4. The location of existing improvements in the development area.

5. A statement of the construction or stages of construction planned, and the estimated time of completion of each stage.

6. Description of any parts of the development area to be left as open space and the use contemplated for the space.

7. A description of any portions of the development area which the Authority desires to sell, donate, exchange, or lease to or from the municipality and the proposed terms.

8. A description of any desired zoning changes and changes in streets, street levels, intersections, and utilities.

9. An estimate of the cost of the development, a statement of the proposed method of financing the development and the ability of the Authority to arrange the financing.

10. The procedures for bidding for the leasing, purchasing, or conveying in any manner of all or a portion of the development upon its completion, if there is no express or implied agreement between the Authority and persons, natural or corporate, that all or a portion of the development will be leased, sold or conveyed in any manner to those persons.

11. A plan for compliance with Act No. 227 of the Public Acts of 1972, amended, being Section 213.321 to 213.332 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.

12. Other material which the Authority, local public agency, or governing body deems pertinent.

(d) Governing Procedures. The Downtown Development Authority -- Village of Beverly Hills shall only have the power and duties prescribed by Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of 1975, as amended, and consistent with this Ordinance. Any questions of interpretation of the powers and duties and responsibilities of the Authority shall be resolved first by reference to this Ordinance and then by reference to Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of 1975, as amended, as it is not inconsistent with this Ordinance. The Authority shall provide the Village Council and Planning Board with all reports and studies regulating the formation and implementation of project development plans.

(e) Boundaries. The Authority shall exercise its power within the following described area:

Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Southfield Road and Thirteen Mile Road heading north along the Southfield Road centerline to the centerline of Beverly Road, then west along the centerline of Beverly Road to the rear lot line of TH 24-02-426-009 (Medical Village), south to Gould Court, west on the southern property line of TH 24-02-462-013 to the rear lot line of TH 24-02-427-006 (McDonalds) south along the rear lot line to the northern property line of TH 24-02-427-008 (Beverly Hills Racquet Club) then west to the rear lot line then south along the rear lot lines to the north lot line of TH 24-02-479-02 (Huntley Square) then east to rear lot line of TH 24-02-480-006 (Steve Petix) then south along the rear lot lines of properties bordering Southfield Road to the north right-of-way line of 13 Mile, then west to the east lot line of TH 24-02-478-003 (Village Hall) then north to the north lot line then west to west lot line of TH 24-02-451-019 (Village Hall) then south along the west lot line to the south lot line then west to the east lot line of TH 24-02-456-013 then north to the north lot line then west to the west lot line of TH 24-02-456-011 then south to the centerline of Thirteen Mile then east to the point of beginning.

(f) Development Plan Approved. The development plan for the development area within the downtown district established pursuant to Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of 1975, as amended, as prepared by the Village of Beverly Hills Downtown Development Authority and submitted to the Village Council, is hereby approved by the Village Council.

Chapter 21 - Village Planning
21.01 PLANNING COMMISSION
21.02 PLANNING COMMISSION CONSULTING SERVICES AND BUDGET
21.03 FUNCTION AND DUTIES OF PLANNING COMMISSION
21.04 RECOMMENDATIONS OF PLANNING COMMISSIONBOARD
21.05 VILLAGE COUNCIL REFERRALS
21.01 PLANNING COMMISSION

(a) Creation. There shall be a Village of Beverly Hills Planning Commission pursuant to P.A. 33 of 2008, as amended, hereinafter referred to as the Commission with the powers and duties as hereinafter provided. This Ordinance shall be officially known and described as the Village of Beverly Hills Planning Commission Ordinance.
(b) Membership. The Commission shall consist of nine (9) members, who shall be qualified electors and freeholders in the Village of Beverly Hills, and who shall represent insofar as is possible, different professions or occupations, and geographic areas of the Village, and who shall be appointed by the Village Council. The term of each member so appointed shall be for a period of three (3) years from July 1st of the year in which the member is appointed, or until a successor takes office, except that in the case of the first Village Planning Commission appointed hereunder, the terms of three members shall be for a period of three (3) years each. Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration term, shall be filled for the balance of the unexpired term by the Village Council. All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.

The Village President, Village Manager, and one or more members of the Village Council may be appointed as ex officio members of the Commission, provided that not more than one-third of the Commission members may be ex officio members. The term of the Village Manager shall expire with the term of the Village President who appointed him or her as Village Manager.

(c) Removal. The Village of Beverly Hills may remove a member of the Commission for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon written charges and after a public hearing. Failure to disclose a potential conflict of interest shall be considered malfeasance in office. Failure to repeatedly attend Commission meetings without being excused by the Commission Chair shall be considered nonfeasance in office. The secretary of the Commission shall report any member who has three (3) consecutive unexcused absences to the Village Council.

(d) Elections, Meetings and Bylaws. The Commission shall, from its appointed members, elect a chair, vice-chair and secretary. The Village Clerk, or his or her duly authorized deputy, shall assist the Commission and shall keep a record of all its proceedings. The Commission shall hold at least one regular public meeting quarterly, shall adopt Bylaws for the transaction of its business, and shall keep a full and complete record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be provided annually to the Village Council.

(e) Powers and Duties. The Commission shall have their powers and duties as set forth in P.A. 33 of 2008, as amended, being the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, (M.C.L. 125.3801 et dseq.); and P.A. 110 of 2006, as amended, being the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (M.C.L. 125.3101 et seq.).

The Commission shall have the authority to apply for and receive grants from any government agency or the federal government and to receive gifts pursuant to P.A. 33 of 2008.

21.02 PLANNING COMMISSION CONSULTING SERVICES AND BUDGET

The Commission may call upon the Village Council for such services and data by the various departments as it may require. The Commission may recommend to the Village Council the securing of such professional and consulting services as it may require; provided, however, that no expenditures of funds shall be made, or contracts entered into for providing such professional or consulting services, unless the same shall be first approved and authorized by the Village Council. No later than the first day of April in each year, the Commission shall prepare and submit to the Village Council a tentative outline of its program for the ensuing Village fiscal year, together with its budget for such ensuing year, which outline and budget shall serve as a guide in the appropriation of monies by the Village Council; provided, that nothing contained herein shall be interpreted to require the Village Council to appropriate the sum or amount requested for such budget. No funds shall be expended in connection with the Commission in excess of amounts appropriated for that purpose by the Village Council.

21.03 FUNCTION AND DUTIES OF PLANNING COMMISSION

(a) It shall be the function and duty of the Commission to advise the Village Council in regard to the proper development of the Village of Beverly Hills, and to make suggestions for the development of any areas outside its boundary which, in the Commissions judgment, bear relation to the planning of the Village. In this regard, the Commission is authorized to advise with and to cooperate with the planning and legislative bodies of other governmental units in any area outside the boundaries of the Village of Beverly Hills.

(b) The Commission is authorized to prepare a recommendation for the physical development of the municipality, either in its entirety, or in part. Such recommendations, together with accompanying maps, plats, charts, and descriptive matter shall indicate the Commissions suggestions for the development of such territory.
(c) The Commission is authorized to recommend for the guidance of the Village Council, a Zoning Ordinance for the control of the height, area, bulk, location, and use of buildings and premises. The Commission may, from time to time, amend, extend or add to such recommendations, and the same shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the Village and its environs.

(d) The Commission may hold public meetings and/or hearings, from time to time, as it may deem advisable or necessary in connection with the proper performance of its functions hereunder. At least one joint meeting of the Village Council and Commission shall be held annually at a time to be designated by the Village President, and it shall be the duty of the Village President to call such meeting or meetings in accordance with the provisions hereof.

21.04 RECOMMENDATIONS OF PLANNING COMMISSION

When any recommendation, or part thereof, has been approved by the Commission, the same shall be referred to the Village Council.

21.05 VILLAGE COUNCIL REFERRALS

In addition to the functions hereinbefore set forth, it shall be the function of the Commission to pass upon all matters referred to it by the Village Council and to give the Village Council the benefit of its judgment with relation to such matters so referred. Matters so referred may include, but not be restricted to, requests for change of zoning, requests for closing, opening or altering streets or alleys, requests for issuing building permits, and any other matters which bear relation to the physical development or growth of the Village. {Ord. 342; 9-1-12}

Chapter 22 - Zoning Ordinance

22.01 TITLE, PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY
22.01.010 SHORT TITLE

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Zoning Ordinance of the Village of Beverly Hills".

22.01.020 PURPOSE

An Ordinance enacted under Act 207, Public Acts of 1921, as amended, governing the incorporated portions of the Village of Beverly Hills, Oakland County, Michigan, to regulate and restrict the location and use of buildings, structures and land or other specified uses; and to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings, and other structures; to regulate and to determine the size of yards, courts, and open spaces; to regulate and limit the density of population; and for said purposes to divide the Village into districts and establish the boundaries thereof; providing for enforcement; establishing a Board of Appeals; and imposing penalties for the violation of this Ordinance.

22.01.030 PREAMBLE

Pursuant to the authority conferred by the Public Acts of the State of Michigan in such case, made and provided and for the purpose of promoting, and protecting the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Village of Beverly Hills to meet the needs for food, energy, and other natural resources, by protecting and conserving the character and social and economic stabilization of the residential, commercial, and other use areas; by securing the most appropriate use of land and to insure that uses of lands shall be situated in appropriate locations and relationships, preventing overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population and transportation systems and other public facilities; providing adequate light, air and reasonable access; and facilitating adequate economical provision of transportation, water, sewers, schools, energy, recreation and other public service and facility needs and requirements, and by other means, all in accordance with a comprehensive Master Plan now, therefore, THE VILLAGE OF BEVERLY HILLS ORDAINS:

22.01.040 ENABLING AUTHORITY

This title is adopted pursuant to Act 207, Public Acts of Michigan, 1921, as amended. Said Act is made a part of this title just as if it were word for word repeated herein.

22.01.050 CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE

For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows, and the following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this Ordinance:

a. The particular shall control the general.

b. In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this Ordinance and any caption or illustration, the text shall control.


c. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive and discretionary.

d. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.

e. A "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof.

f. The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," or "occupied for".

g. The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, a public utility, firm, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity.

h. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, or a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or," "either...or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows:

1. "And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply.

2. "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, or provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination.

3. "Either...or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination.

i. Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them.

22.01.060 CONFLICTING REGULATIONS. Any use that would constitute a violation of Federal, State or local law or regulation shall be prohibited. {Ord. 339; 11-19-11}.

22.04 DEFINITIONS
22.04  DEFINITIONS.  For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Ordinance, certain terms and words used herein are defined as follows:

Adult Regulated Uses; Definitions:  As used in this Ordinance, the following definitions shall apply to adult-regulated uses:

a.         Adult Book Store:  An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, and other periodicals and/or photographs, drawings, slides, films, video tapes, recording tapes, and novelty items which are distinguished or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", (as defined below), or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material.  Such establishment or the segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material in an establishment is customarily not open to the public generally, but only to one or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of age.

 b.         Adult Mini Motion Picture Theatre:  An enclosed building with a capacity for less than fifty (50) persons used commercially for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," (as defined below), for observation by patrons therein.  Such establishment is customarily not open to the public generally, but only to one or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of age.

 c.         Adult Motion Picture Theatre:  An enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used commercially for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," (as defined below), for observation by patrons herein.  Such establishment is customarily not open to the public generally, but only to one or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of age.

 d.         Cabaret:  An establishment which features any of the following:  Topless dancers and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers, male and/or females or similar entertainers or topless and/or bottomless waitresses or employees.

 e.         Massage Parlor: A place where for any form of consideration of gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentation, electric or magnetic treatment or any other treatment or manipulation of the human body occurs as part of or in connection with Specified Sexual Activities or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation or service related thereto exposes Specified Anatomical Areas. {Ord. 299; 6-7-00}

f.          Modeling Studio: Any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, figure models who display Specified Anatomical Areas are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, photographed, or similarly depicted by persons paying such considerations or gratuities, except that this provision shall not apply to any bonafide art school or similar education institution. {Ord. 299; 6-7-00}

g.         Specified Anatomical Areas are defined as: 

 1.         Less than completely and opaquely covered:
     a.         Human genitals, pubic region;
     b.         Buttock;
     c.         Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and

2.         Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

 h.         Specified Sexual Activities are defined as: 

1.         Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.

2.         Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.

3.         Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast.

i.          Significant Portion: Any one or more portions of the display having continuous duration in excess of five minutes; The aggregate portions of the display having a duration equal to ten percent or more of the display.  The aggregate of portions of the collection of any materials or exhibits composing the display equal to ten percent or more of the display. {Ord. 299; 6-7-00}

Adult Foster Care Facility:  A facility for the care of adults, eighteen (18) years of age and older, as licensed and regulated by the State under Michigan Public Act 218 of 1979, and rules promulgated by the State Department of Social Services.  It includes facilities and foster care homes for adults who are aged, mentally ill, developmentally disabled, or physically handicapped who require supervision on an ongoing basis but who do not require continuous nursing care. An adult foster care facility does not include nursing homes, homes for the aged, hospitals, alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation center, or a residential center for persons released from or assigned to a correctional facility.  Such organizations shall be defined as follows:

a.         Adult Foster Care Family Home: a private home with the approved capacity to receive 6 or fewer adults to be provided with foster care for 5 or more days a week and for 2 or more consecutive weeks.  The adult foster care family home licensee must be a member of the household and an occupant of the residence.

b.         Adult Foster Care Small Group Home: a private home with the approved capacity to receive 12 or fewer adults who are provided supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, for 24 hours a day, 5 or more days a week, and for 2 or more consecutive weeks for compensation.

c.         Adult Foster Care Large Group Home: a private home with approved capacity to receive at least 13 but not more than 20 adults to be provided supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, for 24 hours a day, 5 or more days a week, and for 2 or more consecutive weeks for compensation. {Ord. 367, 7-20-19)

d.         Congregate Adult Foster Care Facility:  Residence for more than twenty (20) adults.{Ord. 252, 5-12-91}

Alley: A public way which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property.  (see "Street")

Articulation: Architectural variations in a building wall that accentuates details of the building design so that it defines a building base, middle and top.  Articulation can include recesses, relief and design elements that accent the overall design, continue the rhythm of adjacent buildings, and promote varied front buildings, and promote varied front building lines and interesting design. {Ord. 348, 1-4-14}

Basement:  That portion of a building which is partly or wholly below grade but so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the ceiling. 

Bikeway:  Pedestrian or nonmotorized vehicular circulation routes built according to the standards of the Village or other agency with right-of-way jurisdiction, as applicable.

Building:  Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof supported by columns or walls, including but not limited to tents, awnings, carports and mobile homes and intended for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind.  In addition, a structure erected on-site, a mobile home or mobile structure, a pre-manufactured or pre-cut structure, above or below ground, designed primarily for shelter rather than as a means of conveyance.

Building, accessory:  A subordinate building area, attached or detached, the use of which is customarily incidental to the permitted principal use of the principal building on the same lot.  Examples of accessory buildings include a garage, storage shed and pool house.  In case a question arises to the degree of incidentalness or length of custom, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall rule. (see Building, Principal and Use, accessory) {Ord. 328, 5-2-09}

Buildable Area:  Irrespective of the geometric shape of a lot and/or whether any of the lot lines consists of a straight, curved or any combination of two or more straight and/or curved lines, the buildable area for the lot shall be determined in the following sequence:

a.         Establish the "Front Open Space" with a line parallel to the front lot line, regardless of its contour, at the setback distance specified in the Schedule of Regulations.

b.         Establish the "Rear Open Space" as defined in the Zoning Ordinance for a square, rectangular or irregular shaped lot.

c.         Establish the "Rear Open Space" with a line parallel to the rear lot line, as determined in step (b), extend to intersect both side lot lines.  Use the setback distance specified in the Schedule of Regulations.

d.         Establish the "Side Open Space" for one side with a line that is parallel to the rear lot line, regardless of its contour or angle, between the "Front Open Space" determined in step (a) and the "Rear Open Space" determined in step (c), at the setback distance specified in the Schedule of Regulations for an interior lot or at the setback distance required for corner lots.  (see 22.08.070)

e.         Establish the opposite "Side Open Space" by repeating step (d).  The area encompassed by the "Front, Rear and Side Open Spaces" of an unoccupied lot is determined to be the buildable area of the lot.

Building Height:  The vertical distance measured from the established grade to the highest point of the roof surface if a flat roof; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the mean height level between eaves and ridge of gable, studio hip and gambrel roofs; and seventy-five percent (75%) of the height of an "A" frame.

Building line:  A line parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required front setback line.

Building, principal:  A building or where the context so indicates, a group of buildings in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.  (see "Building, accessory" and "Use, principal")

Bufferyard:  A unit of yard together with plantings, walls, berms, and/or fences required thereon located between different land uses and/or public roads designed to minimize potential nuisances such as dirt, litter, noise, glare of lights, signs and unsightly buildings, and parking lots and/or to provide spacing to reduce adverse impacts of noise, odor, or danger from fires and explosion.

 Child Care Facility: A facility for the care of children under eighteen (18) years of age, as licensed and regulated by the State under Michigan Public Act 116 of 1973 and the associated rules promulgated by the State Department of Social Services.  Such organizations shall be further defined as follows:

a.      Child Care Center:  A facility, other than a private residence, receiving more than six pre-school or school age children for group care for periods of less than 24 hours a day, and where the parents or guardians are not immediately available to the child.  It includes a facility which provides care for not less than two consecutive weeks, regardless of the number of hours of care per day.
      The facility is generally described as a child care center, day care center, day nursery,             nursery school, parent cooperative preschool, play group, or drop-in center.  "Child care center" or "day care center" does not include a Sunday school conducted by a religious organization where children are cared for during short periods of time while persons responsible for such children are attending religious services.

b.      Foster Family Home:  A private home in which one but not more than four minor     children, who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood, marriage, or adoption, are given care and supervision for 24 hours a day, for four or more days a week, for two or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent, legal guardian, or legal custodian.

c.      Foster Family Group Home:  A private home in which more than four but fewer than seven minor children, who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood, marriage, or adoption, are given care and supervision for 24 hours a day, for four or more days a week, for two or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent, legal guardian, or legal custodian

d.      Family Day Care Home:  A private home in which up to six (6) minor children are   received for care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day, except children related to the caregiver by blood, marriage, or adoption.  It includes a home that gives care to an unrelated child for more than four weeks during a calendar year.

e.      Group Day Care Home:  A private home in which more than six but not more than 12             children are given care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to the caregiver.  It includes a home that gives care to an unrelated child for more than four weeks during a  calendar year. {Ord. 367, 7-20-19}

Church:  A building, structure, or groups of buildings or structures, which by design and construction are primarily intended for the conducting of organized religious services.  Accessory structures and uses not directly involving religious services are excluded from this definition and are considered accessory structures or uses. {Ord. 252, 5-12-91}

Collector Street:  A street whose primary function is to provide adequate traffic movement between thoroughfares and local streets and provide direct access to abutting properties.  Collector Streets are those designated as such in the Circulation Plan of the current Village Master Plan. {Ord. 252, 5-12-91}

Commercial Vehicle Definitions: 

a.         Commercial Vehicle:  Any vehicle bearing or required to bear commercial license plates and which falls into one or more of the categories listed below:

1.         Truck tractor;

2.         Semi-trailer, which shall include flat beds, stake beds, roll-off containers, tanker bodies, dump bodies and full or partial box-type enclosures;

3.         Vehicles of a type that are commonly used for the delivery of ice cream, milk, bread, fruit or similar vending supply commercial or delivery trucks.  This category shall include vehicles of a similar nature which are also of a type commonly used by electrical, plumbing, heating and cooling, and other construction oriented contractors;

4.         Tow trucks;

5.         Commercial hauling trucks;

6.         Vehicle repair service trucks;

7.         Vehicles with blades attached for plowing, grading;

8.         Construction vehicle, such as a bulldozer, backhoe and similar vehicles;

9.         A vehicle which has permanently mounted outside brackets or holders for ladders, tools, pipes, or other similar equipment. {Ord. 272, 8-24-94}

b.         Gross vehicle weight:  The weight equal to the weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of its maximum load carrying capacity, as rated by the manufacturer.

c.         Non-licensed commercial vehicle:  Any motor vehicle, whether same is capable of operation or movement under its own power or not, which vehicle does not have attached thereto current and valid license plates registered for such vehicle.

d.         Operator:  Any person who is in actual physical control of a commercial vehicle.

e.         Owner:  Any person in whose name the legal title of a commercial vehicle is registered, or in the event such vehicle is the subject of a lease or conditional sales agreement, the lessee or person with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with the immediate right of possession.

f.          Parking:  The open standing of a commercial vehicle upon the land attended or unattended by an operator thereof, except in a fully enclosed structure.

Condominium:  A plan or project consisting of not less than two (2) units as established and approved in conformance with the Michigan Condominium Act, Act 59 of the Public Acts of 1978, as amended.

Condominium Act:  Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended, MCL 559.101 et. seq.{Ord. 253,  5-12-91}

Condominium Conversion:  A condominium project in which some or all of the proposed condominium units were occupied before the issuance of the notice of proposed action as required by Section 71 of the Condominium Act. {Ord. 253, 5-12-91}

Condominium Co-Owner:  A person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust, or other legal entity or combination thereof, who owns a condominium unit within a condominium project.  Co-Owner may include a land contract vendee if the condominium documents or land contract so provides. {Ord. 253, 5-12-91}

Condominium Detached:  A residential condominium project designed to be similar in appearance to a conventional single family subdivision, except that the limited common areas are arranged in such a manner that clearly defined condominium lots are not created. {Ord. 253, 5-12-91}

Condominium Documents:  The master deed, recorded pursuant to the Condominium Act, the Association bylaws and any other instrument referenced in the master deed or bylaws which effect the rights and obligations of ownership of a co-owner in the condominium. {Ord. 253, 5-12-91}

Condominium Lot:  That portion of the land area of a site condominium project designed and intended to function similar to a platted subdivision lot for purposes of determining minimum yard setback requirements and other requirements set forth in the Zoning Ordinance. {Ord. 253, 5-12-91}

Condominium Project:  A plan or project consisting of not less than two (2) condominium units established in conformance with Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended, MCL 559.101 et seq. {Ord. 253, 5-12-91}

Condominium Site:  A condominium project containing or designed to contain structures or other improvements for residential, commercial, office, business, or other uses permitted in the zoning district in which it is located and in which each co-owner owns exclusive rights to a volume of space within which a structure or structures may be constructed as a condominium unit as described in a master deed.  A site condominium, when constructed as an alternative to a platted subdivision, may also be referred to as a "condominium subdivision" and shall be considered as equivalent to a platted subdivision for the purpose of regulation by this ordinance and other ordinances of the Village. {Ord. 253, 5-12-91}

Condominium Site Plan:  The drawings and related information which pertains to a condominium project and is required by this Ordinance for the review of the Village. {Ord. 253, 5-12-91}

Condominium Subdivision Plan:  The drawings and related information prepared in accordance with Section 66 of the Condominium Act. {Ord. 253, 5-12-91}

Condominium Unit:  That portion of the condominium project designed and intended for separate ownership and use, as described in the master deed for the condominium project.  {Ord. 253, 5-12-91}

Limited Common Elements:  Portions of the common area within a condominium project reserved in the master deed for the exclusive use of less than all co-owners. {Ord. 253, 5-12-91}

Control Bumper:  A continuous concrete curb constructed upon a suitable base having a minimum width of four inches (4") and a minimum height of six inches (6") above grade.

Dwelling unit:  One or more rooms with a bathroom and a single kitchen designed as a unit for occupancy by only one family for cooking, living and sleeping purposes.  (see "Family")

Dwelling, One Family:  A detached building containing not more than one dwelling unit designed for residential use, provided: 

a.         It complies with the minimum square footage requirements of this Ordinance for the zone in which it is located.

b.         It has a minimum width across front, side and rear elevations of 24 feet and complies in all respects with the Village building code, including minimum heights for habitable rooms.  Where a dwelling is required by law to comply with any federal or state standards or regulations for construction and where such standards or regulations for construction are different than those imposed by Village building code, then and in that event, such federal or state standard or regulation shall apply; further provided that the provisions of this section shall not have the effect of making one family dwellings, which exist as of the effective date of this Ordinance, nonconforming.

c.         It is firmly attached to a permanent foundation constructed on the site in accordance with the Village building code and shall have a wall of the same perimeter dimensions of the dwelling and constructed of such materials and type as required in the applicable building code for one-family dwellings.  In the event that the dwelling is a mobile home, as defined herein, such dwelling shall be installed pursuant to the manufacturer's setup instructions and shall be secured to the premises by an anchoring system or device complying with the rules and regulations of the Michigan Mobile Home Commission and shall have a perimeter wall as required.

d.         In the event that a dwelling is a mobile home as defined herein, each mobile home shall be installed with the wheels and towing mechanism removed.  Additionally, no dwelling shall have any exposed undercarriage or chassis.

e.         The dwelling contains a storage capability area in a basement located under the dwelling, in an attic area, in closet areas, or in a separate structure of standard construction equal to or of better quality than the principal dwelling, which storage area shall be equal to ten percent (10%) of the square footage of the dwelling or 100 square feet whichever shall be less.

f.          The dwelling is aesthetically compatible in design and appearance with other residences in the vicinity, with either a roof overhang of not less than six inches (6") on all sides, or alternatively with window sills or roof drainage systems concentrating roof drainage at collection points along the sides of the dwelling:  has not less than two (2) exterior doors with the second one being in either the rear or side of the dwelling; and contains steps connected to said exterior door areas or to porches connected to said door areas where a difference in elevation requires the same.

The compatibility of design and appearance shall be determined in the first instance by the Building Official upon review of the plans submitted for a particular dwelling subject to appeal by an aggrieved party to the Zoning Board of Appeals within a period of thirty (30) days from the receipt of notice of said Building Official's decision.  Any determination of compatibility shall be based upon the standards set forth in this definition of single family "dwelling" as well as the character, design and appearance of one or more residential dwellings to the extent of less than twenty percent (20%) of the lots situated within said area; or, where said area is not so developed, by the character, design and appearance of one or more residential dwellings located outside of mobile home parks throughout the Village.

g.         The dwelling contains no additions or rooms or other areas which are not constructed with a quality of workmanship equal to the original structure, including permanent attachments to the principal structure and construction of foundations as required herein.

h.         The dwelling complies with all pertinent building and fire codes.  In the case of a mobile home, all construction and all plumbing, electrical apparatus and insulation within and connected to said mobile home shall be of a type and quality conforming to the "Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards" as promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, being 24 CFR 3280, amended.  Additionally, all dwellings shall meet or exceed all applicable roof snow load and strength requirements.

i.          The foregoing standard shall not apply to a mobile home located in a licensed mobile home park except to the extent required by state or federal law or otherwise specifically required in the Ordinance of the Village pertaining to such parks. 

j.          All construction required herein shall be commenced only after a building permit has been obtained in accordance with the applicable building code provisions and requirements.

Dwelling, Multiple-Family:  A building, or a portion thereof, designed exclusively for occupancy by two (2) or more families living independently of each other.

Dumpster:  A container used for the temporary storage of rubbish, pending collection, having a capacity of at least two (2) cubic yards.

Essential Services:  The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments or commissions of underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, steam, or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal system including mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, wires, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, towers, poles, gas regulator stations, and other similar equipment and accessories connected therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal departments or commissions for the public health, safety and general welfare, but not including business or commercial buildings or activities, or commercial wireless communications facilities. {Ord. No. 191, 5-16-98}

Family:  Either:

a.         One or more persons related by blood, adoption or marriage, living and cooking together as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit, inclusive of household servants, or

b.         Two (2) to six (6) persons living and cooking together as a single non-profit housekeeping unit having a continuing nontransient domestic character though not related by blood, adoption or marriage.  This definition shall not include any society, club, coterie or organization which is not a recognized religious order nor does it include any group of individuals whose association is temporary or seasonal or similar to a resort, boarding house, motel, hotel, or whose association is for an anticipated limited duration or for a determinable period such as a school term or terms. {Ord. 252, 5-12-91}

Fence:  An unroofed manmade structure that extends more than 12 inches above grade designed as a barrier, ornamental or architectural feature intended for, or capable of, enclosing, inhibiting ingress or egress, dividing, bounding, or, simply making a line on a piece of land. {Ord. 292, 1-30-99}

Filling station:  Buildings or premises arranged or designated to be used for the retail sale of minor auto accessories, oil, gasoline or other fuel for the propulsion or lubrication of motor vehicles and which may include facilities for the changing and repair of tires, tube repairing, polishing, greasing, washing, or servicing and minor repair of such motor vehicles; but excluding so-called high speed automotive washing, steam cleaning, body repairing, bumping or painting.

Floor area, usable, nonresidential:  The measurement of usable floor area for nonresidential uses shall be to the exterior face of exterior walls of the first story and any other story connected by a fixed stairway or elevator, which may be made fit for human use;  the measurement shall include the floor area of all accessory buildings measured similarly, but excluding the floor area for heating and all other mechanical equipment, unenclosed porches, light shafts, public corridors and public toilets.  (see "Story and Building, accessory")

Floor area, usable, residential:  The measurement of usable floor area for residential uses shall be the sum of the area of the first story measured to the exterior face of the exterior wall; plus similarly measured, the area, having more than seven feet six inches (7'-6") headroom, of any upper story that is connected by a fixed stairway and which may be made usable for human habitation; but excluding the floor area of basements, accessory buildings, garages, attics, breezeways and unenclosed porches.  (see "Story and Building, accessory")

Garage community:  An accessory building for the storage of noncommercial vehicles and having no services or commodities offered to the public in connection therewith.  (see "Garage, private")

Garage, private:  An accessory building having not more than 720 square feet in area to be used for the storage of noncommercial vehicles, provided that not more than one commercial vehicle of no more than 10,000 pounds of gross vehicle weight may be stored in said private garage and there shall be no services or commodities offered to the public in connection therewith.  (see "Building, accessory")

Home Occupation:  An occupation conducted in a dwelling unit, provided that:

a.         No person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in such occupation;

b.         The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than 10 percent (10%) of the floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of home occupation;

c.         There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation other than one sign, not exceeding one square foot in area, nonilluminated, and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building;

d.         No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building;

e.         There shall be no sales in connection with such home occupation;

f.          No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard.

g.         No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in a single-family residence, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in other than a single-family residence.  In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.

h.         Clinics, hospitals, barber shops, beauty parlors, nursery schools, tourist homes, tea rooms, animal hospitals, kennels and millinery shops, among others, shall not be deemed to be home occupations.

Intermediate Thoroughfare:  A street whose function is to provide inter-community arterial continuity and feed major thoroughfares.  Intermediate Thoroughfares are those designated as such in the Circulation Plan of the current Village Master Plan.

Landscaping:  The treatment of the ground surface with live materials such as, but not limited to, grass, ground cover, trees, shrubs, vines and other growing horticultural material.  In addition, the combination or design may include other decorative surfacing such as wood chips, crushed stone, or mulch materials not to exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total for any landscape area.  Structural features such as fountains, pools, statues, and benches shall also be considered a part of landscaping but such objects alone shall not meet the requirements of landscaping.  In addition, artificial plant materials shall not be permitted in required landscape areas.

Local Street:  A street whose primary function is to serve the residential uses which abut it and provides a connection through collector streets to the thoroughfares.  All streets not specifically designated as a Major Thoroughfare, Intermediate Thoroughfare, or Collector Street in the Circulation Plan of the current Village Master Plan is considered to be a Local Street. {Ord. 252, 5-12-91}

 Lot:  A lot or record or parcel of land required to meet the regulations of this Ordinance that is occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal and accessory building or use.  (see "Lot of Record") 

Lot, corner:  A lot where the corner interior angle at the intersection of two streets is less than 135 degrees.  A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot for the purpose of this Ordinance, if tangents to the curve at the two points where the lot lines meet the curve form an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.  (see "Street" and "Lot")

Lot, interior:  Any lot other than a corner lot.  (see "Lot")

Lot line, front:  In the case of an interior lot, the line separating said lot from the street.  In the case of a corner or double frontage lot, the line separating said lot from the street which is designated as the front street in the request for a building permit.

Lot line, rear:  The lot boundary opposite and most distant from the front lot line.  In the case of a pointed or irregular lot, it shall be an imaginary line, parallel to and farthest from the front lot line, not less than ten (10) feet long and wholly within the lot.  (see "Lot")

Lot line, side:  A side lot line is any boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line.  (see "Lot line, front" and "Lot line, rear")

Lot of record:  A parcel of land delineated on a plat recorded with the Oakland County Register of Deeds, or a lot described by metes and bounds, and recorded with the Oakland County Register of Deeds.

Lot width:  The length of a straight line drawn between the points where the front setback cuts the side lot lines.  (see "setback")

Major Thoroughfare:  A multiple lane street whose primary function is to provide inter-county continuity and to feed regional major thoroughfares and freeways.  The only street designated as a Major Thoroughfare in the current Village Master Plan is Southfield Road.  {Ord. 252, 5-12-91}

Mobile Home:  A detached one family dwelling mass-produced in a factory designed for long-term residential use and built on a chassis.

Nonconforming building or use:  A legal building or legal use that does not conform with the regulations of this Ordinance (or amendments) for the Zone District in which it is located.

Nursing home:  An installation other than a hospital, having as its primary function the rendering of nursing care for extended periods of time to persons afflicted with illness, injury, or infirmity.

Occupancy, Change of:  The term "change of occupancy" shall mean a discontinuance of an existing use and the substitution therefore of a use of a different kind or class, or the expansion of a use.

Off-street parking space:  A space of 180 square feet of appropriate dimensions for the parking of an automobile, exclusive of access drives and aisles thereto.

Open space:  The area or yard, which is open, unoccupied, and unobstructed by any building roof from the ground to the sky, except as otherwise provided in the Ordinance, having as one dimension the required setback and other dimensions as indicated by the definitions of front, rear and side open space.  (see "Setback" and "Building")

Open space, front:  The opens space or yard, extending the width of the lot, and of a depth equal to the required setback measured horizontally at right angles to the front lot line or centerline of the front street.  (see "Lot" and "Open Space")

Open space, rear:  The open space or yard, extending the full width of the lot and of a depth equal to the required setback measured horizontally at right angles to the rear lot line.  (see "Lot" and "Open space")

Open space, side:  The open space or yard, extending from the front open space to the rear open space and of a width equal to the required side setback measured horizontally at right angles to the side lot line.  (see "Lot" and "Open Space")

Parcel:  A continuous area, tract, or acreage of land that has not been divided or subdivided according to the provisions of Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, MCL 560.101 et. seq. {Ord. 253, 5-12-91}

Parking area, total:  The actual parking area and the area of the access drives thereto.

Point of Observation:  The determination of the percentage of openness to air and light in fences shall be made from a specific point of observation.  The point of observation shall be a point ten feet away from the structure, perpendicular to the vertical surface of the structure and viewed from a height above grade that is equal to 50% percent of the structure's height. {Ord. 292, 1-30-99}

Privacy Screen:  Any unroofed manmade vertical structure intended and used as a visual barrier designed to inhibit observation of an area from off the lot. {Ord. 292, 1-30-99}

Recreational Vehicle:  "Recreational Vehicles" shall include the following: 

a.         Travel Trailer:  A portable vehicle on a chassis, not exceeding thirty-six (36) feet in length or nine (9) feet in width, which is designed to be used as a temporary dwelling during travel, recreational, and vacation uses, and which may be identified as a "Travel trailer" by the manufacturer.  Travel trailers generally contain sanitary, water, and electrical facilities.


b.         Pickup Camper:  A structure designed to be mounted on a pickup or truck chassis with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling during the process of travel, recreational, and vacation uses.

c.         Motor Home:  A recreational vehicle intended for temporary human habitation, sleeping and/or eating, mounted upon a chassis with wheels and capable of being moved from place to place under its own power.  Motor homes generally contain sanitary, water, and electrical facilities.

d.         Folding Tent Trailer:  A canvas folding structure, mounted on wheels and designed for travel and vacation use.

 

e.         Boats and Boat Trailers:  "Boats" and "boat trailers" shall include boats, floats, rafts, canoes, jet skis, plus the normal equipment to transport them on the highway.

f.          Other Recreational Equipment:  Other recreational equipment includes snowmobiles, all-terrain or special terrain vehicles, utility trailers, plus the normal equipment to transport them on the highway. {Ord. 252, 5-12-91}

Required Average Minimum Land Area:  The minimum average area of land required for each dwelling unit not including any area of public street right-of-way and not including any area of the right-of-way of a private street built to Village or County standards.

Residential area:  All residentially zoned or used (including R-M) land in the Village of Beverly Hills, including any public or private driveway, street, road, highway or its right-of-way to or within said land.

 Restaurants:

a.         Dining Room:  A structure which is maintained, operated and advertised or held out to the public as a place where food and beverage are served, and consumed, primarily within the structure.  Such food and beverage are served primarily in nondisposable (reusable by the restaurant) containers.

b.         Drive-In Restaurant:  A drive-in restaurant is any establishment where food, frozen dessert, and/or beverages are served to customers while seated in their motor vehicles upon the premises.  It shall also include any establishment where the customers may serve themselves and are permitted to consume food and beverages in a motor vehicle parked on the premises or at other facilities which are provided for the use of the patron for the purpose of consumption and which are located outside of the building or structures. 

c.         Fast Food Restaurant:  A structure which is maintained, operated, and advertised or held out to the public as a place where food, beverage, and/or desserts are served to customers from a serving counter in disposable (not reusable by restaurant) containers or wrappers.  Such food, beverage, and/or desserts may be consumed:  inside the building; outside, at facilities provided; or "carried out" for consumption off the premises.

d.         Carryout Restaurant:  A structure which is maintained, operated, and/or advertised or held out to the public as a place where food beverage, and/or desserts are served in disposable containers or wrappers from a serving counter for consumption exclusively off the premises.

Satellite Antenna:  An accessory structure which at its widest dimension is in excess of thirty-six inches (36"); an earth based station, the purpose of which is to receive signals from orbiting satellites and other extraterrestrial sources, together with other equipment related to such purposes.

Seats:  The seating capacity of a building is determined by the specifications and plans filed to obtain a building permit.  In the event individual seats are not provided, each eighteen inches (18") of benches or similar seating accommodations spaced thirty-two inches (32") from back to back, shall be considered as one seat.

Setback:  That distance set forth on the Schedule of Regulations, between any lot line and a line parallel thereto on the same lot except as otherwise provided herein.  (see "Lot line" and "Building")

Sidewalk:  Pedestrian or nonmotorized vehicular circulation routes built according to the standards of the Village or other agency with right-of-way jurisdiction, as applicable.

Story:  That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor, and the upper surface of any floor above; or any portion of a building between the topmost floor and the roof having a usable floor area to at least fifty percent (50%) of the usable floor area of the floor immediately below it.  A top floor area under a sloping roof with less than fifty percent (50%) of the usable floor area is a half story.  The first story shall be considered the lowest story of which the ceiling is more than 4 feet (4') above the average contact ground level at the exterior walls of the building.  (see "Building height")

Street:  Any public or private thoroughfare or way, other than a public alley, dedicated to or designed for the use of the public or open to public travel, whether designated as a road, avenue, highway, boulevard, drive, lane, circle, place, court, terrace, or any similar designations.

Street Private:  A vehicular circulation route which has not been accepted for maintenance by the Village or County.

Street, Public:  A vehicular circulation route, the right-of-way and improvements of which meet Village or County standards and have been accepted for maintenance by the Village or County.

Structure:  Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachments to something having location on the ground.

Structure, accessory:  A structure, or portion thereof, which is supplemental or subordinate to the main building or to the use of the land.  Examples of accessory structures include a gazebo, childrens playhouse or play equipment, and recreational structures such as a pool or tennis court.  {Ord. 328, 5-2-09}

This Ordinance:  This Chapter of the Beverly Hills Municipal Code.

Use, accessory, or accessory:  A use or building which is clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with, and (except in some cases of accessory off-street parking spaces or loading) located on the same zoning lot as the principal use to which it is related.  In cases of questions arising as to degree of incidentalness or length of custom the Zoning Board of Appeals shall rule.  When "accessory" is used in this Ordinance, it shall have the same meaning as accessory use.

An accessory use includes, but is not limited to, the following:

a.         Residential accommodations for servants or caretakers.

b.         Swimming pools and tennis courts, for the use of occupants of a residence, or their guests.

c.         Domestic greenhouses or gardening related storage in a barn, shed, tool shed, or similar accessory building or other structure.

d.         A newsstand primarily for the convenience of the occupants of a building, which is located wholly within such building and has no signs or displays on the exterior of the building.

e.         Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock in connection with a business use, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable district regulations.

f.          Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, subject to the accessory off-street parking regulations for the district in which the lot is located.

g.         Uses clearly incidental to a main use such as, but not limited to offices of business complex located on the site.

h.         Accessory off-street loading, subject to the off-street loading regulations for the district in which the lot is located.

i.          Accessory signs, subject to the sign regulations for the district in which the lot is located.

j.          Satellite antenna structures as defined and regulated herein.  

Use, principal: The primary and chief purpose for which a lot is used.  (see "Use, accessory," "Building, principal," "Building, accessory," and "Lot")

Change of Use:  A change, conversion, replacement, addition, addition of a principal use, or substitution of one use for another, which in the judgment of the Village Manager, will create or continue any of the following:

a.         The reoccupancy of all or part of a building or site which has been unoccupied for longer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days.

b.         Site conditions which do not comply with the Zoning Ordinance standards for the district in which the use is located.

c.         Vehicular or pedestrian traffic problems or off-street parking problems.

d.         Disruption of the natural environment.

e.     Adverse impacts of noise, odor, glare, dust, radiation, heat, vibration, toxic or hazardous materials, smoke, erosion or flooding on adjacent lots.

f.          Site engineering deficiencies.

g.         Negative impacts on the public health, safety or welfare.

For changes of use which require a site plan, the Planning Board may permit a modified site plan, with specific information pertaining to the conditions under review, only, rather than all of the information required under Section 22.08.290(d).

Wall:  Any unroofed man-made structure which has a foundation and also has an exterior vertical surface of brick or stone, and no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the vertical surface of which is open to the free passage of air and light.

Work station:  That area to which a barber, stylist, beauty operator, manicurist, shampoo attendant or other regular employee is assigned to serve customers.

22.08 GENERAL PROVISIONS
22.08 GENERAL PROVISIONS.

22.08.010 CLASSIFICATION OF ANNEXED AREAS. All territory annexed to the Village of Beverly Hills shall automatically be classified R-1 Single Family Residential Zone District.

22.08.020 ZONING OF VACATED STREETS. Whenever any street, alley or other public way shall be vacated, such street, alley or other public way or portion thereof shall automatically be classified in the same Zone District as the property to which it attaches.

22.08.030 USE REGULATIONS. Except as otherwise provided herein, regulations governing land and building use are hereby established as shown on the Schedule of Regulations, Section 22.24. Uses permitted in each district after special approval shall be permitted only in accordance with Section 22.08.300.

22.08.040 GENERAL AREA, HEIGHT, ETC. REGULATIONS. Except as otherwise provided herein, regulations governing the minimum lot width, lot area per dwelling unit, required open spaces, height of buildings and other pertinent factors are as shown on the Schedule of Regulations, Section 22.24.

22.08.050 LAND REQUIRED TO SATISFY REGULATIONS. No portion of a lot used in or necessary for compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance shall through sale or otherwise again be used to satisfy the zoning requirements of another lot.

22.08.060 EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT LIMITS.

a. The height limits of this Ordinance may be modified by the Zoning Board of Appeals in its application to radio transmitting and receiving or television antennae, chimneys or flagpoles, church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, water towers, observation towers, power transmission towers, radio towers, masts, aerials, smokestacks, ventilators, skylights, derricks, conveyors, cooling towers, and other similar and necessary mechanical appurtenance pertaining to the permitted uses of the Zone Districts in which they are located.

b. The maximum height set forth in the Schedule of Regulations shall not apply to radio transmitting or television antennae that do not exceed the maximum permitted height of the building by more than ten feet (10').

22.08.070 CORNER LOT SETBACK ON THE SIDE STREET IN RESIDENTIAL ZONE DISTRICTS. Every corner lot in any residential Zone District which has on its side street an abutting interior residential lot, shall have a minimum setback from the side street equal to the minimum front setback for the Zone District in which such building is located; provided that this requirement shall not reduce the buildable width of any lot to less than thirty feet (30'). Where there is no abutting interior residential lot on said side street, the minimum side street setback shall be fifteen feet (15') for the permitted principal building and twenty feet (20') for permitted accessory buildings.

22.08.080 OBSTRUCTIONS TO VISION ON CORNER LOTS. On any corner lot in any Zone District, no wall, fence or other structure or any hedge, shrub or other growth shall be maintained at a height that would obscure vision of drivers properly using the street. {Ord. 292, 1-30-99}

22.08.090 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS. In Single Family Residential Zone Districts R-A, R-1, R-1A, R-2, and R-3 the minimum required distance between residential buildings on two (2) lots which abut each other along a common side lot line shall be not less than the sum of the two (2) required minimum side setbacks of either of the lots; provided, however, that when the lot to which the ordinance is being applied is less than sixty feet (60') in width, the minimum required distance between such residential buildings may be reduced by six inches (6") for every foot that the lot is less than sixty feet (60') in width. In Single Family Residential Zone Districts R-2A and R-2B the minimum required distance between residential buildings on two (2) lots which abut each other along a common side lot line shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. {Ord 366, 7-20-19)

22.08.100 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES IN RESIDENTIAL ZONE DISTRICTS.

a. Attached accessory buildings shall be subject to the same setback and height requirements as principal buildings for the district in which they are located.

b. No detached accessory buildings, structures, or uses shall be erected in the front or required side open space or within permanent easements.

c. Detached accessory buildings or structures may occupy a portion of the rear open space and shall be at least five feet (5') from all adjoining lot lines and shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') in building height, except as otherwise provided herein.

d. On corner lots where a rear open space abuts a side open space, detached accessory buildings on the corner lot shall have a minimum setback from the rear lot line a distance equal to the least side setback required for the lot abutting the corner lot.

e. No more than two accessory buildings shall be located on a single-family residential lot.

f. The total floor area of all accessory buildings shall not be greater than fifty percent (50%) of the usable floor area of the principal building, except that a minimum of five hundred (500) square feet is permitted by right where this requirement would result in a lesser area.

g. Garage doors facing the street shall not exceed a total length of 24 feet in
cummulative total and shall not exceed a height of 9 feet.

h. Accessory buildings intended as garages are to be used for the storage of
noncommercial vehicles, except that no more than one commercial vehicle
of up to 10,000 pounds of gross vehicle weight may also be stored.

i. Accessory buildings shall be designed so that no exterior wall length is greater than two-times the length of any other exterior wall of that accessory building, unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board upon a finding of no adverse impact to the surrounding neighborhood. {Ord. 328, 5-2-09}

22.08.120 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS IN P, 0-1 AND B ZONE DISTRICTS. No accessory building shall be erected in the front open space.

22.08.140 GRADES AND ELEVATION DIFFERENTIALS.

a. The grading of all building lots shall be such to (1) divert water away from buildings, and (2) prevent standing water and soil saturation detrimental to structures and lot use and surrounding property.

b. The elevation differentials is defined as the difference between the elevation of the final ground level (after landscaping at the front building line, equidistant from the side building lines, and the elevations of the crown of the road (at a point equidistant from the side building lines) abutting the front property line. If a sidewalk is in place, the elevation differential shall be based on the sidewalk elevation in lieu of the crown of road elevation.

c. The elevation differential for all buildings shall not be less than fifteen inches (15") nor more than twenty-four inches (24") except as hereinafter provided. A building under construction having foundations in place shall be considered an existing building.

d. All applicants for building permits shall submit with the permit application, plans showing:

1. The proposed grading plan for the entire lot.

2. The direction of flow of surface water off the lot.

3. The gradient of all protective slopes around proposed buildings.

4. The elevation differential of all proposed buildings and the elevation differential of all existing buildings within one hundred feet (100').

e. Variances may be granted from the requirement of subsection (c) by the Zoning Board of Appeals if adequate provisions are made and approved by the Village Engineers to prevent run off water from flowing onto adjacent property.

22.08.150 FENCE, WALL, AND PRIVACY SCREEN REGULATIONS.
Purpose and intent: It is hereby determined that regulation of the location, size, placement and certain features of fences, walls, and privacy screens is necessary to enable property owners to provide physical boundaries and privacy on private property without difficulty and confusion, to promote traffic safety, and safeguard public health and welfare.

Fences, walls, and privacy screens are permitted subject to the following:

A. General Requirements:

1. Permit. No fence, wall or privacy screen shall be erected, replaced or altered by more than 25% of the vertical area of any side until a permit has been issued. An application for a permit shall be filed with the Building Official, accompanied by a fee as set forth in the Village's permit fee schedule and with sufficient information to determine that the proposed structure meets the requirements of this ordinance, including drawings or sketches showing at least the following:

a. Location of the fence, wall or privacy screen in relation to lot lines, principal building, other structures, driveways, sidewalks, bikeways, roadways, rights-of-way and easements within 25 feet of the proposed location.
b. Dimensions and design or style of the fence, wall, or privacy screen including any variations by location.
c. In the event that lot lines for the subject property cannot be located to the satisfaction of the Building Official, the Building Official may require the applicant to establish lot lines on the property located by a licensed surveyor.
d.  If a permit is issued it shall contain language indicating the village permit does not relieve the applicant of compliance with the Homeowners Association regulations or deed restrictions if applicable. 

2. Materials. Fences, walls and privacy screens shall be constructed of high quality, durable materials including brick, natural stone, vinyl with matte finish, treated wood or metal (such as wrought iron or painted aluminum). The use of razor wire, barbed wire, protruding spikes, nails, or any sharp point that could pose a hazard to person or animal, or elements that carry electricity are not permitted. Chain link, wire mesh, and similar materials are only permitted for fences in rear yards, but are not permitted to have wood, plastic, or other material inserts. Fences, walls, and privacy screens must be substantially similar in material, color, and style.

3. Location. Any fence, wall, or privacy screen shall be located entirely inside and shall not project beyond the perimeter of the private property of the person constructing it. A fence, wall, or privacy screen may not be attached to, or touch, a fence, wall, or privacy screen located on another lot without the written consent of both owners. In every case, fences, walls, and privacy screens must be designed and constructed as a stand-alone structure. Any existing perimeter fencing, wall, or privacy screen must be removed prior to installation of new fencing, wall, or privacy screens at that lot line. In the event the existing fence, wall, or privacy screen is on the neighboring property, a four (4) inch gap between the established grade and bottom of the fence or privacy screen is required to allow the maintenance of grasses and/or weeds between the structures.

4. Height. The vertical dimension of any fence, wall, gate or column shall be measured from the lowest finished grade on both sides of any such fence, wall, gate or column to any point on top of the fence, wall, gate or column, including any ornamental features.

5. Orientation of Finished Appearance. When one side of the fence or wall has a more finished appearance than the other, the side with the more finished appearance shall face the exterior of the lot.

6. Obstruction. No fence, wall, or privacy screen shall be erected where it would unreasonably obstruct the continued use of, or safe access to any abutting property. Fences, walls or privacy screens located adjacent to a driveway or a street corner shall be designed not to obscure the vision of drivers properly using the street.

7. Maintenance. Fences, walls and privacy screens shall be constructed in accordance with the adopted Michigan Building Code/Michigan Residential Code and shall be maintained in good condition. Surfaces shall be painted, stained, or constructed of decay resistant materials to protect and preserve the safety and appearance of the structure. If a fence, wall, or privacy screen is found to be in need of repair by the Building Official, the Building Official shall issue orders to the owner to complete the repair. Failure to comply with written notice from the Building Official ordering completion of the repairs shall constitute a violation of this ordinance. If more than 25% of the area of any side of a fence, wall or privacy screen requires reconstruction in any 12 month period, the entire fence, wall or privacy screen shall be brought into compliance with this ordinance.

8. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the definition of yard locations is as follows:
a. Front Yard: The full width of the lot enclosing the area bounded by the front lot line, the side lot lines, and the front building line.
b. Rear Yard: The full width of the lot enclosing the area bounded by the rear lot line, the side lot lines, and the rear building line.
c. Side Yard: The area on both sides of the principal structure on a lot which is bounded by the side lot lines, the rear building line, and the front building line.

22.08.150 Fence Image c


B. Requirements in Single Family Residential Districts:

1. Fences: Fences with a vertical surface area that is at least 35% open to air and light are permitted subject to the following:

a. Front Yard: A fence in the front yard shall not exceed three (3) feet in height above grade and shall not extend back toward the front of the principal building more than eight feet, except as provided for in {b} below.
b. Side Yard: A fence in a side yard that abuts a road or street shall not exceed four (4) feet in height above grade. Fences are not permitted in side yards that do not abut roads or streets except as provided for in {c} below.

22.08.150 Fence Image B b

c. Rear Yard: A fence in a rear yard shall not exceed four (4) feet in height above grade and shall not extend toward the front of the lot farther than the rear of the house, except a fence may extend into the side yard only to enclose the side door entrance.

22.08.150 Fence Image B c

2. Fences: Fences up to six (6) feet in height and/or up to 100% solid vertical surface area are permitted subject to Administrative or Planning Commission approval as follows.

a. Approval Standards:
Applicant must demonstrate that at least one of the following conditions is met for Administrative approval. Administration has the discretion to require review by the Planning Commission when there is a question of interpretation for consistency with the intent of this ordinance.

 Spacing between residences is less than that required by Section 22.08.090 or 22.24 of the Zoning Ordinance, whichever is applicable.
 The subject site is adjacent to a non-single family residential land use or Zone District or single family cluster development.
 The subject site cannot support vegetative screening in lieu of the proposed fencing.  The applicant shall provide supporting documentation of this from a licensed landscape architect or certified arborist.
 At least one residential parcel within 200 of the subject site on that side of the street in that block or at least one abutting residential parcel contains permitted fencing of similar height and/or opacity. To document this, the applicant shall prepare a neighborhood lot study that includes a map of the study area and photograph(s) of existing fencing. An existing privacy screen as allowed in Section 3 Privacy Screens shall not be used as consideration for compliance with this standard.

In the event applicant does not meet any above criteria, applicant must demonstrate that at least one of the following conditions is met for Planning Commission approval. The property owner or occupant of any parcel(s) abutting the subject site shall be given fifteen (15) day notification of the date and time of the meeting at which the request shall be reviewed.

 The subject site and/or an abutting parcel has an unconventional lot, yard and/or dwelling orientation (i.e., side yard adjacent to rear yard, pie-shaped lot adjacent to rectangular lot, or those with multiple parcels contiguous to a single lot line).
 Installation of such fencing would mitigate an essential safety and/or privacy concern.

In addition to condition(s) above, applicant must demonstrate that all of the following conditions are met:

 The size, height and location of the fence does not endanger the public safety.
 The size, location, height, design, and materials of the fence are aesthetically in harmony with the property on which it is located.
 The proposed removal of vegetation and trees and disturbance to natural terrain has been minimized.
 The size, height, design, and location of the fence does not create a traffic or pedestrian hazard.

b. Front Yard: A fence higher than 3 feet above grade and/or less than 35% open to air/light is not permitted in the front yard.

c. Side Yard: A fence higher than 4 feet above grade in a side yard that abuts a road or street shall comply with accessory building setback requirements as described in Section 22.08.070. Fences are not permitted in side yards that do not abut roads or streets except as provided for in {d} below.

d. Rear Yard: A fence in a rear yard shall not extend toward the front of the lot farther than the rear of the house, except a fence may extend into the side yard only to enclose the side door entrance.

22.08.150 Fence Image B d

e. Support Posts: Vertical support posts may extend up to six inches above the allowable fence height.

3. Privacy Screens: Privacy screens that do not exceed six feet in height above grade are permitted as follows:

a. Properties in all single family residential zone districts may erect a privacy screen in the rear or side yard to enclose an area on up to three sides, with a maximum total length that does not exceed 25% of the rear lot line length.

b. Properties where the rear yard abuts Southfield Road, Greenfield Road, or Thirteen Mile Road may erect a privacy screen along the perimeter of the rear yard that abuts these roads and may extend the privacy screen into the side yard only to enclose a side door entrance.

22.08.150 Fence Image 3 B

4. Walls: Walls may be used instead of a fence, provided the total height above grade does not exceed three (3) feet.

C. Amortization of Noncompliant Fences.

1. Any existing fences that are greater than 4 feet above grade and/or do not meet requirements for openness to air and light which have not received a permit or variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be removed or brought into compliance with ordinance requirements by the 1st day of January 2019.

D. Fences, walls, or privacy screens are required in non-single family residential zones for the enclosing of areas of outside storage of goods, material or equipment and shall not be less than six feet and not greater than seven feet in height above grade.

E. Fences that enclose public or institutional playgrounds shall not exceed seven feet in height above grade and shall not obstruct vision to an extent greater than 25% of their total areas. Any fences or similar structures that enclose all or part of a public or institutional playground, athletic field, or similar use greater than seven feet in height above grade shall require Planning Commission approval.

F. Construction Fences. Refer to paragraph b (3) from Section 22.08.280 Regulation of Nuisance Activities. {Ord. 292, 1-30-99}{Ord. 362, 7-17-18}

22.08.160 WALL REQUIRED ON NONRESIDENTIAL ZONED OR USED PROPERTY ABUTTING PUBLIC OR RESIDENTIAL ZONED OR USED LOTS.

Control bumpers, setbacks and appropriate landscaping are required for off-street parking areas that abut a street, alley, Public Property or Residential Zone District. Lots that are utilized for nonresidential purposes shall provide and maintain buffer screening and/or a wall as determined by the Village Council. When a wall is required it shall comply with the following regulations:

a. Side: Where the side lot line of property utilized for nonresidential purposes abuts Public Property or a Residential Zone District in the same block, a wall shall be provided at a height of six feet above the parking area surface grade along the side lot line; provided the wall shall be reduced in height to three feet above grade within 25 feet of any right of way. This provision shall not apply to those portions of property along the side lot line that are occupied by a wall of permitted buildings.

b. Rear: Where the rear lot line of property utilized for nonresidential purposes abuts Public Property or a Residential Zone District in the same block and there is no alley, a wall shall be provided at a height of six feet above the parking area surface grade along the rear lot line; provided that the wall shall be reduced in height to three feet above grade within 25 feet of any right of way. In the case where the rear lot line of property utilized for nonresidential purposes abuts Public Property or a Residential Zone District in the same block across an alley, a wall shall be provided at a height of six feet along the rear lot line. This provision shall not apply to those portions of the rear lot line abutting an alley that is occupied by a wall of permitted buildings. {Ord. 292, 1-30-99}

22.08.170 PUBLIC OR PRIVATE ROAD FRONTAGE FOR RESIDENTIAL
PROPERTY. No residential building shall be erected on a lot, unless the lot abuts for a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet upon a public road or a private road that complies with all Village ordinances. Residential buildings may be permitted on a lot abutting a permanent access easement to a public road only if all of the following conditions are met:

a. The lot abuts the permanent unobstructed access easement for at least 25 feet.

b. The lot was created prior to March 25, 1992.

c. The permanent unobstructed access easement was recorded prior to March 25, 1992.

d. The permanent unobstructed access easement does not violate any ordinances of the Village.

e. Such building shall not be permitted nearer to such easement line than to the street line. Such street or easement shall not reduce the side yard open space of an existing residential building to less than eight (8) feet or reduce the rear open space to less than twenty (20) feet. {Ord. 256, 3-25-92}

22.08.180 DWELLING IN ACCESSORY BUILDING PROHIBITED. In all Zoning Districts, residential occupancy of any accessory building is expressly prohibited.

22.08.190 ESSENTIAL SERVICES. Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and other ordinances of the Village of Beverly Hills, it being the intention hereof to exempt such essential services from the application of this Ordinance, except that all above-grade buildings hereunder shall be subject to site plan review in accordance with Section 22.08.290.

22.08.200 SALES OF CHRISTMAS TREES.

a. Other provisions of this Ordinance notwithstanding, Christmas trees may be stored, displayed and sold without the use of a building or structure:

1. By any person on property within any P, 0-1 or B Business Zone District.

2. By churches, schools, or other nonprofit organizations on property owned by such institutions or organizations in any Zone District.

b. All trees, parts of trees, and any other refuse or debris resulting from aforementioned use, and all signs in connection therewith shall be removed from said property no later than the 26th day of December of the year the property is so used.

22.08.210 AUTOMOTIVE TRAILER CAMPS OR TOURIST CABINS PROHIBITED. No automotive trailer camps or tourist cabins shall be established, and automobile trailers, similar portable dwellings or tents shall not be permitted to be used or occupied as dwellings.

22.08.220 TEMPORARY AND PORTABLE BUILDINGS, USES AND STRUCTURES. The Zoning Board of Appeals may permit temporary buildings, structures, and uses for a period not to exceed six (6) months provided that all requirements and conditions relative to the type of structure and use, and timing and arrangements for termination and removal, are met. The Board of Appeals may require safeguards related to setbacks, screening, off-street parking considered necessary to protect the health, safety, welfare and comfort of inhabitants of the Village. Further, the Zoning Board of Appeals may require site plan approval and performance guarantee as conditions of approval. Trucks, truck trailers, vans or other passenger vehicles shall not be used for storage, warehousing, retail sales or service or offices.

Temporary and portable structures are permitted without Village approval when all of the following conditions below are met. Additionally, trucks, trailers, vans or other passenger vehicles shall not be used as a temporary and portable structure for storage, warehousing, offices, retail sales or service.

1. No more than one (1) such container may be used per property at any given time.

2. Such containers must be placed on a paved driveway surface of an occupied lot and shall not be located in an easement or right-of-way. Containers may be located on an unpaved surface for a period of not more than forty-eight (48) hours within the 14 days allowed in paragraph three below.

3. The maximum duration for use of such containers shall be fourteen (14) days within any six (6) consecutive months. A property owner may seek approval from the Village Administration for a longer duration.

4. If a longer duration is sought, the Village may require safeguards related to setbacks, screening, and off-street parking considered necessary to protect the health, safety, welfare and comfort of the inhabitants of the Village. The Village may require site plan approval and a performance guarantee as conditions of approval. {Ord. 347; 9-28-13}{Ord. 355; 11-28-15}

22.08.230 STORAGE OF OBNOXIOUS MATTER IN OPEN CONTAINERS PROHIBITED.
No compost heaps, garbage, filth, refuse or other obnoxious matter shall be kept in open containers, piled or laid on the open ground; and all containers shall be stored in such a way so as not be visible from any street.

22.08.240 TOPSOIL REMOVAL. The use of land for the removal of topsoil, sand, gravel or other material from the land is not permitted in any Zone District except under a Temporary Certificate from the Building Inspector after approval of the Village Council that such removal of material will not be below the normal grade as established from the nearest existing or proposed street, when such building grade has been established and approved by the Building Inspector and for which a Temporary Certificate may be issued in appropriate cases upon the filing of an application, accompanied by a suitable agreement or bond under Section 22.08.310 that such removal will not cause stagnant water or collect or leave the surface of the land at the expiration date of such permit, in an unsuitable condition or unfit for the growing of turf or for other land uses permitted in the Zone District in which the removal occurs. This regulation shall not prohibit the normal removal of soil for the construction of an approved building or structure when such plans have been approved by the Building Inspector, and a building permit has been issued for said building development.

22.08.250 STORAGE OR DUMPING ON OPEN LAND PROHIBITED. The use of open land for the open storage or collection or accumulation of lumber or man-made materials, or for the dumping or disposal of scrap metal, junk, parts of automobiles, trucks, and boats, tires, garbage, rubbish, or other refuse or of ashes, slag or other wastes or by-products shall not be permitted in any Zone District.

22.08.260 GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS PERMITTED. The Village of Beverly Hills shall have the right to construct and maintain within the Village any building or structure required for the performance of its governmental or proprietary functions; provided that such building, structure or function shall conform to the regulations of the Zone District in which it is located and of this Ordinance, and be constructed so as to conform with the surrounding uses in so far as possible.

22.08.270 EASEMENTS. It shall be unlawful for any person to install erect or cause or permit the installation of a permanent structure (garage, building or large tree) on or across an easement of record which will prevent or interfere with the free right or opportunity to use or make accessible such easement for its proper use. Where public utilities now exist, a six foot (6') easement shall be maintained.

22.08.280 REGULATION OF NUISANCE ACTIVITIES.
a. No activity or use shall be permitted on any property which by reason of the emission of odor, fumes, smoke, vibration, noise or disposal of waste is deleterious to other permitted activities in the Zone District or if obnoxious or offensive to uses permitted in neighboring Zone Districts.

b. All properties shall be in compliance with the Building Department Construction Site Maintenance Requirements while under a valid permit for construction. {Ord. 358; 4-15-17} {Ord. 368; 7-16-19}

22.08.290 SITE PLAN REVIEW.

a. Statement of Purpose. The purpose of site plan review is to provide for consultation and cooperation between the land developer and the Village Council in order to accomplish the developer's land utilization objectives in harmony with the existing and prospective use and development of adjacent properties. It shall be the further purpose of this section to insure that each proposed use and its components, appearance, and function is in compliance with this Ordinance, other Village Ordinances and State and Federal statutes. Further purposes of site plan approval shall include: privacy, efficiency for the public and local government servicing, preservation of the natural landscape, emergency access, effective drainage, vehicular and pedestrian safety and conveniences, control of temporary flooding, preventing stagnant water and ponding in intensively used areas; prevention of air, water and noise pollution; limitation of obnoxious odors, reduction of glare; exposure of toxic particles, substances and wastes. The following approvals, required information, procedures and standards shall be adhered to, to accomplish these purposes.

b. Approval by Village Council Required. In each zoning district, a site plan shall be reviewed for any use other than a principal one family residential use and related accessory uses. No development which would, if approved, provide for more than one principal use on a parcel (such as a single family site condominium) shall be undertaken, no building shall be erected, moved, relocated, converted or structurally altered and no change or addition of use, expansion or decreasing of off-street parking, or filling, excavation, or grading shall be undertaken until the Village Council has reviewed and approved a site plan for such use. A structural alteration shall be defined as one that changes the location of the exterior walls and/or the area of the building. Filling, grading, or excavation which causes more than five (5) cubic yards of earth material to be disturbed shall require site plan approval. {Ord. 253, 5-12-91}

c. Application for Site Plan Approval. Application for site plan review shall be made to the Village by filing of not less than twenty-five (25) copies of the detailed site plan with the office of the Village Manager at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the regularly scheduled Village Council meeting at which the plan is to be first considered. Fees are required to be paid within the fee schedule in effect as established by the Council at time application is made.

The Village Manager shall examine the site plan to determine that it contains all the necessary information. If it is incomplete, it shall be returned to the applicant owner. If complete and if it appears to comply with the Zoning Ordinance it shall be processed in accordance with this Ordinance.

d. Required Information. The following required information shall be included on all site plans:

1. Name of development and general location sketch.

2. Name, address and phone number of owner(s), developer and designer. Date drawn and revision dates shall be indicated on the site plan.

3. The seal of one of the following professionals registered in the State of Michigan: Registered Architect, Registered Civil Engineer, Registered Landscape Architect, or Registered Professional Community Planner. The architectural plans of the buildings shall be prepared by and bear the seal of a Registered Architect. A site plan for an alteration or addition to existing structures may be prepared by the builder or contractor.

4. A legal description and address of the property in question.

5. Boundary dimensions (to the nearest foot) of the property clearly indicated on the site plan, differentiated from other contiguous property.

6. Existing zoning classification of the parcel.

7. Adjacent land uses and zoning, and if the parcel is a part of a larger parcel, boundaries of total land holding.

8. To facilitate determination of off-street parking needs and similar matters, the applicant shall indicate the name and nature of the establishments proposed to occupy the buildings if this has been determined, and should indicate cases where exact occupancy has not yet been determined.

9. All plans shall include a north arrow and scale. The scale of the site plan shall be not less than 1" = 20' if the subject property is less than 3 acres, and 1" = 100' if three acres or more.

10. The area of the site in square feet and acres excluding all existing and proposed public right-of-way.

11. The dimensions of all lots and property lines, showing the relationship of the subject property to abutting properties and all required minimum setbacks from the existing or proposed right-of-way and from adjacent properties.

12. The location and dimension of all existing and proposed structures on the subject property and all existing structures within one hundred feet (100') of the subject property.

13. The location and right-of-way widths of all abutting streets and alleys, and driveway locations across abutting public streets.

14. Traffic and pedestrian circulation patterns, both within the site and on the public streets adjacent to the site and the proposed location and dimensions of any required pedestrian sidewalks.

15. Parking lots including layout and typical dimensions of parking spaces, number of spaces provided (including how computed, per ordinance requirements) and type of surfacing. (If carports, so designate).

16. Existing ground elevations on the site of an appropriate grid or contours, including existing ground elevations of adjacent land within one hundred feet (100') of the subject property and existing building, drive and/or parking lot elevations or any adjacent unusual surface conditions.

17. Proposed finish grade of buildings, driveways, walkways, parking lots and lawned areas.

18. With residential proposals a site summary indicating the number and location of one bedroom units, two bedroom units, etc., typical floor plans with the square feet of floor areas; density computation, recreation facilities, open spaces, street names and lot coverage.

19. With nonresidential proposals, the number of offices, number of employees, the number of floors and typical floor plans and cross sections.

20. Proposed sanitary sewer facilities and location of all existing utilities, easements, vacations and the general placement of lines, manholes, tap-ins, pump stations, and lift stations.

21. Proposed storm sewer facilities (sewers and appurtenances) including outlets (enclosed or open ditches) and proposed methods of storm water retention on site, if any.

22. Sufficient off-site drainage basin data and estimated runoff in cubic feet per second to permit review of any proposed retention of off-site drainage swale.

23. Proposed water service including any proposed tap-ins, main extensions or extensions for adequate fire hydrant spacing, and/or considerations for extensions to loop other public water mains in adjacent public rights-of-way.

24. Locations of existing and proposed fire hydrants with reasonable access thereto for fire fighting, police and other emergency equipment.

25. Location and typical dimensions of rubbish storage areas and screening construction.

26. Elevations of proposed buildings and proposed type of building materials, roof design, projections, canopies and overhangs, screen walls and accessory buildings, and any other outdoor mechanical equipment, such as: air conditioning, heating units and transformers that will be visible from the exterior.

27. Required easements for public right-of-way, utilities, access and shared access.

28. Notation of any variances which have been secured.

29. Performance guarantees to be provided, amounts, type and length of time.

30. Soil erosions and sedimentation control measures.

31. Detailed landscaping plan indicating location, types and sizes of material, a maintenance plan and schedule for pruning, mowing, watering, fertilizing, and replacement of dead and diseased materials. Cross section of berms shall be provided.

32. Location of all existing trees over three inches (3") in diameter.

33. The dimensions and locations of all signs, free-standing signs and lighting structures and shielding.

34. Types of soils; locations of flood plain and wetland, if any.

35. All proposed screen and free standing architectural walls, including typical cross-sections and the height above ground on both sides.

36. The location of any outdoor storage of material(s) and the manner in which it shall be screened or covered.

37. Information and special data which may be critical to the adequate review of the proposed use and its impacts on the site or Village. Such data requirements may include traffic studies, market analysis, environmental assessments (including inventory and impact data on flora, fauna, natural resources, hazardous materials, erosion control and pollution), demands on public facilities and services and estimates of potential costs to the Village due to failures as a basis for performance guarantees.

38. Information and statement of how applicant proposes to comply with State, Local and Federal laws, as applicable to this site or use.

39. The names of any Village officials or employees who will benefit financially from the approval of the site plan shall be disclosed.

40. Other data which the Village may reasonably deem necessary for adequate review.

e. Criteria for Approval of Site Plans. The following criteria shall be used by the Planning Board and Village Council as a basis upon which site plans will be reviewed and approved.

The Village shall adhere to sound planning principles, yet may allow for design flexibility in the administration of the following standards:

1. All elements of the site shall be harmoniously and efficiently designed in relation to the topography, size, and type of land, and the character of the adjacent properties and the proposed use. The site will be developed so as not to impede the normal and orderly development or improvement of surrounding properties for uses permitted on such property.

2. The site plan shall comply with the district requirements for minimum floor space, height of building, lot size, open space, density and all other requirements as set forth in The Schedule of Regulations unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance.

3. The existing natural landscape shall be preserved in its natural state as much as possible, by minimizing tree and soil removal and by topographic modifications that result in maximum harmony with adjacent properties.

4. There shall be reasonable visual and sound privacy. Fences, walls, barriers, and landscaping shall be used, as appropriate, for the protection and enhancement of property and the safety and privacy of occupants and users.

5. All buildings or groups of buildings shall be so arranged as to permit convenient and direct emergency vehicle access.

6. Where possible and practical, drainage design shall recognize existing natural drainage patterns.

7. There shall be a pedestrian circulation system that is insulated as completely as possible from the vehicular circulation system. In order to insure public safety, pedestrian underpasses or overpasses may be required in the vicinity of schools, playgrounds, local shopping facilities, and other uses that generate considerable amounts of pedestrian movement.

8. The arrangement of public or common ways for vehicular and pedestrian circulation shall respect the pattern of existing or planned streets or pedestrian or bicycle pathways in the vicinity of the site. Streets and drives that are a part of an existing or planned street system serving adjacent developments shall be of an appropriate width to the volume of traffic they are planned to carry and shall have a dedicated right-of-way equal to that specified in a Village recognized source of reference. The applicant may be required to dedicate adequate land and improvements to the Village in order to achieve access which is safe and convenient.

9. Appropriate measures shall be taken to insure that the removal of surface waters will not adversely affect adjoining properties or the capacity of the public or natural storm drainage system. Provisions shall be made for a feasible storm drainage system, the construction of storm water facilities, and the prevention of erosion and dust. Surface water on all paved areas shall be collected at intervals so that it will not obstruct the flow of vehicles or pedestrian traffic and will not create nuisance ponding in paved areas. Final grades may be required to conform to existing and future grades of adjacent properties.

10. Off-Street parking, loading and unloading areas and outside refuse storage areas, or other storage areas that face or are visible from adjacent homes, or from public thoroughfares, shall be screened by walls or landscaping of effective height. Dumpsters shall have gates.

11. Exterior lighting shall be so arranged so that it is deflected away from adjoining properties and so that it does not impede vision of drivers along adjacent streets.

12. Adequate services and utilities including sanitary sewers, and improvements shall be available or provided, located and constructed with sufficient capacity and durability to properly serve the development.

Any use permitted in any Zoning District must also comply with all applicable Federal, State, County and Village health and pollution laws and regulations with respect to noise, smoke and particulate matter, vibration, noxious and odorous matter, glare and heat, fire and explosive hazards, gases, electromagnetic radiation and drifting and airborne matter, toxic and hazardous materials, erosion control, flood plains, and requirements of the State Fire Marshal.

13. An objective of site plan review shall be to protect and to promote public health, safety and general welfare by requiring the screening, buffering and landscaping of sites and parking lots which will serve to reduce wind and air turbulence, heat and noise, and the glare of automobile lights; to preserve underground water reservoirs and return precipitation to the ground water strata; to act as a natural drainage system and solve storm water drainage problems; to reduce the level of carbon dioxide and return pure oxygen to the atmosphere; to prevent soil erosion; to provide shade; to conserve and stabilize property values, to conserve energy, provide visual and sound privacy and to otherwise facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive and harmonious community; to relieve the stark appearance of parking lots; and to generally preserve a healthful and pleasant environment in keeping with Village character.

14. It is an objective of site plan review to improve the quality of existing developments as they are expanded, contracted, redeveloped or changed in keeping with the predominant site development standards of the Village.

15. A major objective shall be to retain, enhance and protect the quality, value and privacy of the Village's single family land uses.

16. All development phases shall be designed in logical sequence to insure that each phase will independently function in a safe, convenient and efficient manner without being dependent upon improvements of a subsequent development potential of lands.

17. All sites shall be designed to comply with State and local barrier-free requirements and to reasonably accommodate the handicapped and elderly.

18. Additional approval standards for unplatted residentially zoned parcels. Prior to the approval of a plat or a condominium subdivision plan or development under the single family residential cluster option, the Village Council shall require the following standards be met:

a. The permitted density should not exceed that permitted in the Zoned District.

b. Careful protective measures such as screening, open space, circulation design, shall be built in project designs to prevent adverse impacts of traffic noise, fumes, glare and odors on existing residences which are included in developments.

c. If a proposed development requires one or more direct circulation access point(s) to a major or intermediate thoroughfare, the site development area or combination of lots shall be a minimum of eleven (11) acres. If access alternatives exist, they must be used.

d. Primary interior streets shall be public or adequate access easements shall be granted to abutting parcels in order to minimize the need for access points to major and intermediate thoroughfares.

e. All redevelopment plans shall include a clear demonstration that remaining adjacent parcels can be developed in the future in a practical and coordinated manner.

f. The Council may require extraordinary improvements such as constructing utilities or streets to the property lines in order to permit future tie-ins with adjacent parcels.

g. As much as possible, linkages shall be created between projects in order to insure economy, efficiency of design, convenience for the residents and access options for emergency and service vehicles.

h. All site features, including circulation, parking, building orientation, landscaping, lighting, utilities, common facilities and open space shall be coordinated with adjacent properties.

f. Review of Site Plans. The Village Manager shall secure comments from Village Building and Public Safety Departments, Village Engineer, Planner and others, as applicable, and forward all site plans along with comments to the Village Council which shall refer said plans to the Planning Board for its review. The Planning Board shall review the plans and may solicit further comments from the Village Building and Public Safety Departments, Village Engineer and Planning Consultant and other agencies, groups or persons. Upon completion of its review, the Planning Board shall transmit its recommendation or comments to the Village Council.

g. Site Plan Approval and Record. The Village Council is hereby authorized to review and approve, to approve with conditions or review and deny approval, all site plans submitted under this Ordinance. Guidelines for consideration of each case shall follow the Zoning Ordinance and any other applicable ordinances. Each action taken with reference to site plan review and approval shall be duly recorded in minutes of the Council. When the Village Council approves a site plan with conditions from the applicant, the Building Official shall require a revised site plan with a revision date, indicating said conditions on the site plan.

When a site plan approval is required, no building permit shall be issued until four (4) copies of a final site plan, which includes all conditions of approval, a revision date and notation of all variances has been signed by the Council President, the Building Official and the Planner or their designees. Prior to issuance of a permit, one (1) copy of the final signed plan shall be filed with each of the following: Clerk, Building Official and the Applicant.

h. Site Plan Review Manual. The Village Council, after recommendation from the Planning Board shall prepare a site plan review manual with detailed administrative procedures for site plan review. Council shall cause said procedures to be implemented.

i. Construction Under Plan. When an applicant receives site plan approval as provided previously herein, the applicant shall develop the site in complete conformity, with the approved site plan. Complete construction plan including component phases, shall be submitted for review by the Building Official with a landscape plan prepared by a registered landscape architect for all landscape areas. Upon review and finding by the Building Official that the construction plans meet with the requirements of the Village Council's site plan approval and applicable Ordinances of the Village, the Building Department shall issue a building permit for said construction. Site plan approval hereunder shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of Village Council approval.

j. A Certificate of Occupancy shall be withheld by the Building Official in any case where the site plan and major conditions as approved by the Village have not been complied with. Any minor variations may be approved by the Building Official, and shall be reported within ten (10) days to the Council and Planning Board after the issuance of Certificate of Occupancy.

22.08.300 PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS FOR PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED SUBJECT TO SPECIAL CONDITIONS.

a. Intent. The types of uses requiring special approval shall be deemed to be permitted uses in their respective districts, subject, as to each specific use, to satisfaction of the procedures, requirements and standards set forth in this section. Each specific use for which a permit is sought shall be considered as an individual case and shall conform to the detailed application of the following procedures and standards in a manner appropriate to the particular circumstances of such use. Each use as listed in any district requiring special approval for a permit shall be of such location, size and character that, in general, it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the district in which it is suggested and will not be detrimental to the orderly development of adjacent districts and uses.

b. Public Hearings. Upon the request for special land use authorization, a public hearing with notification as required for a notice of a request for special land use approval as provided in 22.08.300 (c) below shall be held before a decision is made on a special land use request. No decision on a special land use request shall be made unless notification of a public hearing on a special land use request is given as required.

c. Procedure of Notice. Upon receipt of an application for a permitted principal use permitted subject to special approval, one notice of a public hearing shall be published in the newspaper of general circulation in the Village; said notice shall be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of the property for which approval is being considered, to all persons to whom real property is assessed, within three hundred feet (300') of the boundary of the property in question, and to the occupants of all structures within three hundred feet (300'), except that the notice shall be given not less than fifteen (15) days before the application will be considered. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification. Notification need not be given to more than one occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one dwelling unit or spatial areas owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses, or organizations, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure. The notice shall:

1. Describe the nature of the special land use request.

2. Indicate the property which is the subject of the special land use request.

3. State when and where the special land use request will be considered.

4. Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request.

d. Planning Commission Hearing and Review: Special land use approval shall not be granted until a public hearing has also been held by the Planning Commission, in accordance with procedures described in Section 22.08.300 (b) and (c) above. The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation with comments on the special land use to Village Council.

e. Approval by Village Council. The Village Council shall deny, approve, or approve with conditions, requests for special land use approval. The decision on a special land use shall be incorporated in a statement of conclusions relative to
the special land use under consideration. The decision shall specify the basis for the decision, and any conditions imposed.

f. Site Plan Review and Information Required. For all special approval uses, a site plan shall be required and submitted in accordance with Section 22.08.290 of this Ordinance. Approval shall run with the land and shall not be issued for specified periods, unless the use is temporary or time related in nature.

g. Performance Guarantees. Performance guarantees may be required by the Village Council to insure compliance with special approval conditions, in accordance with Section 22.08.310.

h. Standards. In addition to specific site plan standards which the Village Council may apply to the use, the following standards shall serve the Village Council as the basis for decisions involving special land uses and other discretionary decisions contained in this Ordinance. Each proposed use or activity shall:

1. In location, size and intensity of the principal and/or accessory operations, be compatible with adjacent uses and zoning of land.

2. Be consistent with and promote the intent and purpose of this Ordinance.

3. Be compatible with the natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy.

4. Be consistent with existing and future capabilities of public services and facilities affected by the proposed use; and

5. Protect the public health, safety, and welfare as well as the social and economic well-being of those who will use the land use or activity, residents, businesses and landowners immediately adjacent and the Village as the whole.

6. Promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner.

7. Not be in conflict with convenient, safe and normal neighborhood vehicular and pedestrian traffic routes, flows, intersections, and general character and intensity of neighborhood development.

8. Be of such a design and impact that the location and height of buildings, the location, nature and height of walls, fences and the nature and extent of landscaping on the site shall not hinder or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings or impair the value thereof.

9. In the nature, location, size and site layout of the use, be a harmonious part of the district in which it is situated taking into account, among other things, prevailing shopping habits, convenience of access by prospective patrons, the physical and economic relationship of one type of use to another and characteristic groupings of uses of said district.

10. In the location, size, intensity and site layout be such that operations will not be objectionable to nearby dwellings, by reason of noise, fumes, glare or flash of lights.

11. Be consistent with the character, nature and type of residential districts (See Sections 22.14 and 22.16) surrounding the proposed special uses.

i. Record. All conditions imposed with respect to the approval of a land use or activity shall be recorded in the record of the approval action and shall remain unchanged except upon the mutual consent of the Council and the applicant. The Village Council shall maintain a record of changes granted in conditions.

j. Modification After Approval. Modification After Approval. After any special land use approval is granted, any subsequent modifications to the site not in accordance with the approved site plan, any change of use, any increase in the intensity of the use, or any change in any of the conditions of approval, including by way of example but not limitation, any additions to a principal building or any expansion of off-street parking, shall require a new special land use approval pursuant to the provisions set forth in 22.08.300. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Village Council, after a favorable recommendation from the Planning Commission, may waive any of the requirements of Section 22.08.300 with respect to any modifications for which all of the following conditions apply:

1. Intensity of use will not be increased;

2. No additional off-street parking will be required; and

3. Adjacent property will not be adversely affected based on the standards in 22.08.300(h). {Ord 366, 7-20-19}

22.08.310 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES.

a. Required. To insure compliance with this Zoning Ordinance and any conditions imposed under this Zoning Ordinance, including conditions of the site plan approval, special approval, cluster development, planned development, and street access approval, the Village Council or Zoning Board of Appeals may require that financial security acceptable to the Village be deposited with the Village Clerk to insure faithful completion of improvements as defined in (b) below. The amount of the cash deposit, certified check, or irrevocable bank letter of credit shall cover the estimated cost of improvements associated with a project and other reasonable incidental costs associated therewith, for which approval is sought.

b. Improvements. "Improvements" means those features and actions associated with a project which are considered necessary to protect natural resources, or the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the Village and future users or inhabitants of the proposed project or project area, including roadways, lighting, utilities, landscaping, parking, paving of parking and circulation areas, screening, drainage and other site improvements. "Improvements" does not include the entire project which is the subject of the approval.

c. Timing. The performance guarantee along with a detailed description and schedule of improvements to be completed shall be deposited with the Clerk prior
to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy authorizing use of the activity or project.

d. Type. The applicant shall be required to provide the performance guarantee or financial security in one or a combination of the following arrangements, whichever the applicant elects.

1. Irrevocable letter of credit: An irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank authorized to do business in Michigan in an amount to cover the cost of the contemplated improvements as estimated by the Village.

2. Escrow fund: A cash deposit, or deposit by certified check drawn on a bank authorized to do business in Michigan sufficient to cover the cost of the contemplated improvements as estimated by the Village shall be deposited with the Clerk. The escrow deposit shall be for the estimated time period necessary to complete the required improvements.

e. Rebate. In the case of cash deposits, the Clerk shall rebate or release to the applicant, as the work progresses, amounts equal to the ratio of the completed and accepted work to the entire project, after approvals described below.

f. Inspection and Certification. Private Improvements and Acceptance for Maintenance of Required Public Improvements.

1. Certification by the Building Department. The applicant shall furnish the Clerk a letter or document signed by the Building Department indicating satisfactory completion of the required improvements in accordance with the above description of improvements.

2. Inspection of Public Improvements by the Village Engineer or Building Department. After the completion of the construction of the required public improvements, the Engineer or Building Department, or the County, State or Federal agency with jurisdiction to grant approval or accept, shall conduct a final inspection and certify compliance with the above required improvements. This inspection shall be made to assure the improvements are completed according to the approved plans and specifications.

3. Partial Street. In no case shall acceptance of any partial street be made for maintenance.

g. Failure. In case the applicant shall fail to complete the required improvements work within such time period as required by the conditions or guarantees as outlined above, the Village Council may proceed to have such work completed and reimburse itself for the cost thereof by appropriating the cash deposit or certified check, or by drawing upon the letter of credit.

h. The Village may require, prior to the acceptance by the Village of public improvements, a maintenance bond acceptable to the Village for a period of up to three (3) years in an amount not to exceed thirty-five percent (35%) of the total cost of the public improvements.

i. Subdivisions. This section shall not be applicable to improvements for which a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or surety bond has been deposited pursuant to the Subdivision Control Act, No. 288 of the Public Acts of 1967, as amended, being Section 560.101 to 560.293 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.

22.08.320 SATELLITE ANTENNA REGULATIONS.

a. Permitted. Satellite antennae shall be permitted in all districts as an accessory use to a principal building.

b. Permit Required. The construction or placement of a satellite antenna shall not commence before a building permit is issued in accordance with this Ordinance.

c. Limitation. Only one (1) satellite antenna per lot shall be permitted.

d. Grounding. All such antennae shall be bonded to a grounding rod.

e. No satellite antenna shall be:

1. Located in any front yard open space or side yard open space.

2. Constructed closer to a lot line than five feet (5') including its base.

3. Linked physically or with any structure which is not on the same lot.

4. In excess of fifteen feet (15') above grade.

5. Supported by structural supports other than corrosion resistant metal.

6. Wired to a receiver except by wires located at least four inches (4") beneath the ground in a rigid conduit.

f. Wind load. All such antennae shall be designed to meet wind load standards of the building code.

g. Roofs. No satellite antenna shall be constructed upon the roof of any garage, residential dwelling, church, school, hospital or apartment building or any other commercial building or structure, nor shall they be mounted upon chimneys, towers, trees, poles or spires.

h. Screening. All satellite antenna shall be screened from view of adjacent properties or public rights-of-way by a wall, berm, evergreen plantings, or a combination thereof.

i. Glare. The surface of the antenna shall be painted or treated so as not to reflect glare from sunlight.

22.08.330 COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.

a. Purpose. The purpose of restrictions on commercial vehicles is to preserve the health, safety and general welfare of persons and property in residential areas designed and utilized for single-family residential development by regulating the parking of certain large commercial vehicles which frequently are impediments to the ingress and egress of emergency and fire protection vehicles and equipment, which are frequently unsafe when operated on residential streets, and the noise, exhaust emissions and appearance of which tend to impair the health, safety and general welfare of the people of the Village of Beverly Hills.

b. Residential Parking Prohibited. No commercial vehicle, as defined herein, shall be parked in a residentially zoned or used area unless parked in a fully enclosed garage. Provided, however, this provision shall not apply to commercial vehicles temporarily parked (less than eight (8) hours) in a residential area in conjunction with maintenance or service to a residential property. {Ord. 272, 8-24-94}

c. Presumption of Ownership. In any proceeding for violation of any parking provision of this Section, the person to whom a commercial vehicle is registered, as determined from the registration plate displayed on said motor vehicle, shall be presumed in evidence to be the person who committed the violation charged.

22.08.340 ADULT REGULATED USES.

a. Intent and Rationale. In the development and execution of this Ordinance and this Section, it is recognized that there are some uses which, because of their very nature, are recognized as having serious objectionable, operations characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances, thereby having deleterious effect upon adjacent areas. Special regulations of these uses is necessary to insure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting, deteriorating and/or down-grading of the area, and that area adjacent thereto. These special regulations are itemized in this Section. The Village Council is aware by the testimony and report adopted by reference of an experience planner regarding concentration of such uses that control or regulation is for the purpose of preventing a concentration of these uses in any one area, i.e., not more than one such use within seven hundred and fifty feet (750') of another such use.

It is further recognized in the development of this Ordinance that the prohibition against the establishment of more than one adult regulated use within seven hundred and fifty feet of (750') each other serves to avoid the clustering of a blighted or deteriorated area frequented by vagrants, and the like; such prohibition further serves to avoid the deleterious effects of blight and devaluation of both business and residential property values resulting from the establishment of Adult Regulated Uses (as defined in this Ordinance) immediately adjacent to residential neighborhoods; such prohibition further serves to prevent the deleterious effect of blight and devaluation of recreational, educational and/or religious uses.

It is further recognized in the development of this Ordinance and this Section that concern for, and pride in, the orderly planning and development of the neighborhood and area should be encouraged and fostered in those persons who comprise the business and residential segments of that neighborhood and area.

b. "Adult Regulated Uses". Uses subject to the controls set forth in this Section shall be as follows, and are referred to herein as "Adult Regulated Uses":
1. Adult Book Store and/or Novelty Store
2. Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theatre
3. Adult Motion Picture Theatre
4. Cabaret
5. Massage Parlor
6. Modeling Studio

c. Prohibition. It shall be unlawful to establish any Adult Regulated Use without first obtaining approval from the Village Council as described within this Section (22.08.340).

d. Requirements:

1. The Adult Regulated Use shall be located only in an 0-1 Office or B-Business District.

2. The structure of any Adult Regulated Use shall be at least seven hundred and fifty feet (750') from the nearest property line of any public, private or parochial school, library, park, playground or other recreational facility which admits minors, day-care center, or nursery schools; and at least seven hundred and fifty feet (750') from the nearest property line of any church, convent, monastery, synagogue, or other similar place of worship, except as provided below.

3. Application to establish any Adult Regulated Use shall not be approved if there is already in existence, or a site plan approved and effective for one or more Adult Regulated Use within seven hundred and fifty feet (750') of the boundaries of the site of the proposed Adult Regulated Use, except as provided below.

4. The measurement used to determine the application of any of the above restrictions shall be made from the nearest boundary line of the proposed Adult Regulated Use on a direct plane to the nearest boundary line of the use in connection with which the measurement is being taken.

e. Application and Review:

1. Any person desiring to establish an Adult Regulated Use shall submit an application for special approval to the Village Clerk, who shall place the application on the Village Council agenda for referral to the Planning Board.

2. A public hearing will be held by the Village Council. The Village Council may order a joint meeting with the Planning Board for input.

3. Notice of public hearing shall be published, mailed and delivered as required by Section 22.08.300 (b) and (c) of this Ordinance.

4. The Village Council shall approve the application at the public hearing if all of the following findings are made:

a. All locational requirements of this Section 22.08.340 (d) and (e) are met.

b. The site layout and its relation to access streets shall be such that vehicular and pedestrian traffic to and from the use or uses, and the assembly of persons in connection therewith, will not be clearly hazardous, dangerous, or detrimental to the neighborhood. In applying this standard the Village Council shall consider, among other things: convenient routes for pedestrian traffic, the relationship of the proposed use to main vehicular traffic thoroughfares and to streets and road intersections, and the general and intensity of the existing and potential development of the neighborhood.

c. The proposed use will not clearly cause a nuisance, and/or harm the public health, safety and general welfare.

5. The Village Council shall waive the locational provision requiring minimum distances between Adult Regulated Uses and between Adult Regulated Uses and a public, private or parochial school, library, park, playground, or other recreational facility, which admits minors, day-
care center or nursery school, church, convent, monastery, synagogue, or other similar place of worship, if all of the following findings are made after public hearing:

a. That the proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or injurious to nearby properties, and that the spirit and intent of this Ordinance will be observed; and,

b. That the proposed use will not contribute to, create, enlarge and/or encourage a blighted or deteriorated area; and,

c. That the establishment of an additional Adult Regulated Use in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation, nor will it interfere with any program of urban renewal; and,

d. That all applicable regulations of this Ordinance will be observed; and,

e. There is no other reasonable location in the Village at which the use is suited.

6. Prior to granting a permit for any Adult Regulated Use, the Village Council may impose any such conditions or limitations authorized by law in connection with the grant of special uses.

f. Discontinuance. An Adult Regulated Use granted pursuant to the terms of this Ordinance may not be re-established after discontinuance for a period of ninety (90) consecutive days without a new grant of approval by the Village Council. {Ord. 299; 6-7-00}

22.08.350 HOME OCCUPATIONS. Home occupations, as defined herein, shall be permitted in all residential districts.

22.08.360 ENCLOSURE OF ROOF APPLIANCES OR ACCESSORIES. In all Zone Districts, roof appliances such as, but not limited to, cooling towers, air conditioners, heating apparatus, dust collectors, filters, transformers and any other a such appliance or apparatus, other than flag poles, chimneys for carrying products of combustion and radio antenna towers, shall be enclosed with opaque screens not less in height than the height of the highest appliance, as measured from the plane of the roof surface upon which the screen device is mounted to the top of the highest appliance. However, if the screening device is mounted on the top of the parapet or other part of the building facade which extends above the roof surface, the height of the parapet or other part of the building facade extending above the roof surface and the screening device is equal to the height of the highest appliance, such walls may be lowered to permit passage of air for cross ventilation, but shall be adequate to totally screen such equipment from view. The design of the screening device shall be compatible with the architectural design of the building upon which it is located.

22.08.370 GROUP DAY CARE HOMES AND CHILD CARE CENTERS.

a. Licensing: In accordance with applicable state laws, facilities shall be registered with or licensed by the appropriate state government departments and shall be required to be in continuing compliance with the standards outlined for such facilities.

b. Outdoor Play Area: For each person cared for in a facility there shall be provided and maintained a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet of usable outdoor recreational area. The outdoor recreational play area shall be suitably fenced and screened from abutting residentially zoned or used land in accordance with SECTION 22.08.150. Outdoor recreational areas shall not be located in the front yard.

c. Location: No state licensed facility shall be located within fifteen hundred (1500) feet of another State licensed care facility regardless of community boundaries. Child care centers shall havea t least one property line abutting a major thoroughfare, intermediate thoroughfare or collector street. 

d. Off-Street Parking: Off-street parking shall be provided for any employees who are not residents of the home. Whenever off-street parking areas are adjacent to land used or zoned for residential purposes, a wall or landscaped screen shall be provided along the sides of the parking area adjacent to such residential land or use in accordance with SECTION 22.08.160. An on-site drive shall be provided for drop offs/loading. This drive shall be arranged to allow maneuvers without affecting traffic flow on the street. 

e. Compliance with Zoning Ordinance: The proposed site and building shall be in full compliance with all yard and bulk regulations (including setback, lot size, and lot width regulations) for the district in which it is located. Child care centers shall have a minimum side yard setback of at least twenty-five (25) feet. {Ord 367, 7-20-2019}

22.08.380 ADULT FOSTER CARE LARGE GROUP HOME, ADULT FOSTER CARE SMALL GROUP HOME FOR MORE THAN SEVEN RESIDENTS, CONGREGATE ADULT FOSTER CARE FACILITY.

a. Location: The proposed site shall have at least one property line abutting a major thoroughfare or intermediate thoroughfare and the site shall be so planned as to provide all ingress and egress directly onto or from said major thoroughfare or intermediate thoroughfare. No state licensed facility shall be located within fifteen hundred (1500) feet of another state licensed care facility regardless of community boundaries.

b. Compliance with Zoning Ordinance: The proposed site and building shall be in full compliance with all yard and bulk regulations (including setback, lot size, and lot width regulations) for the district in which it is located.

c. Off-Street Parking: Off-street parking shall be provided for any employees who are not residents of the home. Whenever off-street parking areas are adjacent to land used or zoned for residential purposes, a wall or landscaped screen shall be provided along the sides of the parking area adjacent to such residential land or use in accordance with SECTION 22.08.160.

d. Outdoor Area: For each person cared for in a facility there shall be provided and maintained a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet of outdoor recreational area. The recreational area shall be screened from any adjacent residential use in accordance with SECTION 22.08.150. Outdoor recreational areas must be located in the rear yard.

e. Conformance with State Regulations: The facility shall meet all applicable requirements including licensing and certification requirements of the Michigan Department of Social Services and all other applicable local, county, state and federal regulations.

f. Loading/Unloading Areas: The facility shall provide for safe loading and unloading of residents.

g. Concentration of Facilities: In considering whether to permit the establishment of a facility and/or the number of children that should be permitted in such a facility, the Village shall take into account the number of other existing facilities in the general area, regardless of community boundaries, and the potential overall impact on the neighborhood. {Ord. 252, 5-12-91}

22.08.410 SIDEWALKS OR BIKEWAYS. For all developments requiring site plan approval, either a new public sidewalk or bikeway, or the reconstruction of existing sidewalks or bikeways, shall be required to be constructed to Village standards for the perimeter of the lot which abuts a major, intermediate or collector street as defined in the Village Master Plan. New or reconstructed sidewalks or bikeways shall be aligned with existing or proposed sidewalks or bikeways.

22.08.420 ONE SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING PER LOT. Except in the instance of cluster developments or condominium developments where a site plan is approved by the Village Council and except for lots used for education or religious institutions, not more than one (1) single-family dwelling shall be located on a lot as defined herein, nor shall a single-family dwelling be located on the same lot with another principal building. This provision shall not prohibit the lawful division of land.

22.08.430 KEEPING OF FARM ANIMALS AND OTHER ANIMALS. The keeping, raising, or breeding of animals including farm animals and non-domestic animals and reptiles (except domesticated cats, dogs, canaries, parakeets, parrots, gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, turtles, fish, rabbits and similar animals commonly kept as pets) shall be prohibited, and except as may be permitted by and under conditions imposed by the Zoning Board of Appeals.

22.08.440 LIGHT AND ILLUMINATION - RESIDENTIAL USES IN RESIDENTIAL ZONE DISTRICTS. All lighting for the external illumination of residential uses in a Residential Zone District such as homes, buildings or grounds, signs, off-street parking areas, outdoor recreation areas, playfields, swimming pools, tennis courts, nursing homes, and similar uses customarily incidental to a residential use shall be permanently directed within the lot it serves. Light sources shall be shielded in such a manner as to prevent glare toward adjacent uses and shall not adversely affect driver visibility on any public or private road. Building mounted lighting, shall be placed no higher than the maximum permitted building height for the district in which it is located. Pole mounted lighting shall not be placed higher than fourteen (14) feet above grade. In no case shall more than one (1) footcandle power of light, as measured by a footcandle meter or appropriately calibrated photometer, cross any lot line at a height in excess of five (5) feet above ground level. Lighting requirements applicable to all other uses and districts are regulated in Section 22.09.050 LIGHTING {Ord. 252, 5-12-91}{Ord. 318, 9-7-04}

22.08.460 VEHICLE STORAGE, REPAIR AND SALE PROHIBITED. The following is prohibited in all residential districts:

a. The storage of an inoperable or unlicensed motor vehicle as defined in the State of Michigan Motor Vehicle Code, unless stored in compliance with SECTION 22.08.460(c).

b. The storage of any recreational vehicle as defined in this ordinance, except in compliance with SECTION 22.21.010.

c. The repair or maintenance of any vehicle which renders the vehicle inoperable for a period in excess of seventy-two (72) hours, unless:

1. The repair or maintenance activities are conducted entirely within an enclosed garage or other enclosed legal structure; and

2. The vehicle under repair is registered to the owner of the property.

d. The sale or offering for sale of a motor vehicle or recreational vehicle, unless all of the following conditions are met:

1. The vehicle is offered for sale by the registered owner of the vehicle who is a resident of the property;

2. Only one (1) vehicle is offered for sale by a resident within any consecutive six (6) month period; and

3. The vehicle offered for sale is parked or stored in a manner consistent with all Village ordinances. {Ord. 252, 5-12-91}

22.08.470 WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES AND SERVICES

A. Purpose and Intent: It is the general purpose and intent of the Village to carry out the will of the United States Congress by authorizing communication facilities needed to operate wireless communication systems. It is the further purpose and intent of the Village of Beverly Hills to provide for such authorization in a manner which will retain the integrity of neighborhoods and the character, property values and aesthetic quality of the community at large. In fashioning and administering the provisions of this section, an attempt has been made to balance these potentially competing interests.

Recognizing the number of providers authorized to establish and operate wireless communication services and coverage, it is the further purpose and intent of this Section to:

1. Allow the Village Council of the Village of Beverly Hills to regulate and restrict wireless communication facilities and services as principal permitted, accessory permitted, special approval, or prohibited land uses.

2. Allow the Village Council to establish predetermined zone districts of the number, shape, and in the location for the establishment of wireless communication facilities, subject to applicable standards and conditions.

3. Recognize that operation of a wireless communication system may, in the opinion of the applicant, require the establishment of facilities in locations not within the predetermined zone districts. In such cases, it has been determined that it is likely that there will be greater adverse impact upon neighborhoods and areas within the community. Consequently, more stringent standards and conditions should apply to the review, approval and use of such facilities.

4. Ensure that wireless communication facilities are situated in appropriate locations and relationships to other land uses, structures and buildings.

5. Limit inappropriate physical and aesthetic overcrowding of land use activities and avoid adverse impact upon existing population, transportation systems, and other public services and facility needs.

6. Promote the public health, safety and welfare.

7. Provide for adequate information about plans for wireless communication facilities in order to permit the community to effectively plan for the location of such facilities.

8. Minimize the adverse impacts of technological obsolescence of such facilities, including a requirement to remove unused and/or unnecessary facilities in a timely manner.

9. Minimize the negative visual impact of wireless communication facilities on neighborhoods, community land marks, historic sites and buildings, natural beauty areas and public rights-of-way. This contemplates the establishment of as few structures as reasonably feasible, and the use of structures which are designed for compatibility, including the use of existing structures and the avoidance of lattice structures that are unnecessary, taking into consideration the purposes and intent of this section.

10. Facilitate adequate and efficient provision of sites for wireless communication facilities.

11. The Village Council of Beverly Hills finds that the presence of numerous tower structures, particularly if located within residential areas, would decrease the attractiveness and destroy the character and integrity of the community. This, in turn, would have an adverse impact upon property values. Therefore, it is necessary to minimize the adverse impact from the presence of numerous relatively tall tower structures having low architectural and other aesthetic appeal to most persons, recognizing that the absence of regulation would result in a material impediment to the maintenance and promotion of property values, and further recognizing that this economic component is an important part of the public health, safety and welfare.

B. Definitions: For the purposes of this Section, the following definitions shall apply:

1. Attached Wireless Communications Facilities (antenna): Wireless communication facilities that are affixed to existing structures, such as existing buildings, towers, water tanks, utility poles, and the like. A wireless communication support structure proposed to be newly established shall not be included within this definition.

2. Colocation: The location by two or more wireless communication providers of wireless communication facilities on a common structure, tower, or building, with the view toward reducing the overall number of structures required to support wireless communication antennas within the community.

3. Wireless Communication Support Structures (tower): Structures erected or modified to support wireless communication antennas. Support structures within this definition include, but shall not be limited to, monopoles, lattice towers, light poles, wood poles and guyed towers, or other structures which appear to be something other than a support structure.

4. Wireless Communication Facilities: All structures and accessory facilities relating to the use of the radio frequency spectrum for the purpose of transmitting or receiving radio signals. This may include, but shall not be limited to, radio towers, television towers, telephone devices and exchanges, microwave relay towers, telephone transmission equipment building and commercial mobile radio service facilities.

Not included within this definition are: citizen band radio facilities; short wave facilities; ham, amateur radio facilities; satellite dishes; and, governmental facilities which are subject to state or federal law or regulations which preempt municipal regulatory authority.

C. Permitted Districts:

1. In the following circumstances, a new wireless communication facility shall be deemed a permitted principal use, subject to site plan review and the conditions set forth in Section D below, and if approved, constructed and maintained in accordance with the standards and conditions of this Section:

a. Attached wireless communication facility within all B, Business, O-1, Office, and PP, Public Property zoning districts, where the existing structure is not, in the discretion of the Village Council, proposed to be either materially altered or materially changed in appearance.

b. Colocation of an attached wireless communication facility which had been pre-approved for such colocation as part of an earlier approval by the Village of Beverly Hills.

c. An existing structure which will serve as an attached wireless communication facility consisting of a utility pole located within a right-of-way, where the existing pole is not proposed to be modified in a manner which, in the discretion of the Village Council, would materially alter the structure and/or result in an impairment of sight lines or other safety interest.

d. A wireless communication support structure established within a right-of-way having an existing width of more than 204 feet.
2. New wireless communication support structures (excluding lattice towers) shall be deemed permitted uses after special approval within B, O-1, and PP zone districts, conditioned upon site plan and special land use review and approval. All wireless support structures are subject to the standards and conditions provided in D below, the application requirements specified in Section E below, and the general special land use approval procedures and standards specified in Section 22.08.300 Procedures and Standards for Principal Uses Permitted Subject to Special Conditions.

The Village Council may require that wireless communication facilities be of a design such as a steeple, bell tower, or other form which is compatible with the existing character of the proposed site, neighborhood and general area.

D. Standards and Conditions Applicable to All Facilities: All applications to erect, construct, or modify wireless communication facilities shall be reviewed in accordance with the following standards and conditions, and, if approved, shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with such standards and conditions. In addition, if the facility is approved, it shall be constructed and maintained with any additional conditions imposed by the Village Council in its discretion:

1. Public Health and Safety. Facilities shall not be demonstrably injurious to neighborhoods or otherwise detrimental to the public safety and welfare.

2. Compliance with Federal, State, and Local Standards. Wireless communication facilities shall comply with applicable federal and state standards relative to the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions.

3. Maximum Height for a New Wireless Communications Support Structure. The maximum permitted height of any new wireless communications support structures shall be 110 feet.

The height of the support structure shall be measured from the average grade surrounding the base of the support structure to the highest point of the highest proposed antennae or structure. At the discretion of the Village Council, all proposed towers shall be constructed to accommodate up to three providers or antenna.

The maximum height of 110 feet shall not apply when attached wireless communications facilities are proposed on an existing support structure which was not erected solely for the purpose of supporting wireless communications facilities (e.g. the SOCWA watertower).

4. Maximum Permitted Height of the Equipment Enclosure. The accessory building constructed to enclose such things as switching equipment shall be limited to the maximum height for accessory structures within the respective district.

5. Minimum Setbacks. The setback of a new or modified support structure from any residential district shall be at least the height of the tower as measured to the highest point of the approved support structure and antenna. The setback of a new or modified support structure and accessory structures from any nonresidential district shall be the minimum required setback for principal buildings, as provided in the Schedule of Regulations, for the zoning district in which the support structure is to be located.

6. Minimum Distance Between Towers. At the time a proposal is submitted to the Village for a new wireless communications support structure, the location of other existing wireless communications support structures shall be provided, in accordance with Section E. The minimum distance between the proposed and existing wireless communications support structures shall be 220 feet.

7. Access. There shall be unobstructed access to the support structure, for operation, maintenance, repair and inspection purposes, which may be provided through or over an easement. This access shall have a width and location determined by such factors as: the location of adjacent thoroughfares and traffic and circulation within the site; utilities needed to service the tower and any attendant facilities; the location of buildings and parking facilities; proximity to residential districts and minimizing disturbance to the natural landscape; and the type of equipment which will need to access the site.

8. Division of Property. The division of property for the purpose of locating a wireless communication facility is prohibited unless all zoning requirements and conditions are met.

9. Equipment Enclosure. Where an attached wireless communication facility is proposed on the roof of a building or if the equipment enclosure is proposed as a roof appliance or penthouse on the building, it shall be designed, constructed and maintained to be architecturally compatible with the principal building. The equipment enclosure may be located within the principal building or may be an accessory building. If proposed as an accessory building, it shall conform with all district requirements for principal buildings, including yard setbacks.

10. Design Objectives. The support structure and all accessory buildings shall be designed to minimize distraction, reduce its visibility, maximize aesthetic appearance, and ensure compatibility with surroundings. The Village Council shall have the discretion to require the use of a certain color, building material, or design element to ensure compatibility. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to maintain the wireless communication facility in a neat and orderly condition. No signs or logos visible from off-site shall be permitted on a support structure, with the exception of approved warning signs.

11. Landscaping/Fencing. The Village Council shall have the discretion to require landscaping to provide screening and aesthetic enhancement for the structure base and accessory buildings. The Village Council shall also have the discretion to permit or require fencing for protection of the support structure and security from children and other persons who may otherwise access facilities.

12. Soil Conditions and Structural Integrity. The support system shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable building codes and shall include the submission of a soils report from a geotechnical engineer, licensed in the State of Michigan. This soils report shall include soil borings and statements confirming the suitability of soil conditions for the proposed use. The requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communication Commission, and Michigan Aeronautics Commission shall be noted.

13. Written Notification to Potential Colocators. Documentation that other service providers have been notified in writing of the proposed support structure shall be provided, in accordance with Section F below.

E. Application Requirements: All applications to erect, construct, modify any part of component of a wireless communications facility shall include the following:

1. A site plan prepared in accordance with Section 22.08.290, showing the location, size, screening and design of all buildings and structures, including fences, and the location and size of outdoor equipment, and the location, number, and species of proposed landscaping, and as-built drawings for all proposed attached wireless communications facilities and/or wireless communications support structures.

2. A maintenance plan, and any applicable maintenance agreement, shall be presented and approved as part of the site plan for the proposed facility. Such plan shall be designed to ensure the long term, continuous maintenance to a reasonably prudent standard.

3. A disclosure of what is proposed, demonstrating the need for the proposed wireless communications support structure to be located as proposed based upon the presence of one or more of the following factors:

a. Proximity to a major thoroughfare.

b. Areas of population concentration.

c. Concentration of commercial or other business centers.

d. Areas where signal interference has occurred due to buildings, masses of trees, or other obstruction.

e. Topography of the proposed facility location in relation to other facilities within which the proposed facility is to operate.

4. The reason or purpose for the placement, construction or modification with specific reference to the provider's coverage, capacity and/or quality needs, goals and objectives.

5. The service area of the proposed wireless communications facility, and signal power expressed in Effective Radiated Power (ERP) upon which the service area has been planned. A propagation map shall be provided to illustrate this information.

6. The nature and extent of the provider/applicant's ownership, easement, or lease interest in the property, building or structure upon which facilities are proposed for placement, construction or modification.

7. The identity and address of all owners and other persons with a real property interest in the property, buildings, or structure upon which facilities are proposed for placement, construction or modification.

8. A map showing existing and known proposed wireless communications facilities within the Village of Beverly Hills, and further showing existing and known proposed wireless communications facilities within areas surrounding the borders of the Village which are relevant in terms of potential colocation or in demonstrating the need for the proposed facility. The map shall also show existing buildings and/or other structures of the same approximate height within a one-half () mile radius of the proposed site which could accommodate a feasible colocation of the applicant's proposed attached wireless communications facility.

9. For each location identified on the applicant/provider's survey maps and drawings, the application shall include the following information, if known, with the applicant / provider expected to exercise reasonable due diligence in attempting to obtain information prior to application:

a. The structural capacity and whether it can accommodate the applicant's facility, as proposed or modified.

b. Whether property owner approvals exist or have been requested and obtained.

c. Whether the location could be used by the applicant/provider for placement of its attached wireless communications facility, or if not, a disclosure of the technological considerations involved, with specific reference to how use of the location would prohibit the applicant/provider from providing wireless communications services.
10. A certification by a State of Michigan licensed and registered professional engineer regarding the manner in which the proposed structure will fail. The certification may be utilized, along with other criteria such as applicable regulations for the district in question, in determining appropriate setbacks to be required for the structure and other facilities.

11. A description of the security to be posted at the time of receiving a building permit for the wireless communications support structure to ensure removal of the structure when it has been abandoned or is no longer needed, as provided in Section G below. The security, in the form of a surety bond, shall be a promise of the applicant and owner of the property to remove the facility in a timely manner as required under this Section, with the further provision that the applicant and owner shall be responsible for the payment of any costs and attorney's fees incurred by the Village in securing removal.

12. The Village Council shall have the discretion to require a detailed landscape plan where the support structure is being placed at a location which is not otherwise developed, or where a developed area will be disturbed. The purpose of landscaping is to provide screening for the wireless communications support structure base, accessory buildings and enclosure.

13. The Village Council shall have the discretion to require the applicant to provide a visual simulation or rendering of the proposed support structure that illustrates the relationship between the height and the visual appearance of the structure. If required, the visual simulation shall be provided from two different perspectives and accurately depict the scale of the proposed structure in the context of the surrounding area.

14. The proposal shall be reviewed for conformity with the colocation requirements of Section F.

F. Colocation: It is the policy of the Village of Beverly Hills to minimize the overall number of newly established locations for wireless communication facilities and wireless communication support structures within the community, and encourage the use of existing structures for attached wireless communication facility purposes, consistent with the statement of purpose and intent, set forth in Section A of this above. Each licensed provider of a wireless communication facility must, by law, be permitted to locate sufficient facilities in order to achieve the objectives promulgated by the United States Congress. However, particularly in light of the dramatic increase in the number of wireless communication facilities reasonably anticipated to occur as a result of the change of federal law and policy in and relating to the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, it is the policy of the Village that all users should colocate on attached wireless communication facilities and wireless communication support structures in the interest of achieving the purposes and intent of this section, as stated above, and as stated in Section A. If a provider fails or refuses to permit colocation on a facility owned or otherwise controlled by it, where colocation is feasible, the result will be that a new and unnecessary additional structure will be compelled, in direct violation of and in direct contradiction to the basic policy, intent and purpose of the Village of Beverly Hills. The provisions of this Section are designed to carry out and encourage conformity with this policy.

1. Feasibility of Colocation. Colocation shall be deemed to be "feasible" for purposes of this section where all of the following are met:

a. The wireless communication provider entity under consideration for colocation will provide fair compensation for colocation.

b. The site on which colocation is being considered, taking into consideration reasonable modification or replacement of a facility, is able to provide structural support.

c. The colocation being considered is technologically feasible, e.g., the colocation will not result in unreasonable interference, given appropriate physical and other adjustment in relation to the structure, antennas, and the like.

d. The height of the structure necessary for colocation shall not exceed the maximum height identified under Section D above.

2. Requirements for Colocation.

a. A special land use permit for the construction and use of a new wireless communication facility shall not be granted unless and until the applicant demonstrates that a feasible colocation is not available for the coverage area and capacity needs.

b. All new and modified wireless communication facilities shall be designed and constructed so as to accommodate colocation.

c. The policy of the community is for colocation. Thus, if a party who owns or otherwise controls a wireless communication facility shall fail or refuse to alter a structure to accommodate a proposed and otherwise feasible colocation, such facility shall be deemed to be a nonconforming structure and use, and shall not be altered, expanded or extended in any respect.

d. If a party who owns or otherwise controls a wireless communication facility shall fail or refuse to permit a feasible colocation, and this requires the construction and/or use of a new facility, the party failing or refusing to permit a feasible colocation shall be deemed to be in direct violation and contradiction of the policy, intent and purpose of the Village of Beverly Hills, and, consequently such party shall take responsibility for the violation, and shall be prohibited from receiving approval for a new wireless communication support structure within the Village of Beverly Hills for a period of 5 years from the date of the failure or refusal to permit the colocation. Such a party may seek and obtain a variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals if and to the limited extent the applicant demonstrates entitlement to variance relief which, in this context, shall mean a demonstration that enforcement of the 5 year prohibition would unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent wireless communication services, or that such enforcement would have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless communication services.

3. Notification of Potential Colocators. In an effort to promote colocation, an applicant submitting a request to erect a new support structure shall be required to send a written notice to all current wireless communications providers licensed by the FCC within the Detroit SMSA. Copies of the notice letter shall be provided to theVillage at the time the application is filed. If, during a period of thirty days after the notice letters are sent to potential colocators, a user or users request, in writing, to colocate on the proposed support structure, the applicant shall accommodate the request(s), unless colocation is not reasonably possible based on the criteria of this section.

G. Removal of Wireless Communications Facilities:

1. All providers with facilities within the Village shall notify the Village, in a timely manner, when a facility is no longer in operation.

2. All wireless communications providers with facilities in the Village of Beverly Hills shall be required to submit an annual status report to the Village that describes the current operational status of the facilities and any planned changes or modifications to the structure, site, or ownership, lease, or maintenance agreement.

3. A condition of every approval of a wireless communication facility shall be adequate provision for removal of all or part of the facility by users and owners.

Provisions for removal shall be made if the facility has not been used for 180 days or more. For purposes of this Section, the removal of antennas or other equipment from the facility, or the cessation of operations (transmission and/or reception of radio signals) shall be considered as the beginning of a period of nonuse.

4. The situation in which removal of a facility is required, as set forth in paragraph (3) above, may be applied and limited to portions of a facility.

5. Upon the occurrence of the event requiring removal, specified in paragraph (3) above, the property owner or persons who had used the facility shall immediately apply or secure the application for any required demolition or removal permits, and immediately proceed with and complete the demolition/removal, restoring the premises to its prior condition as reasonably determined by the Village Council.

6. If the required removal of a facility or a portion thereof has not been lawfully completed 60 days after the applicable deadline, and after at least 30 days written notice, Village of Beverly Hills may remove or secure the removal of the facility or required portions thereof, with its actual cost and reasonable administrative charge to be drawn or collected and/or enforced from or under the surety bond posted at the time application was made for establishing the facility. {Ord. 291, 5-16-98}

22.08.480 TEMPORARY OR SEASONAL ACCESSORY OUTDOOR SALES AND DISPLAY

a. Purpose. Temporary or seasonal accessory outdoor sales and display activities are subject to issuance of an administrative permit and the requirements of this section. It is the intent of this section to provide for such activities which are distinguished from permanent outside business activities. It is further the intent of this section to promote the health, safety, general welfare, aesthetics, and image of the Village by regulating such activities so as to:

1. Establish standards permitting a business established in the Village an opportunity to conduct temporary or seasonal outdoor sales and display;

2. Ensure that such activities do not create safety hazards by occupying required parking spaces, emergency access, or impede the efficient movement of pedestrians and vehicular traffic;

3. Provide standards and procedures for administrative review of such activities; and

4. Allow certain activities, while providing standards to ensure compatibility with the B Business District and adjacent properties.

b. Application for Permit. No person or entity shall engage in any such activity without a permit issued pursuant to this section.

1. Application for a permit shall be made by the property or principal business owner with the property owners consent to the Administrative Office at least ten (10) business days prior to the date of the requested activity.

2. The submittal shall include all of the information required by paragraph (c) below.

3.The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable review fee which shall be imposed in accordance with the fee schedule established by the Village Council.

c. Required Information and Plans. The applicant shall provide the following information and plans:

1. A statement describing the proposed activity, including:

i. the purpose of the activity;
ii. the type of merchandise involved;
iii. hours of operation;
iv. duration of the activity, with a start and end date;
v. number of employees involved;
vi. any provisions for on-site security;
vii. impacts on parking;
viii. name of person or organization requesting permit;
ix. authorization from the property owner (if not the same); and
x. any other pertinent information required by the Administrative Office to fully evaluate the application.

2. A site plan, drawn to scale, for the property, which accurately represents existing conditions on the site, including building entrances and exits, and parking and driveway areas. The plan must also identify the boundaries of the proposed activity, along with any proposed temporary structures, including umbrellas, stands, and signs that may be associated with the request.

d. Procedure. The application will be processed as follows:

The Administrative Office shall review permit applications and shall determine if the proposal is in compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances, and the specific standards for such activities.

1. Upon finding the application meets all standards, the Administrative Office shall issue a permit to the applicant. Specific conditions to assure compliance with applicable codes, ordinances, and the standards in this section may be attached to the permit.

2. Determination of noncompliance with all standards shall be communicated to the applicant, who shall have up to five (5) business days from the date of notification to submit revised plans and/or information with which the Administrative Office is able to determine compliance. If the applicant does not provide necessary information with five (5) business days, the application shall be denied.

e. Criteria for Approval. Criteria for permit approval are listed below; however, the Administrative Office shall have the authority to modify or waive these requirements if determined to be unnecessary and in the best interest of protecting the public health, safety and welfare. The Administrative Office shall also have the authority to forward the application to the Planning Commission for their review and determination if deemed necessary.

1. The activity shall be clearly accessory to the principal use approved for the site. Only merchandise which is normally sold or stocked by the principal use shall be sold or displayed, provided that seasonal merchandise, such as plants, flowers and produce may be allowed.

2. The submittal shall demonstrate that adequate off-street parking for the principal use and the proposed activity will be provided for the duration of the activity. Determination of compliance with this requirement shall consider the nature of the activity and the applicable parking requirements of the Village. Consideration shall also be given to the parking needs and requirements of other occupants in the case of multi-tenant buildings. The activity shall not interfere with vehicular access to and from the property and shall maintain all necessary clearances for public safety purposes.

3. Property owner and tenant signatures are required to utilize the area in front of another tenant's space.

4. The activity must be consistent with other uses permitted in the zoning district. No use that is prohibited in a zoning district shall be allowed as a temporary outdoor sale.

5. No portion of any such activity shall be permitted within a required yard.

6. The height of materials displayed shall not exceed five (5) feet, unless placed adjacent to the principal building. The height of any accessory structure, such as a tent or canopy, shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet.

7. No such activity shall take place outside of the standard operating hours for the principal use. In the event of a twenty-four (24) hour business, the activity shall cease no later than 9:00 PM.

8. No such activity shall be permitted to include any external noise amplification (i.e. speakers and microphones or bullhorns).

9. Any lighting associated with such activity shall be in compliance with the standards of Section 22.09.050.

10. The Administrative Office may give consideration to any other factors deemed necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the Village and its residents.

{Ord. 343; 9-1-12}

22.09 SITE DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
22.09.010 INTENT. The Village of Beverly Hills recognizes that high quality and well-planned building and site design elements contribute to defining the sense of place in the Village of Beverly Hills. Consequently, this ordinance section was developed to ensure future development and redevelopment occurs in accordance with the following objectives:
a. Promote quality site design and building architecture consistent with the predominant residential character of the Village.

b. Promote an understanding that the changes in commercial sites that occur periodically may be small, but the cumulative impact over time could alter the Village's attractive physical character.

c. Facilitate development and redevelopment, which strives for quality site design on individual parcels, in relation to their surroundings and the Village overall.

d. Retain sensitivity to overall community design goals, while allowing creativity of site design.

e. Instill a sense of "timelessness" in the Village so individual buildings are not identified with a specific era.

f. Implement the objectives and guidelines of the Village's Site Development Handbook.

g. Balance all the above objectives with the Village's commitment to support the continued vitality and daily operations of existing businesses.

22.09.020 APPLICABILITY. All proposals within the P-Parking, O-1 Office, and B-Business Districts and nonresidential uses in a Residential Zone District shall be reviewed and approved by the Village for compliance with the requirements of Section 22.09.

The extent the proposal must comply with these requirements is as follows:
a. New Construction Projects. All new projects that involve construction of new buildings and associated parking and landscaped areas shall fully comply with the design standards of Section 22.09. Site Plan approval is also required in accordance with Section 22.08.

b. Faade Improvements. Projects that involve only changes to building elevations under the following circumstances are subject to the following requirements: (1) if the elevation faces the front yard(s) of the site; or (2) if the elevation is visible to the general public from the side and/or rear yard by means of parking, circulation, or a public building entrance.

1. Minor Facade Improvements. Minor facade improvements to the exterior of the building shall mean minor improvements to the building that change its original appearance such as illumination, building material coverage, or design character. This shall not include daily repairs, common replacements, and building maintenance which are only subject to applicable building code requirements, not this ordinance. Minor faade improvements only require approval from the Building Official for compliance with subsection (a) and (b) below. The Building Official has the discretion to require review by the Planning Board when there is a question of interpretation for consistency with the intent of this ordinance.

(a) Building materials and colors must provide a balance between compatibility with the existing structure and the general intent and purpose of Section 22.09.030 Building Design.
(b) If the project involves changes to building mounted lighting, new fixtures shall comply with the requirements of 22.09.050, as applicable.

2. Major Facade Improvements. Major facade improvements shall mean facade improvements where building materials are changed in a manner that significantly alters the architectural design of at least one building elevation beyond minor faade improvements. These projects only require approval from the Planning Board for compliance with Section 22.09 and do not require site plan approval under Section 22.08.

a) Building materials must provide a balance between compatibility with the existing structure and the general intent and purpose of Section 22.09.030 Building Design.
b) All requirements of Section 22.09.040 a, b, c, f, h, i, and j (Landscaping) must be met.
c) Ten percent (10%) of the required plantings of Section 22.09.040 d, e, and g (Landscaping) are to be provided.
d) If the project involves changes to building mounted lighting, new fixtures shall comply with the requirements of 22.09.050, as applicable.

c. Expansions to Buildings. Expansion of a building shall meet the following minimum requirements. These projects require Site Plan approval in accordance with Section 22.08.

1. Less than twenty percent (20%) gross floor area expansion. Projects involving an expansion of less than twenty percent of the current gross floor area shall be required to comply with the following sub-sections:

(a) Building materials must provide a balance between compatibility with the existing structure and the general intent and purpose of Section 22.09.030 Building Design. Some upgrades to the existing structure may be required.
(b) Landscape standards of Section 22.09.040 a, b, c, f, h, i, and j must be met.
(c) Twenty percent (20%) of the required plantings of Section 22.09.040 d, e, and g (Landscaping) shall be provided.
(d) If the project involves changes to lighting, new fixtures shall comply with the requirements of 22.09.050, as applicable.

2. Between twenty percent (20%) and forty-nine percent (49%) gross floor area expansion.

(a) Building materials must provide a balance between compatibility with the existing structure and the general intent and purpose of Section 22.09.030. Some upgrades to the existing structure shall be required.
(b) Landscape standards of Section 22.09.040 a, b, c, f, h, i, and j must be met.
(c) Forty percent (40%) of the required plantings of Section 22.09.040 d, e, and g (Landscaping) shall be provided.
(d) If the project involves changes to lighting, new fixtures shall comply with the requirements of 22.09.050, as applicable.

3. Expanding the gross floor area fifty percent (50%) or greater. Projects involving an expansion that is fifty percent (50%) or greater of the current gross floor area shall be required to fully comply with the requirements of Section 22.09.

4. Cumulative expansions: The percentage of building expansion will be calculated cumulatively from the original floor area of the building as established on the effective date of this ordinance. For instance, if a building is expanded by fifteen percent (15%), then two (2) years later it is expanded by twenty percent (20%), then it must comply with upgrade requirements applicable to expansions of thirty-five percent (35%).

d. Improvements Due to Destruction. Should a structure be destroyed by any means (e.g. fire or weather) where replacement costs total sixty percent (60%) or less of the total value of the building (as established at the time of damage), improvements may be made without conforming to the requirements of Section 22.09 Site Development Requirements and Site Plan approval is not required.

22.09.030 BUILDING DESIGN. Architectural elevation drawings are required to be submitted for all site plans to confirm compliance with the following requirements for building design.

a. Village Discretion. The Village may waive strict compliance of Section 22.09.030 Building Design when the following qualities can be demonstrated.

1. The design and materials are found to be in keeping with the intended character of the Village.
2. The materials are found to be permanent and durable.
3. The design and materials are compatible with the type of use and development proposed.
4. The design and materials can easily be adapted to another use in the future.
5. The design and materials meet the intent of Section 22.09 Site Development Requirements as expressed in Section 22.09.010.
6. The project involves only interior expansion that does not affect the exterior appearance of the building.

b. General Building Design Requirements.

1. Building materials must be permanent and durable and shall be designed in a manner that promotes high quality architectural design and character.
2. Building colors shall not be a contrasting departure from surrounding building colors.
3. All entrance facades shall be of a finished quality.
4. Rhythm of openings, or the number and spacing of windows, shall not be disrupted for new construction or expansions.
5. New construction shall consider the scale and proportion, or the relationship of building height to width of existing structures in the area.
6. The most visible building elevations shall include windows and architectural features customarily found on the front facade of a building, such as awnings, cornice work, edge detailing or other decorative finish materials.
7. Buildings shall be designed at a pedestrian scale with relationship to the street and sidewalk. A prominent and usable public building entrance shall be provided at the front of the building.
8. Canopies, such as over gasoline pumps, shall be designed consistent with approved building materials and colors. Support columns shall be brick or materials compatible with the principal structure. The Village may require a peaked roof to complement the principal building. Any canopy lighting shall be recessed in the canopy.

c. Long Walls. When building walls are one hundred (100) feet or greater in length, design variations must be applied to ensure that the building is not monotonous in appearance. Such variations include but are not limited to the following:

1. Recess and projections along the building facade.
2. Architectural details or features.
3. Enhanced ornamentation around building entryways.
4. Landscaping.
5. Streetscape elements.

d. Roof Design. As a part of building design, roofs shall be designed in keeping with the overall architecture of the building.

1. Asphalt, fiberglass, tile, copper, slate or cedar shingles are permitted and shall be heavily textured to indicate dimension. Standing seam metal roof systems shall be permitted only by special approval from the Village when it is demonstrated to be compatible with the residential character of the Village.

2. The following roof style elements are required:

(a) All roofs shall be mansard, gambrel, hip or gable roof styles. The slope of the roof shall not be less than 5 (rise) on 12 (run).
(b) Additional roofline treatments are encouraged and may be required by the Village in order to minimize the mass of the roof and in order to promote the residential character. These treatments include, but are not limited to offset rooflines, dormer windows, cupolas, additional accent gables and covered entryways.
(c) Flat roofs may be permitted if accent treatments are provided along the top edge of the roofline as a cornice treatment.

3. Rooftop equipment shall be screened from view of adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. The method to screen rooftop equipment shall be compatible with the building through color, scale, materials, and architectural style. The Village may require cross-section details to confirm compliance.

22.09.040 LANDSCAPING.
a. Landscape Plan Review. A separate detailed landscape plan shall be submitted as part of the approval process. The landscape plan shall demonstrate that all requirements of this Section are met and shall include the following information:

1. Planting plans shall be prepared by a registered landscape architect.
2. Illustrate location, spacing, species, and size of proposed plant material.
3. Confirm that each landscape standard is separately met on the plans.
4. Provide, where required by the Village, typical cross sections to illustrate views from adjacent land uses, and the slope, height, and width of proposed berms or landscape elements.
5. Identify trees and other landscape elements to be preserved.
6. Delineate the location of tree protection fence and limits of grading at the perimeter of areas that to be preserved.
7. Provide details to ensure proper installation and establishment of proposed plant material.
8. Identify grass areas and other methods of ground cover.
9. Identify a landscape maintenance program including a statement that all diseased, damaged or dead materials shall be replaced in accordance with requirements of this Section.

b. Minimum Planting. All plant material shall be hardy to Oakland County, be free of disease and insects, and conform to the American Standard for Nursery Stock of the American Nurserymen. The minimum plant sizes shall be provided in accordance with the following:

Plant Type Minimum Plant Size Minimum Spacing Requirements
Large Canopy Trees Three (3) inch caliper Twenty-five (25) ft on center
Ornamental Trees Two (2) inch caliperSix (6) ft height Fifteen (15) ft on center
Evergreen Trees Six (6) ft height Fifteen (15) ft on center
Large Deciduous Shrubs Two (2) ft height Four (4) - six (6) ft on center
Upright Evergreen Shrubs Two (2) ft height Three (3) - four (4) ft on center

c. General Planting.

1. Ornamental trees may be used to diversify planting requirements, provided two (2) ornamental trees shall be provided for each one (1) required canopy tree.
2. Fractions of trees shall be rounded upward to the nearest whole number.
3. All areas of open space shall contain only living materials and planting beds with the exception of approved sidewalks, bike paths, signs, driveways, essential services, and detention ponds as dictated by site conditions. On redevelopment projects, the Village has the discretion to require installation of live materials in areas currently covered by concrete, asphalt, stone, gravel or other non-living materials to increase pervious surface and enhance the site.
4. Shrub plantings shall be designed to screen parking from being visible from the roadway or adjacent land uses, as necessary.
5. Canopy trees within the greenbelt shall be planted in a manner to create a formal, consistent tree canopy along the streetscape.
6. The overall landscape plan shall not contain more than thirty three (33%) of any one (1) plant genus to ensure a hardy mixture of species.
7. Plantings shall be designed to ensure adequate sight visibility for motorists, adequate clearance for pedestrians and vehicles, clearance from overhead utility lines, adequate separation from underground utilities and accessibility to fire hydrants.
8. All landscape areas shall be protected from vehicles or other types of encroachment by concrete curbing. Bumper stops, guard rails, bollards, or any other type of method shall not be permitted. On redevelopment projects where these treatments currently exist, removal is required.
9. Landscaping shall comply with Section 22.08.080 Obstructions to Vision on Corner Lots.

d. Street Trees.

1. Street trees are required along land abutting a public street, private street or access drive to serve as an obscuring screen, noise abatement, and visual enhancement along roadway corridors.
2. Street trees shall be planted at a rate of one (1) large canopy tree per thirty (30) linear feet, or fraction thereof, of the entire road frontage. The frontage calculation shall include any openings for driveways, sidewalks or easements with the number of trees.
3. Street trees shall be planted between the sidewalk and the roadway curb, within the right-of-way. If conditions prohibit planting in the right-of-way, trees shall be planted where feasible along the right-of-way line on the subject site.

e. Buffers.

1. In order to minimize the negative impacts of conflicting adjacent land uses, a planted buffer strip shall be required when any use in the Parking, Office, or Business District or a nonresidential use in a Residential Zone District abuts a Residential Zone District (R-A, R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-2A, R-3, and RM).
2. Buffer strips shall consist of two (2) canopy trees and four (4) shrubs, or one (1) evergreen tree, one (1) canopy tree and four (4) shrubs per thirty (30) linear feet along the property line.
3. At a minimum, the width of the buffer shall be fifteen (15) feet, measured from the property line.
4. The Village has the discretion to require a decorative screening wall within the buffer area in cases where it is determined the above referenced planting requirements are not sufficient to minimize incompatible land use impacts. In those cases, the wall shall comply with the following requirements:

(a) Walls cannot extend into the required front setback.
(b) Wall height shall not be less than four (4) feet nor more than six (6) feet.
(c) Walls shall be constructed of the primary building material of the principal structure as determined by the Village. They shall be made of unpierced and reinforced poured concrete with false brick design or a capped brick wall, masonry brick or poured masonry decorative wall. Cement or slag blocks shall not be permitted.

f. On-Site Screening. On-site landscape screening is required to screen outside storage areas, mechanical equipment, loading and service bays, and similar operations in a manner acceptable to the Village.

g. Parking Lots. All parking, drive aisles, loading, and other paved ground surface areas used for vehicular parking shall have internal landscaping to provide visual and climatic relief from broad expanses of pavement and to channelize and define logical areas for pedestrian and vehicular circulation. The following parking area landscaping is required.

1. Required parking area landscaping shall be placed within the parking lot surface and may also be provided along the edge of parking lot extending no more than ten (10) feet from the edge of the pavement provided it is located within the subject lot.

2. One (1) canopy tree shall be required for each 2,000 square feet of the total paved surface, including parking, drive aisles, and loading. At least two (2) parking lot trees shall be provided on each site.

3. At least one-third (1/3) of the required trees shall be placed within landscaped islands situated in the parking lot.

4. When visible from a street or access drive, screening shall be provided to shield views of parked cars from passing motorists and pedestrians in the form of a minimum three (3) foot tall hedgerow. Decorative treatment may be incorporated such as a combination of a hedgerow with tree clusters, or with a two and half (2.5) foot tall wood fence, brick wall or wrought iron fencing with brick pilasters.

5. When provided, landscape parking lot islands shall meet the following requirements:

(a) Each separate landscaped island shall be a minimum of one hundred and fifty (150) square feet in area.
(b) Each parking lot island shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet wide.
(c) The island shall be two (2) feet shorter than adjacent parking spaces.
(d) A minimum curve radius of five (5) feet is required.
(e) Each island shall contain at least one (1) tree.

h. Waste Receptacles. Garbage, rubbish, and similar refuse to be stored outside shall be stored within approved receptacles and situated in a centralized location(s) on the site. The waste receptacle and its enclosure shall comply with the following requirements:

1. A space for the location of a waste receptacle, including a dumpster or compactor, paved with a concrete pad, shall be provided.
2. The waste receptacle base shall be at least nine (9) feet by six (6) feet in area, constructed of six (6) inches of reinforced concrete. The base shall extend six (6) feet beyond the waste receptacle pad or gate to support the front axle of a refuse vehicle.
3. The waste receptacle shall be located in a rear yard or interior side yard whichever has the least impact on adjoining uses and least visibility from the street and shall be clearly accessible to servicing vehicles.
4. The location of waste receptacles shall not conflict with on-site circulation of vehicles and trucks.
5. Waste receptacles shall be screened from view on all sides. Such screening shall consist on three (3) sides of a screening wall which is not less than six (6) feet in height or at least one (1) foot above the height of the enclosed waste receptacle, whichever is greater.
6. The screening wall shall replicate the primary materials of the building.
7. An opaque, lockable gate providing access shall also provide screening.

i. Maintenance.

1. All required plant materials shall be planted prior to issuing a Certificate of Occupancy. A financial guarantee is required if the project is completed during a time of year when planting is impractical.
2. Tree stakes, guy wires, and tree wrap shall be removed after completion of the initial growing season.
3. All landscaped areas shall be provided with a source of irrigation.
4. The owner of the property shall be responsible for the regular maintenance of all landscaping. Landscaped areas and plant materials required by this Section shall be kept free from refuse and debris. Plant materials, including lawn, shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance per the intent of the approved site plan. If any plant material required with an approved site plan dies or becomes diseased, it shall be replaced within thirty (30) days of receiving written notice from the Village or within an extended time period as specified in said notice.

j. Landscape Waiver. The Village may determine that conditions warrant a waiver from or modification of the landscaping provisions of Section 22.09.040. In making such determination, the Village may consider the following criteria:

1. Presence of existing natural vegetation
2. Topography
3. Existing wetland, floodplain and poor soils areas
4. Existing and proposed building placement
5. Building heights and views
6. Types and distance to adjacent land uses
7. Dimensional conditions unique to the parcel
8. Provision of adequate sight distances for motorists
9. Health, safety and welfare of the Village
10. Future land use proposed in the Village Master Plan
11. Drainage conditions
12. For existing building expansion projects, when strict compliance would hinder the ability to meet parking requirements for the site

22.09.050 LIGHTING. The intent of this subsection is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public by recognizing that buildings and sites need to be illuminated for safety, security and visibility for pedestrians and motorists. To do so, requirements are imposed for various forms of lighting that will: minimize light pollution; maintain safe nighttime driver performance on public roadways; preserve the restful quality of nighttime by eliminating intrusive artificial light and lighting that unnecessarily contributes to 'sky glow'; reduce light pollution and light trespass from light sources onto adjacent properties; conserve electrical energy; and curtail the degradation of the nighttime visual environment.

a. Submittal Requirements. The following information must be included in the required site plan submission, as applicable to the project:

1. Location of all proposed and existing freestanding, building-mounted and canopy light fixtures on the site plan and building elevations;
2. Photometric grid overlaid on the proposed site plan indicating the overall light intensity throughout the site (in footcandles);
3. Specifications and details for the type of fixture being proposed including the total lumen output, type of lamp and method of shielding;
4. Use of the fixture proposed; and
5. Any other information deemed necessary by the Building Official to determine compliance with provisions of this Section.

b. General Lighting Requirements. The following requirements apply to all pole-mounted and building mounted exterior lighting.

1. Exterior lighting fixtures shall be fully shielded and directed downward to prevent off-site glare. Further, the design and size of such fixtures shall be compatible with the architecture of the building.
2. The intensity of light within a site shall not exceed ten (10) footcandles or one (1) footcandle at any property line, except where the site abuts a residential district or use whereby a maximum of only 0.5 footcandles at any property line is permitted.
3. Metal halide fixtures, or other fixture type that reflects similar illumination, shall be used in an effort to maintain a unified lighting standard throughout the Village and prevent 'sky glow.'
4. The Village may require decorative light fixtures as an alternative to shielded fixtures where it will be compatible with the Village character.
5. The maximum height of pole-mounted light fixtures shall be fourteen (14) feet measured from the finished grade of the parking lot to the top of the fixture. The Village may allow a taller fixture.
6. Luminous tube and exposed bulb fluorescent lighting is prohibited as an architectural detail on all buildings, such as along the roofline and eaves, around windows, etc.

c. Miscellaneous Lighting Requirements. The following lighting requirements apply to other types of lighting that may be proposed either interior or exterior to the site.

1. Any light fixtures visible through a window must be shielded to prevent glare at the property line.
2. Luminous tube (includes neon) and exposed bulb fluorescent lighting (visible from the property line) is prohibited unless it is part of a sign that meets the requirements of Section 22.32 Signs.
3. The internal illumination of building-mounted canopies is prohibited.
4. Indirect illumination of signs, canopies, window displays and buildings is permitted provided there is no glare.
5. The use of laser light source, searchlights or any similar high intensity light for outdoor advertisement or entertainment is prohibited.
6. Lighting shall not be of a flashing, moving or intermittent type (see also regulations applicable to digital messages, Section 22.32).

22.09.060 ACCESS MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS. These standards are intended to preserve the capacity of the street system and to minimize potential for traffic collisions, in balance with the need to provide reasonable access to properties. Commercial driveways or driveways, referred to in this section, shall include driveways serving any nonresidential use as applicable to these Site Development Requirements.

a. Location in General. Driveways shall be located to minimize interference with the free movement of traffic, to provide adequate sight distance, and to provide the most favorable driveway grade. Driveways and association access features, such as radii, right turn lanes, passing lanes and tapers, shall be located entirely within the right-of-way frontage, unless otherwise approved by the Village.

b. Number of Driveways. Access to a parcel shall consist of either a single two-way driveway or a pair of one-way driveways where one (1) driveway is designed and appropriately signed to accommodate ingress movements and the other egress movements. Other circumstances may require the following:

1. Where a parcel has frontage along two (2) streets, access shall be provided only along the street with the lower average daily traffic volume, unless the Village determines this would negatively affect traffic operations or surrounding land uses.
2. Where the property has continuous frontage of over three hundred (300) feet, the Village may allow an additional access point.

c. Driveway Spacing from an Intersection. Minimum spacing requirements between a proposed driveway and an intersection either adjacent or on the opposite side of the street may be set on a case-by-case basis but in no instance shall be less than the distances listed below. The following measurements are from the near edge of the proposed driveway, measured at the throat perpendicular to the street, to the near lane edge of the intersecting street or pavement edge for uncurbed sections.

Location of Driveway Minimum Spacing for a Full Movement Driveway Minimum Spacing for a Channelized Driveway Restricting Left Turns
Along major roadways* intersecting street is a major roadway 150 feet 95 feet
Along major roadways intersecting street is not a major roadway 100 feet 75 feet
Along other Roads 75 feet 50 feet
* Major roadways include 14 Mile Road, 13 Mile Road, Lahser Road, Evergreen Road, Southfield Road, and Greenfield Road

d. Minimum Spacing between Driveways. Minimum spacing between two commercial driveways shall be determined based upon posted speed limits along the parcel frontage. The minimum dimensions indicated below are measured from each driveway's centerline

Posted Speed Limit (MPH) Minimum Driveway Spacing (in feet)
25 130
30 185
35 245
40 300
45 350
50 and higher 455

e. Modification of Standards. Given the existing built conditions through much of the Village, the standards above may be modified by the Village on a case-by-case basis depending upon analysis of existing and expected traffic operations, and restrictions imposed by current development or site conditions.

f. Shared Access System. The Village may require a shared access system where it is determined to have a beneficial impact on traffic operations and safety. This determination shall be based on the expected traffic patterns, existing traffic conditions and the feasibility for shared access. This shared access system could involve a shared driveway, connections of parking lots or a drive connecting two or more lots or uses, access from a side street, a shared driveway or service road connecting two or more properties or uses. In such cases a shared access agreement shall be provided to the Village.

22.09.070 GENERAL SITE DESIGN REQUIREMENTS. In addition to the specific requirements, the following are required:
a. Construction of new or expanded off-street parking areas shall be located in the side or rear yard, where practical. Front yard parking shall be screened as set forth in Section 22.09.040 (g).

b. Loading and unloading and other types of service areas shall be located in the rear yard and shall not conflict with vehicular circulation. Where it is visible from a residential district, additional screening may be required by the Village in addition to the required screening of Section 22.09.040 (e).

c. To the extent feasible, new building construction or expansions shall provide a building close to the front lot line, with no front yard parking, at the same time complying with the minimum front yard setback of the district.

d. Visible utility lines and equipment detract from the aesthetics of a site. Therefore, where feasible, new on-site utility lines shall be installed underground and existing on-site utility lines shall be buried. The location of ground mounted equipment shall ensure the least visible impact and shall be screened in accordance with Section 22.09.040 (f).

e. Sidewalks or bikepaths are required in accordance with Section 22.08.410. Internal pedestrian circulation shall also be provided on for all sites. This shall be in the form of the following:

1. An internal sidewalk is required between the public sidewalk and the front entrance to the building. Where parking is located between the building and the public sidewalk, other methods shall be required to ensure a safe pedestrian system such as cross walk striping.

2. Other internal walkways shall be required to allow people to move safely through the parking areas, as determined by the Village. {Section 22.09 added by Ord. 318, 9-7-04}

22.09.080 MAINTENANCE AGREEMENTS. A maintenance agreement shall be required for all vegetative and structural best management practices (BMPs) to be constructed on site. {Ord. 353; 11-18-14}

22.10 PP-PUBLIC PROPERTY DISTRICT
22.10.010 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE

The intent of the PP-Public Property District is to provide a district wherein community services and facilities may be optimally located with respect to providing public service within the Village.

22.10.020 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES

In the PP District, no uses shall be permitted unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance, except the following:

Principal Uses

Recreational

Public indoor recreation areas, community recreation centers, swimming pools, and similar

 

Public parks or open space, outdoor recreation areas, playgrounds and ballfields, public gardens, and fountains

 

Civic

Municipal and other governmental buildings such as village/ township/state/county/federal offices, post offices, public museums and libraries, memorials and monuments, and community centers, but not including publicly owned and operated warehouses, garages, or storage yards

 

Art galleries, private libraries or museums, or similar

 

Churches, temples, and similar places of worship, including living quarters for the church ministry or other members of a religious order who primarily carry out their duties on site

 

Parking 

Any permitted principal use in P-Parking Zone District

In accordance with

Section 22.28

Accessory Uses

Temporary or seasonal accessory outdoor displays

In accordance with

Section 22.08.480

Any permitted accessory uses in P-Parking Zone District

 

Church or religious accessory uses and accessory structures such as day care centers, auditoriums, parish centers, athletic or recreational facilities, and similar

Each use or structure shall be subject to separate approval

Any use that is customarily incidental to permitted principal use

 

{Ord. 374, 1-21-20}

SECTION 22.10.030 PERMITTED USES AFTER SPECIAL APPROVAL

The following uses may be permitted, subject to the conditions imposed in SECTION 22.08.300 and subject further to the approval of the Village Council:

Permitted Uses after Special Approval

Civic

Municipal and other governmental buildings which generate truck traffic or include outside storage, garages, or warehouses

 

Utility Facilities

Essential public service utility buildings such as telephone exchange buildings, electric transformer stations and substations, gas regulator stations

 

Water towers 

 

Cemeteries

 

Recreational

Private, noncommercial indoor recreation areas, recreation centers, swimming pool clubs, and similar

 

Private, noncommercial outdoor recreation areas, playgrounds and ballfields, and similar

 

Accessory Uses

Permanent accessory outdoor displays or storage

 

Front open space parking

 

{Ord. 374, 1-21-20}

22.10.040 AREA, HEIGHT, BULK AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS

Area, height, bulk and placement requirements, unless otherwise specified, are as provided in Section 22.24, Schedule of Regulations - PP-Public Property District.

22.10.050 SITE PLAN REVIEW

Site plan review requirements are as provided in Section 22.08.290.

22.14 R-A, R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-2A, R-2B, AND R-3 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
22.14.010.  STATEMENT  OF  PURPOSE.  The single-family residential districts are established as districts in which the principal use of land is for single-family dwellings, but with each district having different minimum lot sizes to encourage differing development character and densities.  For these residential districts, in promoting the general purpose of this Section, the specific intent of this section is:

a. To permit the construction of, and the continued use of the land for single-family dwellings; and

b. To prohibit business, commercial or industrial use of the land, and to prohibit any other use which would substantially interfere with development or continuation of single-family dwellings in the district.

SECTION  22.14.020  PERMITTED  PRINCIPAL  USES.  In the RA, R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-2A, R2-B and R-3 districts no uses shall be permitted except the following: {Ord. 326, 10-27-07}


Principal Uses

Residential Dwellings

Single-family detached dwellings

 

Child Care

Family day care home and group day care home

In accordance with

Section 22.08.370

Parking 

Public off-street parking in connection with a permitted principal use

In accordance with

Section 22.28

Accessory Uses

Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to permitted principal use such as a garage or shed, or private greenhouse

 

Private swimming pools and similar facilities for single family use

 

Fences, walls, and privacy screens

In accordance with

Section 22.08.150

Permitted signage

In accordance with

Section 22.23

Home occupations

In accordance with

Section 22.04

 {Ord. 252, 5-12-91} {Ord. 373, 1-21-20}

22.14.030  PERMITTED  USES  AFTER  SPECIAL  APPROVAL.  The following uses may be permitted in RA, R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-2A, R-2B and R-3 zoning districts, subject to the conditions imposed in SECTION 22.08.300 and subject further to the approval of the Village Council: {Ord. 326, 10-27-07}


Permitted Uses with Special Approval

Civic

Public utility buildings and essential public services such as telephone exchange buildings, electric transformer stations and substations, and gas regulator stations

Operational requirements must necessitate their location in the district to serve the immediate vicinity

Churches, temples, and similar places of worship, including living quarters for the church ministry or other members of a religious order who primarily carry out their duties on site

 

Church or religious accessory uses and accessory structures such as day care centers, auditoriums, parish centers, athletic or recreational facilities, and similar

Each use or structure shall be subject to separate special approval

Municipal and other governmental buildings such as village/ township/state/county/federal offices, post offices, public museums, libraries and community centers, but not including publicly owned and operated warehouses, garages, or storage yards

 

Recreational

Community groups or private social clubs such as Knights of Columbus, Veterans of Foreign Wars, Kiwanis, or similar

 

Private, noncommercial indoor recreation areas, recreation centers, swimming pool clubs, and similar

Education

Non-profit schools, private or parochial, including latch-key and similar accessory programs

 

Non-profit schools, private or parochial, related accessory uses and structures such as schools, day care centers, auditoriums, parish centers, athletic or recreational facilities, and similar uses.

Each use or structure shall be subject to separate special approval

Accessory Uses

Public off-street parking in connection with uses permitted by special land use approval

In accordance with

Section 22.28

 {Ord. 252, 5-12-91} {Ord. 367, 7-20-19} {Ord. 373, 1-21-20}

22.14.040  AREA,  HEIGHT,  BULK  AND  PLACEMENT  REQUIREMENTS.  Area, height, bulk and placement requirements, unless otherwise specified, are as provided in Section 22.24, Schedule of Regulations - Residential Districts.

22.14.050  SITE  PLAN  REVIEW.  Site plan review requirements are as provided in Section 22.08.290.

22.16 R-M MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
22.16.010 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE

The R-M Multiple-Family Residential District is designed primarily for multiple-family dwellings. It is designed to promote a harmonious mixture of multiple-family uses in a basically residential environment and also to provide a buffer between single-family residential and commercial uses.

22.16.020 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES

In the R-M district, no uses shall be permitted unless otherwise provided in this section, except the following:


Principal Uses

Residential

Multi-family dwellings, attached or detached, such as duplexes, townhomes, apartments, or similar

 

Child Care

Family day care home and group day care home

In accordance with

Section 22.08.370

Recreational

Private indoor recreation areas or recreation centers, swimming pools, and similar facilities

 

Private open space and passive outdoor recreation areas, public gardens, and fountains

 

Parking 

Any permitted principal use in P-Parking Zone District

In accordance with

Section 22.28

Accessory Uses

Home occupations

In accordance with

Section 22.04

Greenbelt

In accordance with

Section 22.24

Any permitted accessory uses in P-Parking Zone District

 

 

{Ord. 367, 7-20-19} {Ord. 371, 1-21-20}

22.16.030 PERMITTED USES AFTER SPECIAL APPROVAL

The following uses may be permitted in the R-M zoning district subject to the conditions imposed in Section 22.08.300 and subject further to the approval of the Village Council:

Permitted Uses with Special Approval

Child Care

Child care center, Preschool, Daycare

In accordance with

Section 22.08.370

Adult Foster Care

Adult foster care, small group home

In accordance with

Section 22.08.370

Adults foster care, large group home

Congregate adult foster care facilities

Health Care and Medical

Nursing home and convalescent centers

 

Accessory Uses

Masonry wall, up to six (6) foot high, in lieu of a greenbelt

In accordance with

Section 22.24, (h)

 {Ord. 252, 5-12-91} {Ord. 367, 7-20-19} {Ord. 371, 1-21-20}

22.16.040 AREA, HEIGHT, BULK AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS

Area, height, bulk and placement requirements, unless otherwise specified, are as provided in Section 22.24. Schedule of Regulations-Multiple-Family Residential District.

22.16.050 SITE PLAN REVIEW

Site plan review requirements are as provided in Section 22.08.290.

22.18 P-PARKING DISTRICT
22.18.010 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE

The P-Parking District is intended to permit the establishment of areas to be used solely for off-street vehicular parking of private passenger cars only. This district is also designed to afford maximum protection to adjacent residential areas by providing appropriate masonry walls and landscaping and well-designed parking lot facilities.

22.18.020 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES

In all P-Parking Districts no land shall be used, and no building shall be hereafter erected, converted or structurally altered for any use other than:

Principal Uses

Parking 

Public off-street parking facilities for the parking of self-propelled motor vehicles for periods not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours at any one time, provided there shall be no business use transacted on or within the parking area

In accordance with

Section 22.28

Accessory Uses

Masonry walls, landscaping, fences, and similar screening

 

Permitted signage

In accordance with

Section 22.23

{Ord. 372, 1-21-20}

22.18.030 PERMITTED USES AFTER SPECIAL APPROVAL

The following uses may be permitted subject to the conditions imposed in Section 22.08.300 and subject further to the approval of the Village Council:

Permitted Uses with Special Approval

Utility

Public utility buildings and essential public services such as telephone exchange buildings, electric transformer stations and substations, and gas regulator stations

Operational requirements must necessitate their location in the district to serve the immediate vicinity

{Ord. 372, 1-21-20}

22.18.040 AREA, HEIGHT, BULK AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS

Area, height, bulk and placement requirements, unless otherwise specified, are as provided in Section 22.24, Schedule of Regulations - P-Parking District.

22.18.050 SITE PLAN REVIEW

Site plan review requirements are as provided in Section 22.08.290.

22.20 0-1 OFFICE DISTRICT
22.20.010  STATEMENT  OF  PURPOSE.  The 0-1 Office District is designed to accommodate office uses, sales-office uses and basic personal services characteristically provided to service office areas.

22.20.020  PERMITTED  PRINCIPAL  USES.  In the 0-1 Office District no uses shall be permitted unless otherwise provided in this section, except the following:

Principal Uses

Recreational Uses

Community groups or private social clubs such as Knights of Columbus, Veterans of Foreign Wars, Kiwanis, or similar

 

Public open space such as common greens or plazas, public passive recreation areas, public playgrounds, and public gardens or fountains

 

Civic

Municipal and other governmental buildings such as village/ township/state/county/federal offices, post offices, public museums, libraries and community centers, but not including publicly owned and operated warehouses, garages or storage yards

 

Art galleries, private libraries or museums, or similar

 

Churches, temples, and similar places of worship, including living quarters for the church ministry or other members of a religious order who primarily carry out their duties on site

 

Health Care and Medical

Medical offices, urgent care facilities, or clinics up to 15,000 square feet of gross floor area

 

Veterinary clinics or hospitals and related offices

 

General Office

Offices up to 15,000 square feet of gross floor area which do not entail the on-site sale, lease, processing, or servicing of personal property such as advertising, accounting/bookkeeping, architectural, attorney/legal services, engineering, employment, real estate, secretarial, or any similar use

 

Offices of non-profit professional, civic, social, political, and religious organizations

 

Studios of photographers and artists

 

Contractor offices and buildings up to 15,000 square feet of gross floor area with storage of equipment and machinery on

 

only indoors

 

Parking 

Any permitted principal use in P-Parking Zone District

In accordance with

Section 22.28

Accessory Uses

Temporary or seasonal accessory outdoor sales and displays

In accordance with

Section 22.08.480

Any permitted accessory uses in P-Parking Zone District

 

Church or religious accessory uses and accessory structures such as day care centers, auditoriums, parish centers, athletic or recreational facilities, and similar

Each use or structure shall be subject to separate approval

{Ord. 376, 1-21-20}

22.20.030  PERMITTED  USES  AFTER  SPECIAL  APPROVAL.  The following uses may be permitted subject to the conditions imposed in Section 22.08.300  and subject further to the approval of the Village Council:

Permitted Uses with Special Approval

Child Care Uses

Child care center, Preschool, Daycare

In accordance with

Section 22.08.370

Health Care and Medical

Medical offices, urgent care facilities, or clinics over 15,000 square feet of gross floor area

 

Hospitals

 

Animal shelters and animal day care facilities

 

General Office

Any permitted office use over 15,000 square feet of gross floor area which do not entail the on-site sale, lease, processing, or servicing of personal property

 

Banks and similar financial institutions, with or without drive-up service or teller machines

 

Standalone drive-up teller machines

 

Personal service, retail, and restaurants within an office

 

Utility

Public utility buildings and essential public services such as telephone exchange buildings, electric transformer stations and substations, and gas regulator stations

Operational requirements must necessitate their location in the district to serve the immediate vicinity

Adult Regulated Uses

Any adult regulated use, as defined in Section 22.04

In accordance with

Section 22.08.340

Accessory Uses

Permanent accessory outdoor sales, displays, or storage

 

Front open space parking

 

Accessory drive-up services not listed

 

{Ord. 376, 1-21-20}
 
22.20.040  AREA,  HEIGHT,  BULK  AND  PLACEMENT  REQUIREMENTS.  Area, height, bulk and placement requirements, unless otherwise specified, are as provided in Section 22.24, Schedule of Regulations - Office District.

22.20.050  SITE  PLAN  REVIEW.  Site plan review requirements are as provided in Section 22.08.290.

22.21 PARKING AND/OR STORAGE OF CONVEYANCES OTHER THAN LICENSED PRIVATE PASSENGER CARS OR VEHICLES
22.21.010 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE

From and after June 1, 1980, parking and/or outside storage of any conveyance for use on land, in the air or on the water, other than licensed private passenger cars or vehicles shall be prohibited in all residential and B-1 zoning districts except as herein permitted.

a. Definitions:

1. Licensed Private Passenger Car or Vehicle: Any vehicle for which the principal purpose is transportation of people on streets and highways. Such classification shall not include recreational vehicles as defined in paragraph below nor shall it include any conveyance, equipment or vehicle the primary purpose of which is other than the transportation of people on streets and highways.

2. Recreational Vehicles: Boats, boat trailers and any vehicle equipped for camping, sleeping or living purposes or any part thereof. The classification includes mobile homes, campers, truck campers, camper trailers and motor homes.

b. Exceptions:

1. Any recreational vehicle bearing a current license plate and owned by and titled to an occupant of a residential dwelling may be parked and/or stored in the rear open space of such residence not less than ten feet (10') from the rear lot line when abutting a residential dwelling and not less than five feet (5') from any side lot line which abuts a residential dwelling and not less than twenty-five feet (25') or the equivalent of the side setback of the principal building, whichever is least, when abutting an adjacent side street.

2. Any recreational vehicle as defined in this ordinance may be parked on a driveway for purposes of loading and/or unloading for a total of not more than six (6) day (one hundred forty-four hours [144]) during any one calendar month; provided, however, that each loading and/or unloading period shall not exceed three (3) consecutive days (seventy-two [72] hours).

3. Any vehicle designed for use on streets and highways may be parked in the driveway of a residence if it is the sole means of transportation to and from work for one or more occupants of such residence notwithstanding the fact that it may not be a Licensed Private Passenger Vehicle.

4. No recreational vehicle as defined in this ordinance shall be used for living purposes within the Village of Beverly Hills or shall be connected to the sewer or water system of the Village.

5. Upon special permit first obtained from the building inspector, a recreational vehicle undergoing repair or a recreational vehicle offered for sale without advertisement or sign on vehicle or recreational vehicle owned by a non-occupant of the dwelling may be parked in the front yard for not exceeding a one (1) week period.

22.22 B-BUSINESS DISTRICT
22.22.010 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE

The B-Business District is intended to permit retail business and service uses which are needed to serve the residential areas. In order to promote such business developments so far as is possible and appropriate in each area, uses are prohibited which would create hazards, offensive and loud noises, vibration, smoke, glare or heavy truck traffic. The intent of this district is also to encourage the concentration of shopping areas to the mutual advantage of both the consumers and merchants and thereby to promote the best use of land at certain strategic locations.

22.22.020 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES

In the B-Business District no uses shall be permitted unless otherwise provided in this section, except the following:

Principal Uses

Child Care

Child care center, preschool, commercial daycare

In accordance with

Section 22.08.370

Recreational

Indoor health clubs, fitness centers, gyms and aerobic clubs

 

Motion picture theaters

 

Civic

 

Churches, temples, and similar places of worship, including living quarters for the church ministry or other members of a religious order who primarily carry out their duties on site

 

Education

Vocational and technical training facilities

 

Commercial schools and studios for teaching photography, art, music, theater, dance, martial arts, ballet, or similar

Health Care

 

Any permitted principal health care use in the O  Office District

 

General Office

Any permitted general office use in the O  Office District

 

Business services such as mailing, copying, data processing, and retail office supplies

Retail

 

Retail uses up to 25,000 square feet of gross floor area

 

Retail sales of goods assembled, manufactured, compounded, processed, packaged or treated from previously prepared materials, or repaired or stored on the premises

Service establishment of an office, showroom, or workshop nature such as an electrician, decorator, seamstress/tailor, baker, painter, upholsterer, appliance repair, photographic reproduction, or similar that requires a retail adjunct

 

Indoor retail sales and storage of building and lumber supplies, home improvement items, and similar materials

 

Service

 

Dry cleaning drop-off without drive-up service

 

Laundromats

Personal and business service establishments performing services on the premises including seamstress/tailor, shoe repair, tanning salons, beauty parlor, barber shop, tattoo parlor, massage, skin care, or similar

 

Personal service, retail, and restaurants within an office

 

Tool and equipment rental, excluding vehicles

 

Restaurants

 

Restaurants and coffee shops without drive-thru or drive-in  

 

Restaurants, bars, and microbreweries serving alcoholic beverages

Restaurants and coffee shops with carry-out service or open front windows

 

Parking 

 

Any permitted principal use in P-Parking Zone District

 

Accessory Uses

Temporary or seasonal accessory outdoor sales and displays

In accordance with

Section 22.28

Any permitted accessory uses in P-Parking Zone District

Any use that is customarily incidental to permitted principal use

In accordance with

Section 22.08.480

Retail uses may be permitted one (1) exterior convenience item, such as ice chest, vending machine, propane storage, provided the items are clearly related and accessory to the principal use.

 

Church or religious accessory uses and accessory structures such as day care centers, auditoriums, parish centers, athletic or recreational facilities, and similar

 

 

Allowable per Administrative approval upon finding the items cannot be located inside the building and located adjacent to the principal building in a manner that does not block or disrupt pedestrian or vehicular circulation, or endanger the public health, safety, and welfare.

 

Each use or structure shall be subject to separate approval

 {Ord. 343; 9-1-12} {Ord. 375; 1-21-20}

22.22.030 PERMITTED USES AFTER SPECIAL APPROVAL

The following uses may be permitted subject to the conditions imposed in Section 22.08.300 and subject further to the approval of the Village Council:

Permitted Uses after Special Approval

Civic

Bus passenger stations, not including terminals

 

Recreational Uses

Outdoor commercial or private recreation, recreation centers including amusement parks, batting cages, or go-cart tracks

 

Miniature golf courses

 

Public arenas or stadiums

 

Indoor commercial recreation (skating, bowling, soccer, dance academies, arcades, indoor shooting/archery ranges, indoor golf including golf dome)

 

Health Care and Medical

Any use permitted with Special Approval in the O  Office District

 

General Office

Any use permitted with Special Approval in the O  Office District

 

Retail

Retail uses over 25,000 square feet of gross floor area

 

Drive-thru windows accessory to any of the retail uses

 

Nurseries, home improvement supplies, and similar outdoor retail sale of vegetation, supplies, and equipment

 

Commercial outdoor display, sales, and/or storage of lumber, building supplies, and similar materials.

 

Service

Dry cleaning drop-off with drive-up service

 

Funeral home and mortuary establishments

 

Open air businesses

 

Hotel/motel, including accessory convention or meeting facilities and restaurants

 

Indoor mini-storage and self-storage facilities

 

Restaurants

Restaurants and coffee shops with drive-thru or drive-in service

 

Restaurants, bars, and microbreweries serving alcoholic beverages that provide dancing and/or live music

 

Banquet halls

 

Auto Service

Auto and gasoline filling stations, including up to two (2) exterior convenience item, such as ice chest, vending machine, propane storage, provided the items are clearly related and accessory to the principal use.

Exterior convenience items are allowable per Administrative approval upon finding the items cannot be located inside the building and located adjacent to the principal building in a manner that does not block or disrupt pedestrian or vehicular circulation, or endanger the public health, safety, and welfare.

Automobile repair establishments including accessory retail of new auto parts

Salvage yards and tire stores are not included

Automobile, motorcycle, boat, and recreational vehicle sales, new and used

 

Automobile or truck and trailer leasing and rental

 

Automobile wash, automatic or self-serve

Shall be fully enclosed in a building

Adult Regulated Uses

Any adult regulated use, as defined in Section 22.04

In accordance with

Section 22.08.340

Accessory Uses

Any use permitted with Special Approval in the O  Office District

 

 {Ord. 343; 9-1-12} {Ord. 375; 1-21-20}

22.22.040 AREA, HEIGHT, BULK AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS

Area, height, bulk and placement requirements, unless otherwise specified, are as provided in Section 22.24, Schedule of Regulations - B-Business District.

22.22.050 SITE PLAN REVIEW

Site plan review requirements are as provided in Section 22.08.290.

22.23 VILLAGE CENTER OVERLAY DISTRICT
22.23.1 AUTHORITY

Pursuant to authority granted in Section 125.3503 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (P.A. 110 of 2006, as amended), this Overlay District is written to permit flexibility in the regulation of land development in the Beverly Hills Village Center as needed to achieve the vision set forth in the published Village Center Plan.

22.23.2 INTRODUCTION AND ELEMENTS OF THE VILLAGE CENTER

a. Village Center Plan. This Section of the Zoning Ordinance is intended to implement the Vision, Concept and Design Guidelines for the Village Center as established in the Village's published Village Center Plan. The Village Center Plan articulates design principles to support the Vision and gives examples of how sites along the corridor could redevelop. The Design Guidelines provide standards for building, site and district design for the Village Center. The regulations contained in this Section enumerate the principles of the Village Center Plan inasmuch as possible; however, reference to the published Village Center Plan is highly recommended.

b.Overlay District Elements. To achieve the vision set forth in the Village Center Plan, the Village has established an Overlay District comprised of the following key elements:

1. Regulating Plan. Shows recommended building height and location of streets in the Village Center, and Primary Frontages where regulation of building mass is most important to create the streetscape and environments envisioned. Some flexibility in the location of streets may be permitted by the Village, upon recommendation by the Planning Commission as discussed in this Section.

2. Slip Street Detail. This illustration shows a possible cross-section for Southfield Road, as discussed in Section 22.23.5. Such a design requires approval from the Road Commission for Oakland County.

3. Form-Based Code. Enumerated in this Section, provides the regulatory framework for development and redevelopment in the Village Center Overlay Distrct, as shown on the Regulating Plan discussed above.

22.23.3 PURPOSE AND DEVELOPMENT PRINCIPLES

The purpose of this District is to accomplish the following:

a. Define a Village Center area for Beverly Hills that will create an identity for its commercial core

b. Implement the Village Center Vision as illustrated in the Beverly Hills Village Center Plan

c. Promote development of an integrated, mixed-use, pedestrian-oriented environment with buildings containing commercial, residential and office uses

d. Provide street linkages and internal drives to serve the development within the district, and logical street connections to developments outside the district

e. Regulate building height and require appropriate landscaping and screening to achieve appropriate scale along streetscapes and ensure proper transition to nearby residential neighborhoods.

Create a definable sense of place for the Village with a pedestrian oriented, traditional urban form that encourages residents to visit, stay, and enjoy the district

g. Encourage development consistent with the desired vision through incentives that will encourage use of the form-based code option

22.23.4 APPLICABILITY

a. Application of Regulations. Within the Village Center Overlay District, all requirements of the Beverly Hills Zoning Ordinance shall apply, except as modified by this Section. When applying the regulations to the form-based zones, if regulations elsewhere within this ordinance conflict or appear to conflict with the regulations of this Section, the regulations of this Section shall apply.

b. Interpretations and Appeals.This Overlay District relies, in part, on the Village Center Plan adopted by the Village Planning Commission. As such, certain flexibility is required to implement the Village Center Plan, depending on the timing, location and nature of redevelopment within the Village Center. Therefore, the Planning Commission shall have the authority to act on appeals, interpretations or modifications, in order to ensure they are consistent with the overall vision. Modifications are discussed in Section 22.23.11.

c. Underlying Zoning. Where the term "underlying zoning" is used, it shall refer to the zoning of the subject property as designated on the official Zoning Map for the Village of Beverly Hills and any applicable regulations that apply to that zoning district. Underlying this Village Center Overlay District are the following underlying zoning districts:
1. R-1, Single Family Residential
2. R-3, Single Family Residential
3. RM, Multiple Family Residential
4. O-1, Office
5. B, Business
6. P, Parking

d. Expansion of the District. In order to provide for the harmonious development and use of land within the Village Center, and to see to its logical extension, the Village Council, upon recommendation by the Planning Commission, may extend the boundaries of the Village Center where development is proposed that is consistent with the Village Center Plan and the Purpose and Development Principles in Section 22.23.3 above.

e. Conflicts. Where the provisions of this Section conflicts with other pprovisions of the Beverly Hills Code of Ordinances, the provisions of this Section shall govern.

f. Triggers for Compliance. Use and development of land within this Overlay District shall be as follows:

1. Existing Uses. An existing use shall be permitted to continue.

2. Changes in Use. Changes in use from one use to another use that does not require additional parking or building additions shall be permitted.

3. Site Improvements. Site and building maintenance shall be allowed.

4. Building Expansions

a. Exempt Expansions. Additions of a size equal or less than 10% of the gross square footage of the existing buildings may be permitted and may be constructed according to the requirements of the Village Center Overlay District or the underlying zoning, at the property owner's discretion.

b. Minor Expansions. Additions of a size greater than 10% but equal or less than 25% of the gross square footage of the existing building, shall be permitted, but shall meet the Site Layout Requirements for the Zone in which it is located unless modifications are allowed in accordance with Section 22.23.11.

c. Major Expansions. Additions of a size greater than 25% of the gross square footage of the existing building shall meet the requirements of this Village Center Overlay District.

5. New Buildings and Development. New development projects proposed under this Village Center Overlay District, shall meet all requirements of this Section.

6. Modifications. Modifications of the requirements in this Village Center Overlay District may be approved when consistent with the Village Center Plan, and as discussed in Section 22.23.11.

22.23.5 STANDARDS FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT

a. Streets and Access. The Regulating Plan shows recommended street locations to provide interconnectivity and access to internal portions of the Village Center. These streets will be maintained by private property owners, but cooperation among owners is needed to create the connections needed to implement the Regulating Plan. To ensure such coordinated access is phased in as development occurs, each development shall be responsible for recording easements to allow for shared access.

1. Location. The location of streets shall be generally consistent with the Regulating Plan, but may be modified by the Planning Commission upon consideration of the criteria in Section 22.23.11, Administration.

2. Street Design. All streets and service drives shall be constructed to meet the requirements of the Village of Beverly Hills Code of Ordinances.

3. Temporary Access. Where a planned street is not constructed at the time of redevelopment of a property and connections cannot be immediately provided, temporary access may be allowed provided the following is met:

a. Such access meets the construction requirements of the zoning ordinance in terms of width and design.

b. The development has dedicated the necessary easements to accommodate any streets or service drives planned within their site.

c. Parking agreements have been executed on the developer's site to allow for future shared parking.

d. Deed restrictions are recorded that ensure its removal when such streets and service drives are constructed.

4. Street Furniture. Benches, trash receptacles and other furniture may be required in park and plaza areas and along adjoining sidewalks where the Planning Commission determines that pedestrian activity will benefit from these facilities. Street furniture shall be consistent with any published Village Center Design Specifications.

5. Slip Street. Upon endorsement by the Road Commission for Oakland County, a single row of parking may be permitted along the entire front of the building, which may be located within the right-of-way. The final design shall be determined by the Road Commission for Oakland County, and may change at their discretion. The current design includes angled or parallel parking with a one-way circulation aisle. A minimum seven (7) foot wide sidwalk should be provided between the parking and the building, and the required building setbacks/build-to requirements of this Section shall begin at the edge of the sidewalk closest to the property.

b. Public Open Space. A minimum of 5% of the gross floor area of all stories of proposed buildings shall be provided. Such areas shall be located to complement existing or planned civic and greenspaces, and shall be one of the following:

1. Greenspace. Greenspaces are open spaces that provide recreation or leisure areas that serve the entire Village Center area.

a. Location and design of greenspaces shall generally follow those shown on the Village Center Plan, with flexibility according to Section 22.23.11.

b. To the greatest extent possible, greenspaces should be grouped with greenspace on adjoining parcels.

c. Greenspaces shall be landscaped and shall not be counted toward parking lot, greenbelt or buffer requirements.

2. Park or playground. Parks and playgrounds are best suited near residential areas at the perimeter of the Village Center.

3. Corner Plaza. Required build-to lines may be modified to accommodate a plaza. The typical size of a plaza is 25 feet by 25 feet, but may vary depending on site conditions.

4. Pedways. Pedways may be incorporated throughout developments as discussed in the Village Center Plan.

22.23.6 CONTRIBUTIONS IN LIEU

The Village recognizes that certain physical elements of the Village Center may be best developed in a coordinated fashion rather than piecemeal as development occurs. Therefore, where desired by the applicant or where required by the Village, payments in lieu of those improvements may be made in accordance with the following:

a. Payments in lieu may be accepted for the following improvements:

1. Streets as shown on the Regulating Plan.

2. Streetscaping as listed in Section 22.23.8a.

3. Parking as discussed in Section 22.23.10.

4. Slip Street along Southfield Road as discussed in Section 22.23.5, if allowed by the Road Commission for Oakland County.

5. Public Open Space as discussed in Section 22.23.5.

6. Required Landscaping as discussed in Section 22.23.10.e.

b. In cases where the elements above cannot reasonably be developed on a parcel, or for those where coordinated installation (on-street parking, for example) is needed for logical development, the Village may allow developers to defer construction in one of the following ways:

1. Payment into a dedicated fund, of an amount equal to the cost to install all deferred improvements on the subject site. Improvement costs must also consider off-site improvements and utilities needed to serve the site. The developer shall submit to the Village an estimate of costs to construct these items for verification by the Village's engineer.

2. The Village may facilitate, through a special assessment district or other means, construction of streetscaping as development progresses in the Village Center. Developments proposed under this Village Center Overlay District shall participate in the special assessment district, and agree to pay back the costs to serve their portion of the Village Center. The assessment district may be created to install or replace some or all of the items listed above, the costs of which will be distributed amongst developed parcels consistent with the standards listed.

22.23.7 ZONES AND PERMITTED USES

a. Zones. The Village Center Overlay District shall be and is hereby divided into Zones as enumerated on the Regulating Plan.

1. Mixed Use Zone. The Mixed Use Zone is intended to provide for a traditional mixture of office buildings, retail stores, entertainment establishments, public spaces, residential uses and related activities that are mutually supporting and serve the needs of Village residents. The intent of the zone regulations is to encourage a lively social environment and economically viable Village Center with a wide variety of uses in a pedestrian oriented unified setting, with shared parking and access.

2. Residential Zone. The Residential Zone is intended to support the activities of the Mixed Use Zone through increased residential densities and pedestrian-oriented design. It is also intended to provide a transition between the tall mixed use buildings located near Southfield and 13 Mile Roads, and the neighborhoods abutting the Village Center.

b. Permited Uses.

1.Mixed Use Zone.
a. Any of the uses allowed in the underlying zoning districts, as listed in Section 22.23.4, may be permitted.
b. Residential units, consistent with the Village Center Plan, may be permitted. These include dedicated residential areas as shown, but also mixed-use buildings as discussed in the Village Center Plan.
c. Reconstruction and expansion of existing single-family structures is permitted, provided such is consistent with the underlying zoning requirements.
d. Other complementary uses, consistent with the Village Center Plan and adjacent land uses, may be permitted by the Village Council upon recommendation by the Planning Commission.

2. Residential Zone.
a. Uses permitted in the underlying zoning districts shall be allowed.
b. Residential units, consistent with the Village Center Plan, may be permitted.
c. Reconstruction and expansion of existing single-family structures is permitted, provided such is consistent with the underlying zoning requirements.

22.23.8 MIXED USE ZONE REQUIREMENTS

a. Streetscaping. The following shall be installed along all Primary Frontages, as shown on the Regulating Plan, as part of a comprehensive street and streetscape network:

Required Streetscaping

Sidewalks

Sidewalks shall be installed along all street frontages, and shall be a minimum five (5) feet wide.  Sidewalks along all Primary Frontages, as shown on the Regulating Plan, shall be a minimum of seven(7) feet wide, or as required in Section 22.08.410 Sidewalks or Bikeways, whichever is wider

Wider sidewalks are encouraged, and may encompass all or a portion of the front yard build-to zone as defined in sub-section c. Building Requirements below

Accessible sidewalk connections shall be provided between parking areas and building entrances

Street Trees

As required in Section 22.09.040.d.

Tree grates may be installed, and when used shall be five (5) to ten (10) feet in length, and shall have access to irrigation systems provided by the developer

Street Lights

Pedestrian level street lighting of a decorative nature shall be installed along all sidewalks consistent with the Village Center Plan or street light standards adopted by the Village

Light poles shall be installed at least every 30 ft. or closer in order to provide required illumination

Illumination levels shall comply with Section 22.23.10.b.2.d)



b. Site Layout. Sites shall be designed consistent with the Village Center Plan and shall meet the following:
Site Layout



Notes:

There are no minimum or maximum lot sizes.

There are no maximum lot coverage requirements, provided stormwater requirements are met.

Building Placement

Faade

Buildings must occupy at least 75% of Primary Frontages as shown on the Regulating Plan 

Orientation

Buildings must be parallel to the street

Recesses

May be allowed to accommodate outdoor dining, plazas or other public amenities consistent with the Village Center Plan

Parking Circulation and Driveways

Parking Location

Minimum 75% of off-street parking must be in rear yard

Minimum Parking Setback

10 ft. from all property lines

Minimum Driveway Spacing

150 ft. from other driveways

Refer to RCOC for additional spacing requirements




Projections

Balconies

May project up to 8 ft. into any yard

Eaves and Awnings

May project up to 2 ft. into any yard

ADA Compliant ramps

May project into any yard

Fences, Walls and Garden Walls

Required

A knee wall shall be installed along all Primary Frontages and pedways occupied by parking

Minimum Height

30 in. where adjacent to streets, sidewalks, and parks

Design

Must meet requirements of Section 22.08.150



c. Building Requirements. Buildings shall be designed according to the following:
Building Requirements


Setbacks / Build-To Line

Front Yard Build-To Zone

0 ft. to 20 ft.

Minimum building depth

30 ft.

Side Yard Setback

No setback is required along Primary Frontages shown on the Regulating Plan

10 ft. from other streets and property lines

Buildings shall meet any spacing, fire wall or other requirements of the Fire Department

Rear Yard

0 ft.

Buildings shall meet any spacing, fire wall or other requirements of the Fire Department

Adjacent to Residential Zone

Section 22.09.040.e., Landscaping and Section 22.08.160, Wall Requirements

Building Height 

Maximum

As shown on Regulating Plan, with additional height incentives per Section 22.23.11

Minimum

2 stories

Ground/First Floor Elevation

At grade

Required Step Backs

Building height for stories over three shall be stepped back a distance equal to the story height for each story.  This creates a 45-degree angle from the top to the bottom of each story

 

Roof Design

Flat Roofs

A minimum 42 in. tall parapet shall be installed to conceal rooftop mechanical equipment visible from the street level

Minimum Floor Area for Residential Units

Studio Units

400 sq. ft. 

1 Bedroom Units

600 sq. ft.

2 Bedroom Units

800 sq. ft.

Building Design and Faades

Articulation

Articulation through design,  windows, or recesses is required to prevent long, monotonous, flat facades

Ground Floor Windows

75% minimum window area

Windows shall be designed to create storefronts

Transom windows should be used above storefront windows where possible

Maximum 0.25 reflectance factor

Minimum 60% light transmittance factor

Reflective coatings are prohibited

Upper Floor Windows

50% minimum window area

Windows facing street must be taller than they are wide (typically 2:1)

Openings shall generally follow the established rhythm of other buildings constructed according to this Section

Windows divided into multiple panes of glass are encouraged

Windows may be ganged horizontally (maximum five per group) if each grouping is separated by a column, pier or wall section that is at least seven inches wide

Entrances

One usable door every 50 ft. of front building wall

At least one usable door facing street or front lot line

Recessed entrances are encouraged

Pedestrian connection to public sidewalk must be provided

Building Materials

Color scheme shall be harmonious with the Villages predominant character and architecture, and shall unify the building with other buildings in the district

At least seventy-five percent (75%) of building faades, exclusive of required window areas, shall consist of a high-quality, durable material, such as masonry brick, native stone, fiber-cement board, or better siding

Accent materials, such as fiberglass reinforced concrete, siding, decorative metal, and polymer plastic.  EIFS materials, or those that will create glare or heat reflection may be used only on portions of facades located 8 feet above grade

Peaked roofs shall consist of asphalt, fiberglass, tile, slate or cedar shingles.  Standing seam metal roofing shall be allowed as an accent only



22.23.9 RESIDENTIAL ZONE REQUIREMENTS

a. Site Layout. Sites shall be designed according to the following:

Notes:

There are no minimum or maximum lot sizes.

Both attached and detached residential units shall be permitted, provided they are in a form and style consistent with the Village Center Plan and adjacent uses outside the Village Center District. 

Building Placement

Faade

Must occupy at least 50% of lot width along Primary Frontages

Building must be oriented parallel to the street

Maximum Lot Coverage

75% provided stormwater requirements are met.

Projections

Bay Windows

May project up to2 ft. into side or rear yard

Balconies

May project up to 8 ft. into any yard

ADA Compliant ramps

May project into any yard

Porches and Stoops

May project up to 6 ft. into front yard

Driveways

Parking Location

Side or rear yard

Residential Driveway Width

Maximum 12 ft. in the front yard

Corner Lot Minimum Setbacks

20 ft. from any right-of-way, street or access easement



b. Building Requirements. Buildings shall be designed according to the following:
Building Requirements Placement


Setbacks / Build-To Line

Front Yard Build-To Line

12 ft.

Rear Yard Setback

25 ft.

Side Yard Setback

0 setback with firewall; or 4 ft.

Building Height 

Maximum

2 stories or 35 ft.

Garages

Garages shall be located in the rear yard and may be accessed by a rear alley or from a side street.  The Planning Commission may permit garage doors on the front faade where lot dimensions (lot depth) do not permit a rear alley.

Front-facing Attached Garage

Cannot encompass more than 50% of faade width

Attached Garage Setback

20 ft. from front faade

 

Faades

 
Windows

20% minimum window area

 
Windows facing street must be taller than they are wide (typically 2:1)

 
Entrances

At least one usable door shall face front lot line

 
Second door for duplexes may face side or rear yard

 
Front Porch or Stoop

If provided, shall be a minimum 6 ft. wide by 6 ft. deep

 
Roof Pitch

 
Minimum

4:12 

 
Maximum

12:12

 
Minimum Floor Area for Residential Units

Studio Units

400 sq. ft. 

1 Bedroom Units

600 sq. ft.

2 Bedroom Units

800 sq. ft.

Building Design

 
Building Materials

Buildings shall utilize high-quality building materials that are in keeping with traditional architectural styles.  Permitted wall materials include, brick, stone, wood, and fiber cement siding. 

 
22.23.10 GENERAL DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Developments shall be consistent with the Village Center Plan, any published Village Center Specifications, and the following:

a. Signs. Signs shall comply with the provisions of Section 22.32, Signs.

b. Lighting. Except as otherwise required below, lighting shall comply with the requirements of Section 22.09.050.

1. A photometric plan and fixture details shall be submitted with the site plan.

2. Lighting levels shall comply with the following:


  Use   

Minimum/Maximum Footcandles (fc)

Minimum

Maximum

Maximum at Residential Property Lines

a)  Residential or institutional uses

0.2 fc

 5 fc

1.0 fc

b)  Office, recreation, and entertainment  uses

0.6 fc

5 fc

1.0 fc

c)  Commercial uses

0.9 fc

5 fc

1.0 fc

d)  Sidewalks and Pedways

0.6 fc

5 fc

1.0 fc

Parking lots and bicycle parking areas
3 fc

10 fc

1.0 fc

3. Light fixtures shall consist of Light-Emitting Diodes (LED) that emit warm lighting consistent with traditional downtown illumination. Neon lighting or exposed light sources shall be prohibited.

4. Building-mounted fixtures shall be decorative, such as goose-neck fixtures.

5. Ground level lighting may be allowed only in the form of pedestrian-level bollards, or indirect ground lighting located within planters or tree grates.

6. Light fixtures shall utilize shields and filters to prevent glare into upper story residential units.

c. Parking.

1. Design. Except as otherwise required in this Section, off-street parking lots shall be designed according to Section 22.28, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements.

2. Vehicular Parking.

a. The number of parking spaces shall be as required in Section 22.28 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements, or 4 spaces per 1,000 gross square feet of building area, whichever is less.

b. The amount of parking may be reduced by the Village, based on a finding by the Planning Commission that adequate parking is provided for the mixture of proposed and future uses, in consideration of available on-street parking, available municipal parking within the Village Center, different peak hour parking demands, or shared parking agreements.

c. The Planning Commission may require a Parking Study, prepared by a qualified professional, from the applicant to assist with making a determination.

3. Bicycle Parking. All developments shall provide bide racks that meet the following:

a. Bike rack design shall be as noted in the Village Center Plan.
b. Racks shall be located at least three (3) feet and not more than five (5) feet from the curb.
c. The number of spaces shall be provided according to the following:

Use

Number of Bicycle Parking Spaces

Residential

One (1) per each three (3) rooms

Recreation/Assembly/Commercial

One (1) per ten (10) automobile spaces


d. Loading. Loading areas shall be provided as required in Section 22.28 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements; however, the Planning Commission may modify or waive loading requirements where it is determined that adequate loading areas are available on nearby sites or driveways as part of shared parking or driveway agreements, or where expected uses and activities are such that dedicated loading is not necessary.

e. Landscaping. Landscaping, including parking lot landscaping, shall comply with the provisions of Section 22.09.040, Landscaping.

22.33.11 ADMINISTRATION

a. Site Plan Review. Applications shall be reviewed according to Section 22.08.290 Site Plan Review.

b. Incentives.
1. Types of Incentives. To promote redevelopment and stimulate reinvestment in the Village Center, the Village, upon recommendation by the Planning Commission, may grant additional flexibility or development options where one or more of the Recognized Benefits, listed below, are provided. The following incentives may be granted.

a. Additional Building Height. The maximum building height elsewhere in the Village is two (2) stories. Many locations in the Village Center, as noted on the Regulating Plan, permit additional building height in some cases.

b. Parking. Inherent in the Village Center Plan is a shared parking concept that provides more efficient use of parking, which allows the Village to consider parking reductions for development in the Village Center.

c. Dimensional Flexibility. As with all planned developments, it is recognized that certain flexibility may be needed to achieve development consistent with the Village Center Plan. Where needed to implement the Village Center, flexibility may be allowed.

2. Recognized Benefits. Additional building height, beyond that allowed on the Building Height Plan, or flexibility may be granted during the project review when one or more of the following recognized benefits are provided:

a. Senior housing or barrier-free housing units.

b. High quality architectural design beyond the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.

c. Extensive landscaping beyond the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.

d. Provision of open space or public plazas or features beyond the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.

e. Significant use of sustainable building and site design features such as: water use reduction, water efficient landscaping, innovative wastewater technologies, low impact stormwater managements, optimize energy performance, on-site renewable energy, passive solar heating, reuse/recycled/renewable materials, indoor air quality or other elements identified as sustainable by established groups such as the US Green Building Council (LEED) or ANSI National Green Building Standards.

f. Inclusion of parking within the building, either behind liner storefronts, underground or on upper floors.

b. Allowed Flexibility. It is recognized that certain existing site conditions may prohibit full compliance with this Section. The Village Council, upon recommendation by the Planning Commission, may modify the standards of this Section, after considering the criteria below:

1. The proposed development is consistent with the Village Center Plan, as amended.
2. The proposed development is consistent with the Purpose and Development Principles listed in Section 22.23.3.
3. The proposed modification will not prevent or complicate logical extensions of streets, parking, open space, or development of adjacent properties consistent with the Village Center Plan and Regulating Plan.
4. The modification is the minimum necessary to allow reasonable development that is consistent with the purpose of the Village Center.
5. The proposed development will not impair public safety.
6. The modification is not simply for convenience of the development.

c. Conditions and Phasing. Where deemed necessary, the Village Council, upon recommendation by the Planning Commission, may:

1. Impose reasonable conditions to further the purpose of the Village Center or to ensure compliance with the Village Center Plan.

2. Require a phasing plan that explains how new development, meeting the requirements of this section, will be constructed, and elements of the site not in compliance will be phased out over time.

d. Development Agreement. Development approved according to this Section shall enter into a development agreement with the Village, in a form acceptable to the Village Attorney that specifies the required improvements, commitments and obligations of the development as it relates to the overall Village Center district. The development agreement shall specify any recognized benefits provided by the developer, flexibility granted by the Village, and maintenance provisions for all site improvements.

REGULATING PLAN
Regulating Plan

SLIP STREET DETAIL
Slip Street Detail

HOW TO USE THE VILLAGE CENTER FORM-BASED CODE

This Code is structured in a fashion similar to a Planned Unit Development, where regulatory flexibility may be granted in favor of a higher quality development, or one that provides additional benefits that could not be achieved using the underlying zoning. The Village Center is a project that began through the planning process. The Village Master Plan calls for a village center near the intersection of 13 Mile Road and Southfield Road. The Village Planning Commission has developed a Village Center Plan to further implement the Master Plan. The Village Center Plan includes three basic elements:


1. The Vision and Development Guidelines, which generally explain the type of development and redevelopment that is envisioned for the Village Center Area. These include discussion of desired site and building layouts, pedestrian amenities, streetscaping, building quality and other elements that will contribute to the overall vision.

2. The Village Center Design Specifications, which includes the set of streetscaping and public elements that will be required in the district to provide cohesive streets, sidewalks and design within the Village Center.

To implement the Village Center Plan, the Village has adopted a form-based code. This is called the Village Center Overlay District, and is included in the Village Zoning Ordinance as Section 22.23. This is the regulatory document that implements the Village Center Plan. The code refers to the Village Center Plan, which provides the foundation for the code, and can be the basis for necessary elements which may not be required in the code per se, but that may be necessary to achieving the vision in the Village Center Plan. To encourage use of the Overlay District, it contains additional regulatory flexibility and incentives such as additional building height and parking reductions, to help improve development potential and viability in the Village Center. {Ord. 348; 1-4-14} 


22.24 AREA, HEIGHT BULK, AND PLACEMENT REGULATIONS ALL ZONE DISTRICTS

Zoning District

Lot Minimums

Area             Width

(Sq. Ft.)        (Feet)

Maximum

Building Height

In     

Stories Feet

Maximum Coverage of Lot by All Buildings (Percent)

Minimum Setback Measured From Lot Line (Feet)

    Front                   Side Open Space           Rear

    Open                   One            Other         Open

    Space (p)                         (p)                  Space   (p)

Minimum Usable Floor Area Per Unit (in Square Feet)

(p)

PP-Public Property

 

0

0

2

30

--

35

10

20

20

None

R-A Single Family

 

25,000

130

2

30

 

     25 (q)                   40 (a)          15                    20                  40

                                    (o)

 

1 story = 1600

1  or 2 story = 2000

R-1 Single Family

16,000 (n)

100

2

30

R-1A Single Family

12,000 (n)

100

2

30

25 (q)

40 (a)

(o)

12.5(b)

17.5

40

1 story  1400

1  or 2 story = 1800

R-2 Single Family

12,000 (n)

75

2

30

25 (q)

40 (a)

(o)

12.5(b)

17.5

40

1 story = 1200

1  or 2 story = 1600

R-2A Single Family

6,000 (n)

60

2

30

30 (q)

40 (a)

(o)

5(b)*

10*

30

1 story = 1200

1  or 2 story = 1600

R-2B Single Family

9,000 (n)

75

2

30

25 (q)

40 (a)

(o)

5(b)*

10*

40

1 story = 1200 1  or 2 story = 1600

R-3 Single Family

4,000 (n)

40

2

30

35 (q)

40 (a)

(o)

 

5(b)*

5*

30

1 story = 900

1  or 2 story = 1200

R-M Multiple Family

(k)(l)(m)

 

(e)

(d)(f)

2

30

30(h)

40 (h)

(g)

(h)

20

(g)

(h)

20

(g)

(h)

35

(g)

(f)

PParking

 

--

--

2

30

--

--

(c)

(c)

--

None

O-1 Office

--

--

2

30

--

35

Site plan approval

 

Site plan approval

20

None

B-Business

--

--

2

30

--

35

Site plan approval

 

Site plan approval

20

None

22.24.010 ADDENDUM TO SECTION

The Schedule of Regulations with all notations, references and information are incorporated as part of this Ordinance.

a. Front Open Space. Where a front open space of greater or less depth than forty feet (40') exists in front of a single family residence or residences presently on one side of a street in any block and within two hundred feet (200') of the lot or parcel, the depth of the front open space of any building subsequently erected or remodeled on that side of the street in that block shall not be less than the average depths of the front open space of such existing residences.

b. Corner Lot Setback on the Side Street - see Section 22.08.070.

c. See Section 22.08.100 regarding accessory building setback and height requirements.

A ten foot landscaped buffer strip shall be provided between the parking area and all public rights of way. In cases where the off street parking facilities abut a residential zone district or public property the screening, and buffering standards of Section 22.08.160 and 22.08.400 are also required. In no instance shall the corner lot setback form the side street lot line be less than ten feet. {Ord. 299; 6-7-00}

d. R-M Density. In any multiple-family development, the maximum density of multiple dwelling units per gross acre of ground used for that purpose shall not exceed 7.5 dwelling units to the acre.

e. R-M Floor Space. In any multiple-family development, the required minimum usable floor space per multiple dwelling unit shall be 1,000 square feet exclusive of space in basements, garages, breezeways and porches.

f. R-M Open Space. In any multiple-family development, the required minimum open space shall be as follows, modified by item 1 below:

Front setback - 40 feet 
Side setback - 20 feet each side
Rear setback - 35 feet

1. Each side open space shall be increased by one foot (1') for each ten feet (10') or part thereof by which the length of the structures exceeds forty feet (40') in the overall dimension, along the adjoining lot line. In order to preserve the general open character of the district, structures shall be limited in length to one hundred twenty-five feet (125').

2. Open space and spacing between buildings shall be provided on the following basis:

1 and 2 story structures: Forty-five feet (45') between buildings and thirty-five foot (35') rear open space.

g. R-M Greenbelts.

No use permitted in the R-M District, other than those permitted in a Single-Family District, shall be erected or used on any lot or parcel adjoining a Single-Family Residential District or 0-1 or B-District unless a greenbelt is provided and maintained along the adjoining Single-Family Residential or 0-1 or B-District lot line fifty feet (50') in width with a definitive planting and landscape plan first approved by the Village Council. In lieu of said green-belt, a six foot (6') wall may be utilized provided prior approval of the Village Council is obtained.

h. R-M Total Lot Area. The total land coverage in multiple-developments by all buildings other than carports shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of land area.

i. R-M Frontage on Streets. All multiple family dwellings shall front on or have unobstructed direct access to public streets or roads.

j. R-M Off Street Parking. Paved off-street parking in the ratio of a minimum of two (2) parking spaces for each dwelling unit shall be provided. However, not more than fifteen percent (15%) of the required off-street parking may be located in parking bays, specifically designed for that purpose, located within the rights-of-way of public streets, between the traffic roadway and sidewalk. All interior streets within the development shall have a five foot (5') concrete sidewalk on the sides of the street abutting the dwelling units.

k. R-M Utilities and Lighting Underground. The owner shall make arrangements for all local distribution lines for telephone and electric service, exclusive of main supply lines, perimeter feed lines, and related surface facilities such as padmount transformers, switching equipment and service pedestals, to be placed underground in accordance with the valid rules and regulations of the telephone and electric utilities and shall make suitable arrangements for their location with the telephone and electric service company involved. All lighting for parking areas, streets, sidewalks and for external illumination of buildings shall be directed away from and shall be shielded from adjacent residential uses.

l. R-M Definitions. Multiple family dwelling is construed as a building or portion thereof used or designed for two or more dwelling units; provided, however, that each dwelling unit in a multiple family dwelling shall have at least one (1) living room, one (1) kitchen, one (1) bathroom, and one (1) bedroom, but not more than three (3) bedrooms and not less than one (1) full bathroom per each two (2) bedrooms.

All uses which require a license from the Michigan Liquor Control Commission shall meet the requirements of the "Village of Beverly Hills Liquor License Ordinance," Ordinance Number 209, as amended.

m. Required Area. In any single family residential development, where some or all dwelling units do not have front open space which is contiguous to a public street or a private street improved to the right-of-way and construction standards of the Village or Oakland County, the maximum permitted density shall be determined by the following regulations; otherwise the required average minimum land area (square feet) per dwelling unit, shall be equal to the minimum lot area of the applicable Zoning District.

Zoning Required Average Minimum of Land
District Area (Square Feet) Per Dwelling Unit

R-A 25,000
R-1 19,000
R-1A 15,000

Zoning Required Average Minimum of Land
District Area (Square Feet) Per Dwelling Unit

R-2 14,250
R-2A 6,000
R-2B 9,000
R-3 4,000
{Ord. 326, 10-27-07}

n. Front Open Space. In the case of single-family residential developments without individual lots, such as a condominium, the minimum front open space shall be determined by the following regulations as measured from the centerline of the nearest public or private street.
Front Open Space
Districts Feet

R-A, 
R-1, R-1A, R-2,
R-2A, R-2B and R3 - 40 feet [subject to sub-sections (a) and (o)] {Ord. 326, 10-27-07}

o. Minimum Distances. In single-family residential developments without individual lots, such as a condominium, for each dwelling unit, the minimum side and rear open space (in feet) shall be multiplied by two to determine the minimum distances between detached dwelling units. The intent of this provision is to achieve minimum open spaces similar to those in developments with individual lots for each dwelling unit.

p. Computation. Area within public street right-of-ways shall not be included in the computation of minimum lot area or the rights-of-way of private streets built to Village standards shall not be in the computation of minimum lot area.

q. The Building Official shall have the authority to allow up to a 5% increase above the maximum building coverage ratio provided the following conditions are met:

The property owner incorporates low impact design practices (rain gardens, green roofs, porous pavement, biorentention, etc.) into the storm water management plan for the property such that it mitigates the coverage increase.
The property owner, and any future owner(s), shall be required to maintain such so long as the building coverage ratio exceeds the maximum noted in Section 22.24. {Ord. 364, 10-18-18}

*See Section 22.08.130

{Ord. 326, 10-27-07}{Ord. 361, 2-17-18}{Ord. 364, 10-18-18}

22.25 CONDOMINIUM PROJECTS
22.25.010 INTENT

New condominium projects and conversion condominium projects shall conform to the requirements of this Ordinance and all other applicable regulations of the Village and the Condominium Act. Each condominium project shall be reviewed in a manner consistent with like projects within the underlying zoning district. A site condominium project shall be considered equivalent to a platted subdivision for the purposes of enforcing site and building standards. It is the intent to regulate site condominium and single family condominium projects in a manner consistent with a traditional subdivision plat, except that the review procedures within this Ordinance shall apply.{Ord. 253, 5-12-91}

22.25.020 GENERAL

The following regulations shall apply to condominium projects:

a. Condominium Lot. For all purposes of this Ordinance, each condominium lot shall be considered the equivalent of a lot as defined in this Ordinance and shall comply with all applicable regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.

b. Computation. The area within a public or private street right-of-way shall not be included in the computation of minimum area of a condominium lot.

c. Dwelling Unit. In the case of a condominium project in which the condominium units are intended for single family residential purposes, not more than one single family dwelling unit shall be located on a condominium lot, nor shall any dwelling unit be located on a condominium lot with any other principal use.

d. Setback Requirement. Yard setback requirements as specified in SECTION 22.24 shall be measured from the boundaries of the condominium lot.

e. Utility Connections. Each condominium unit shall be separately connected to the Village water supply and sanitary sewer system. This requirement may be waived by the Village Council for cause upon recommendation of the Village Engineer.

f. Relocation of Lot Boundaries. Relocation of condominium lot boundaries, if allowed in the condominium documents, as permitted in Section 48 of the Condominium Act, shall comply with all regulations of the Village and shall be subject to the same procedures as the division of a lot of record.

g. Resulting Lots. Each condominium lot formed by the division of an existing condominium lot or lots, as permitted by Section 49 of the Condominium Act, shall comply with all requirements of the Village and shall be subject to the same procedures as the division of a lot of record.

h. Road Requirements in Condominium Projects. All public or private roads in a condominium project shall conform to the standards and specifications established by the Village of Beverly Hills for road design and maintenance. {Ord. 253, 5-12-91}

22.25.030 SITE PLAN REVIEW

Prior to recording of the Master Deed of the condominium project as required by Section 72 of the Condominium Act, each condominium project shall receive a preliminary site plan approval from the Village. No permit for construction shall be issued by the Village until a condominium project has received final site plan approval from the Village Council. The condominium project shall be subject to the site plan review requirements in SECTION 22.08.290 and SECTION 22.25.040. {Ord. 253, 5-12-91}

22.25.040 SITE PLAN INFORMATION

A complete site plan for a condominium project shall be provided to the Village Building Official at least twenty-one (21) days in advance of a meeting for preliminary site plan review. The site plan may be reviewed and processed concurrently with the notice required to be given the Village pursuant to Section 71 of the Condominium Act. The following information shall be included on, or attached to a condominium project site plan:

a. Ownership Interests. All persons with an ownership interest in the land on which the condominium project will be located together with a description of the nature of each entity's interest (for example: fee owner, optionee, lessee, or land contract vendee).

b. Proposed Use. The proposed use of the condominium project (for example: residential, commercial, industrial).

c. Density. Number of condominium units to be developed on the subject parcel and density per acre.

d. Circulation. The vehicular and pedestrian circulation system planned for the proposed development, including a designation of any street(s) as to whether they are proposed to be private or dedicated to the public.

e. Roads. The location of existing private and public roads adjacent to the proposed development with an indication of how they will connect with the proposed circulation system for the new development.

f. Design. The proposed layout of units, parking areas, open space and recreation/park areas.

g. Landscaping. Proposed landscape screening, including greenbelt and berms, and screening walls and a maintenance plan detailing maintenance responsibilities.

h. Condominium Regulations. All regulations proposed to be included in the condominium documents in the nature of restrictive covenants which regulate the layout, use and maintenance of public or common areas, accessory structures, payment of assessments, and enforcement of condominium regulations.

i. Additional Information. The following additional information must be submitted for Village review:

1. Cross sections of roads, drive aisles and paved area;

2. Site drainage showing topography and flow directions, including computations of flows into available public storm sewers or retention and/or detention areas;

3. Specific locations and dimensions of wetland areas, floodplain, and significant natural features such as tree stands, unusual slopes, streams and water drainage areas;

4. Preliminary approval by the Village of proposed sanitary, storm, and water system locations and connections;

5. The condominium documents as defined in this Ordinance;

6. All necessary easement documents showing the dedication of land areas for the purposes of constructing, operating, inspecting, maintaining, repairing, altering, replacing, and/or removing pipelines, mains, conduits and other installations of a similar character for the purpose of providing public utilities, including conveyance of sewage, water and storm water run-off across, through and under the property subject to said easement, and excavating and refilling ditches and trenches necessary for the location of said structures. {Ord. 253, 5-12-91}

22.25.050 PROJECT STANDARDS

The following standards are applicable to condominiums:

a. Single Family Detached Condominiums. The unit area, site, and/or lot of all Single Family Detached Condominiums shall be subject to all dimensional and area requirements and other Village standards for the zoning district in which they are located as stated in the Schedule of Regulations, SECTION 22.24 The Single-Family Residential Cluster Option (SECTION 22.26), and other applicable requirements of this Ordinance. Single family detached condominium projects shall not exceed the maximum permitted density for the zoning district in which the project is located, as determined on the basis of minimum lot area standards set forth in SECTION 22.24. All dimensions and required information shall be depicted on the site plan so that the Planning Board and Village Council can clearly determine that all applicable requirements are met.

b. Single Family Site Condominiums. Single family site condominium units and lots shall be subject to all dimensional and area requirements and other Village standards for the zoning district in which they are located as stated in the Schedule of Regulations, SECTION 22.24 and other requirements of this Ordinance. These regulations shall be applied by requiring that the area of condominium unit and the surrounding limited common element be, at a minimum, equal to the lot area and lot width requirements for the district in which the project is located. The area that the condominium unit encompasses for the principal building and the surrounding limited common element shall incorporate, at a minimum the equivalent of the minimum yard setback requirements as defined within this Ordinance and shall meet all the dimensional requirements of a lot for the zoning district in which it is located.

c. Commercial, Office, or Business Site Condominiums. Commercial, office or business site condominium projects shall be subject to all requirements applicable to the zoning district in which they are located. These regulations shall be applied by requiring that the site condominium unit and a surrounding limited common element to be equal to the minimum area and width requirements for the district in which the project is located. The uses contained in a commercial, office, or business site condominium project must be appropriate to the allowed uses of the underlying zoning district.

d. Subdivision Requirements. The design and construction standards for streets, sidewalks, utilities, storm drainage and subdivision layout as set forth in the Land Division Act, Act 288 of the Public Acts of 1967, as amended, MCL 560.101 et. seq., and Article 23 of the Village Code (subdivision regulations) shall apply to all site condominiums projects. The provisions of SECTION 22.26 shall also apply to condominium projects developed using the Single Family Residential Cluster Option.

e. Conversion Condominums. All conversion condominium projects shall be subject to the provisions of this Ordinance and shall require site plan approval by the Village Council prior to the occupancy of any converted condominium unit. The site plan shall include all existing conditions and clearly identify all proposed site modifications. The Village Council shall consider the site plan for a condominium conversion as a new site plan and may revise any requirements granted by a previous site plan approval. {Ord. 253, 5-12-91} {Ord. 299; 6-7-00

22.25.060 PRELIMINARY SITE PLAN APPROVAL

The Planning Board shall make a recommendation to the Village Council regarding a preliminary approval of the site plan for the proposed condominium project. Based upon the standards and requirements set forth in this Ordinance, the Village Planning Board shall review and make a recommendation to the Village Council who shall preliminarily approve, subject to conditions, or deny the site plan.

a. Effect of Denial. A denial shall mean that the site plan for the proposed condominium project does not meet the requirements of this Ordinance. A Council resolution of denial shall specify the reasons for the denial and those requirements which are not met.

b. Effect of Approval. A preliminary approval shall mean that the site plan for a condominium project meets the requirements of this Ordinance. Subject to any conditions imposed by the Village Council as part of its motion of approval, a preliminary approval assures the applicant that the project and site plan shall receive final approval if:

1. The applicant meets the requirements as stated in SECTION 22.25.70 for Final Site Plan Approval;

2. All state and county approvals are obtained;

3. No negative comments are received from any governmental agencies or public utilities during the required notice period; and

4. All federal, state and local laws and ordinances are met. All site condominium projects shall require the review and approval or comments from the following agencies prior to final site plan review by the Village:

a. The Oakland County Road Commission if any part of the project includes or abuts a county road;

b. The Oakland County Drain Commissioner; and

c. Michigan Department of Health and/or the Michigan Department of Natural Resources shall approve the extension of the water and sewer utilities.

A preliminary approval shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of Village Council approval. {Ord. 253, 5-12-91}

22.25.070 FINAL SITE PLAN SUBMISSION

The developer or proprietor may request final approval by submitting to the Village the following items:

a. Revised Plan. A revised, dated site plan incorporating all of the changes, if any, required for preliminary approval.

b. Approvals or Comments. Verification of all required state and county approvals or comments pursuant to SECTION 22.25.060(b).

c. Section 71 Comments. Presentation of all comments pursuant to Section 71 of the Condominium Act.

d. Condominium Documents. Copies of the recorded condominium documents or copies of the documents in their final recordable form. {Ord. 253, 5-12-91}

22.25.080 FINAL SITE PLAN REVIEW

The Planning Board shall review and recommend an action to the Village Council regarding a site plan submitted for final approval. The Village Council may approve or deny the site plan.

a. Effect of Denial. A denial shall mean that the final site plan for the proposed condominium project fails to satisfy one or more of the following:

-The requirement of this ordinance,
-The conditions of preliminary site plan approval,
-The standards of other jurisdictions reviewing the plan, or
-That a discrepancy exits between the Village approved preliminary site plan and the condominium documents filed as required by the Condominium Act.

A motion of denial shall specify the reasons for the denial.

b. Effect of Approval. Final site plan approval shall mean that the site plan for a condominium project meets the requirements of this Ordinance and that the applicable permits for construction may be issued by the Village Building Official following the payment of required fees. A final site plan approval shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of Village Council approval. {Ord. 253, 5-12-91}

22.25.090 MONUMENTS REQUIRED

All site condominium projects shall be marked with monuments as follows:

a. Required. Monuments shall be placed in the ground according to the following requirements, but it is not intended or required that monuments be placed within the traveled portion of a street to mark angles in the boundary of the condominium project if the angle points can be readily re-established by reference to monuments along the sidelines of the streets.

b. Construction. All monuments used shall be made of solid iron or steel bars at least one-half (1/2) inch in diameter and thirty-six (36) inches long and completely encased in concrete at least four (4) inches in diameter.

c. Location. Monuments shall be located in the ground at all angles in the boundaries of the condominium project; at the intersection lines of streets and at the intersection of the lines of streets with the boundaries of the condominium project; at all points of curvature, points of tangency, points of compound curvature, points of reverse curvature and angle points in the side lines of streets and alleys; at all angles of an intermediate traverse line and at the intersection of all limited common elements and all common elements.

1. If the required location of a monument is inaccessible, or if the locating of a monument would be clearly impracticable, it is sufficient to place a reference monument nearby and the precise location thereof be clearly indicated on the plans and referenced to the true point.

2. If a point required to be monumented is on a bedrock outcropping, a steel rod, at least one-half (1/2) inch in diameter shall be drilled and grouted into solid rock to a depth of at least eight (8) inches.

3. All required monuments shall be placed flush with the surrounding grade where practicable.

d. Condominium Unit. Each condominium unit corner shall be monumented in the field by iron or steel bars or iron pipes at least eighteen (18) inches long and one-half (1/2) inch in diameter, or markers approved by the Village Engineer. Each condominium lot must be able to be defined by reference to appropriate condominium unit monuments.

e. Timing. The Village Council, on recommendation of the Village Engineer, may waive the placing of any of the required monuments and markers for a reasonable time, not to exceed one (1) year, following the date of final site plan approval, on the condition that the proprietor deposits with the Village Clerk cash or a certified check, or irrevocable bank letter of credit running to the Village, whichever the proprietor selects, in an amount approved by the Village. Such cash, certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be returned to the proprietor upon receipt of a certificate by a surveyor that the monuments and markers have been placed as required within the time specified. {Ord. 253, 5-12-91}

22.25.100 POST CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS

It shall be the responsibility of a developer or proprietor of a condominium project to furnish the Village, through the Building Official, the following items:

- one (1) copy of the recorded Master Deed;
- one (1) copy of all restrictive covenants;
- two (2) copies of an "as built survey"; and
- one (1) copy of the site plan on a mylar sheet of at least thirteen by sixteen
(13 X 16) inches with an image not to exceed ten and one-half by fourteen
(10 1/2 X 14) inches.

In the case of a site condominium, these documents must be submitted prior to the connection to Village sanitary sewer and water service lines. For condominium projects which include the construction of structures, these documents must be submitted prior to occupancy of any structure. {Ord. 253, 5-12-91}

22.25.110 TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY

The Village Council, upon recommendation from the Village Building Official, may allow occupancy of a condominium unit before all required improvements are installed, provided that a bond is submitted sufficient in amount and type to provide for the installation of all remaining improvements without expense to the Village before the expiration of the Temporary Occupancy Permit. {Ord. 253, 5-12-91}

22.25.120 CONDOMINIUM PLAN REVISION

If the condominium subdivision plan as required by the Condominium Act is revised, the final site plan shall be revised accordingly and submitted for the review by the Village Council prior to the issuance of a building permit. The Village Council may require a new site plan review of the revised site plan, if, in its sole opinion, such changes in a document require significant changes to an approved site plan. {Ord. 253, 5-12-91}

22.25.130 AMENDMENT OF CONDOMINIUM DOCUMENTS

An amendment to any condominium document that affects the preliminary or final site plan, or any conditions of the preliminary or final site plan approval, shall be approved by the Village Council prior to the issuance of a building permit. The Village Council may require a new site plan review of an amended site plan, if, in its sole opinion, such changes in a document require significant changes to an approve site plan. {Ord. 253, 5-12-91}

22.26 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER OPTION
22.26.010 INTENT

The intent of this section is to permit the development of one-family residential patterns which, through design innovation, will provide for an alternate means for development of single-family areas. To accomplish this, an applicant may propose specific modifications to the One Family Residential standards as outlined in the Schedule of Regulations. The modifications may be permitted in the R-A, R-1, R-A1, R-2, R-2A and R-3 Districts subject to Village Council review and approval and the conditions herein imposed. {Ord. 257, 4-26-92}

22.26.020 GENERAL

For the R-A, R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-2A, and R-3, Single Family Residential Districts, any requirement of Section 22.24 - Schedule of Regulations may be waived subject to Village review and approval and the conditions imposed by this section. {Ord. 257, 4-26-92}

22.26.030 QUALIFICATIONS FOR CLUSTER OPTION

The Village Council may approve of the clustering of buildings on parcels of land under single ownership and control, which, in the opinion of the Village Council, have characteristics which would make sound physical development under the normal subdivision approach undesirable because of location, because the site has natural characteristics which are worth preserving or which make platting difficult, or if the proposed clustering plan provides a recognizable and substantial benefit to the Village. In approving an area for cluster development, the Council shall find at least one of the following conditions to exist:

a. A substantial part of the parcel's perimeter is bordered by a major or intermediate thoroughfare which would result in a substantial proportion of the lots or single family dwellings of the development fronting on the major or intermediate thoroughfare.

b. The parcel contains natural land forms which are so arranged that the change of elevation within the site includes slopes in excess of fifteen percent (15%) between these elevations. These elevation changes and slopes shall appear as the typical feature of the site and shall represent at least fifteen percent (15%) of the horizontal development area of the site, rather than the exceptional or infrequent features of the site. The topography is such that achieving road grades of less than that permitted by the Village would be impossible unless the site were mass graded. The providing of single family clusters will allow a greater preservation of the natural setting.

c. The parcel is in a floodplain or has documented poor soil conditions which result in a substantial portion of the total area of the parcel being unbuildable.


d. The parcel contains natural assets which would be preserved through the use of cluster development. Such assets may include natural stands of large trees, land which serves as a natural habitat for wildlife, unusual topographic features or other natural assets which should be preserved.

e. The Village Council finds that the proposed clustering plan meets all of the following criteria:

1. Implementation of the cluster plan shall result in a recognizable and substantial benefit to the direct users of the plan and to the community. For the purpose of this approval a recognizable and substantial benefit is defined as follows: A clear benefit, both to the ultimate users of the property in question and to the Village, which would reasonably be expected to accrue, taking into consideration the reasonably foreseeable detriments of the proposed development and uses. Such benefits may include: long-term protection or preservation of natural resources, preservation of historical structures or significant architectural features; or, elimination of nonconforming use(s) or structure(s);

2. The proposed development shall not have an adverse impact on future development within the Village as presented in the adopted Village Master Plan.

3. The proposed development shall be consistent with the intent and spirit of this Ordinance; and

4. The proposed development shall not impede the continued use of future development of surrounding properties for uses that are permitted in the Zoning Ordinance nor diminish their value.

In order to qualify a parcel for development under Paragraphs (b), (c), or (d) of this Section 22.26.030, the Village Council shall review documented evidence supplied by the applicant or their agent and prepared by a qualified professional in the appropriate field and make a determination that the request is supported by the documentation. Such evidence shall include the following as appropriate: soil test boring, a flood plain map, topographic map of maximum two (2) foot contour interval, and an inventory of all natural assets located on the site. The Council may, at their discretion, engage independent qualified professionals to review any submission by the applicant, with all costs to be borne by the applicant. {Ord. 257, 4-26-92}

22.26.040 PRELIMINARY DETERMINATION, CONCEPT REVIEW, FINAL APPROVAL

All cluster option plans shall be subject to the following procedure for review:

a. The first step in the development of a cluster option plan is a preliminary determination by the Village Council that Section 22.26.030 applies to the site and/or proposed plan. This determination will be made following a review and recommendation by the Planning Board and is accomplished by a concept review of the site plan. The concept review considers the following basic issues: benefit, density, utilities, circulation, extent or degree of modification from existing requirements and standards, and the relationship to adjacent development. A preliminary determination based upon the concept review does not assure approval of a clustering plan. A favorable preliminary determination will, however, provide petitioner with an indication as to whether or not to proceed with the detailed site plan required for final approval.

b. Following approval of a concept plan by the Village Council, a site plan review shall be conducted according to Section 22.08.290. All modifications to Village regulations must be detailed on the site plan. Clustering plans shall comply with Village regulations, such as, but not limited to: the Village Subdivision Control Ordinance, and condominium regulations as stated in Chapter 22.25. Following a review and recommendation by the Planning Board, final approval of the cluster option may be granted by the Village Council through the approval of the site plan. {Ord. 257, 4-26-92}

22.26.050 STANDARDS FOR CLUSTER OPTION

For developments which qualify for the cluster option, certain requirements and standards set forth in the Schedule of Regulations and elsewhere in this Ordinance may be modified as follows:
a. The required average minimum land area and density requirements shall be as follows:

1. In a cluster development, the regulations for determining the required average minimum land area for each dwelling unit shall be as follows:

Single Required Average Required Average
Family Minimum Land Area Minimum Land Area
Residential (Sq. Ft.) Per (Sq. Ft. per)
District Dwelling Unit in Dwelling Unit in 
Developments With Developments With-
Public Streets or out Public Streets
With Private or Without Private
Streets Built to Streets Built to
Village Standards Village Standards
Not Counting the
Area of the
Streets

R-A 25,000 28,900

R-1 16,000 19,000

R-1A 12,000 15,000

R-2 12,000 14,250

R-2A 9,000 11,250

R-3 6,000 7,800

2. A cluster option shall contain sufficient minimum land area for at least six (6) residential units, as determined by the table in Subsection (a)(1) above.

3. Notwithstanding the foregoing minimum land area requirements of Subsection (a) (1) and Subsection (a) (2) above, the density of any development under the cluster option shall not exceed the maximum density that could be achieved by developing single family lots in conformance with this Ordinance, the Village Subdivision Regulations, the Village Private Road Ordinance and all applicable State and County subdivision regulations, including the Subdivision Control Act of 1967, being P.A. 1967, No. 288 as amended. To ensure compliance with this density requirement, the applicant is required to submit a parallel plot plan of the site at the time of concept review. The parallel plan shall be designed with lots or unit lots and roadways that meet or exceed all State and Village minimum requirements for a conventional subdivision.

b. In no case shall the spacing between residential units be less than ten (10) feet, measured between the nearest points of adjacent buildings.

c. Building setbacks from streets shall be determined after consideration of potential vehicular traffic volume, site design, and pedestrian safety. In determining the setbacks, the following minimum requirements shall apply:

1. A cluster development shall maintain an open space area of at least forty (40) feet from any pre-existing public street right-of-way.

2. No structure within a cluster development shall be nearer to the pavement edge or the shoulder of any private street or drive than ten (10) feet.

3. No garage or required off-street parking space shall be located closer than twenty (20) feet from the right-of-way line of any street proposed to be dedicated to the public. However, a garage or required off-street parking space may be located as close as twenty (20) feet from the pavement edge of any private street or drive located within the common area of the cluster development, provided that the placement does interfere with traffic circulation throughout the development.

4. A cluster development shall provide and maintain usable common open space at the ratio of 1,000 square feet of open space per dwelling unit, provided that each development shall contain a minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet of common open space. Any pervious land area within the boundaries of the site may be included as required open space, except for land contained in public or private street rights-of-way.

5. All required open space shall be set aside by the developer through an irrevocable conveyance, such as a deed restriction or covenant that runs with the land, assuring that the open space will be developed according to the site plan and never changed to another use.

d. In computing the height of any individual dwelling unit in a cluster on a slope in excess of ten (10) percent and when the unit is constructed on posts, the first ten (10) feet of height in the posts shall not be computed. Applications of the definition of "Building Height" shall apply over and above this ten (10) feet of post height.

e. In order to provide an orderly transition of density, where the parcel proposed for use as a cluster development abuts a one family residential district, the Village Council shall determine that the abutting one family district is effectively buffered within the cluster development by means of one or more of the following:

1. Single family lots subject to the standards of the SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS;

2. Detached buildings with setbacks as required by the SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS for rear and side open space for the applicable residential district;

3. Open or recreation space;

4. Changes in topography which provide an effective buffer;

5. A major or intermediate thoroughfare; and/or,

6. Some other similar means of providing a transition. {Ord. 257, 4-26-92}

22.26.060 APPLICATION, PROCEDURES AND FINAL APPROVAL

a. In making application for approval under this section, the applicant shall provide a sworn statement from each property owner or other party with an ownership interest in any portion of the property to be included as part of the clustering plan indicating that the party:

- supports the application,
- authorizes the applicant to be an agent before the Village,
- agrees to abide to any requirements or conditions developed as part of a final clustering plan.

b. For the concept review and preliminary determination of qualification of the clustering plan, the applicant shall submit a conceptual site plan with sufficient information to show that the parcel qualifies for the cluster option pursuant to Section 22.26.030. This plan shall enable the Planning Board and the Village Council to review the benefits, density, utilities, extent or degree of modification from existing requirements and standards, circulation and relationship to adjacent development. The conceptual plan shall include topography drawn at two (2) foot contour intervals, all computations relative to acreage and density, typical building elevations, and typical floor plan. A separate parallel plan as required in Section 22.26.050 (a) (3) shall also be provided.

c. The application and all accompanying materials shall be first reviewed by the Village Council at a regular meeting and forwarded to the Planning Board for their review and recommendation. the Planning board shall hold a public hearing on the preliminary determination of qualification and the site plan concept, and then submit their recommendations to the Village Council. After reviewing the recommendations of the Planning Board, the Village Council shall hold a public hearing, make a preliminary determination of qualification and review the concept plan. If the Village Council finds that the parcel does not qualify for the cluster option or finds that the cluster option should not be approved because it does not meet the letter and spirit of this ordinance or because the proposal would be detrimental to existing development in the general area based on the standards set forth in Section 22.08.300 (h) of this Ordinance, it shall deny the cluster option. The reasons for denial shall be specified in the minutes of the Council meeting.

d. If the Village Council makes a preliminary determination that the proposal does qualify for the cluster option, the matter shall be referred by Council to the Planning Board for the second step of the approval process which includes the review of a detailed site plan. The site plan shall comply with all requirements of Section 22.080.290 Site Plan Review and, if applicable, all information required for subdivisions pursuant to the Municipal Code. Review of the site plan and the cluster option proposed shall proceed in accordance with the procedures of Section 22.080.300 for Special Condition uses. The Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing on the site plan and make a recommendation to the Village Council. After receiving the Planning Board's recommendation the Village Council shall hold a public hearing on the site plan and make a final decision to deny, approve or approve with conditions the cluster option and the site plan. Any denial, approval or conditional approval shall be in accordance with the standards in Section 22.080.300(h) as well as the standards set forth in this Section 22.26. If the Village Council denies the Cluster Option or the site plan, it shall specify the reasons for its denial in the minutes of its meetings.

e. If the Council approves the site plan it shall instruct the Village Attorney to prepare a deed covenant or similar instrument enforceable by the Village. Said instrument shall set forth the conditions upon which such approval is based and define the point at which substantial construction is initiated. This instrument, after approval by the Council, shall be agreed upon by the Village and the applicant and filed with the appropriate Registrar of Deeds prior to the issuance of a building permit for any construction in accordance with site plans.

f. As a condition for the approval of the site plan by the Council, the applicant may be required to provide a performance guarantee in accordance with Section 22.08.310.

g. Development of the open space shall be completed concurrently with the construction of the dwelling units.

h. If substantial construction as defined in the legal instrument required in Subsection (e) above, has not commenced within twelve (12) months of approval by the Village Council, all Village approvals shall become null and void. The applicant may apply in writing to the Village Council for an extension, not to exceed twelve (12) months, at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of this deadline. A maximum of two (2) extensions may be allowed on any approved plan.

i. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have authority to consider an appeal of any decision by the Village Council concerning a Cluster Option proposal. {Ord. 257, 4-26-92}

22.28 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
22.28.010 OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES
a. For every use, activity, or structure permitted by this Ordinance and for all buildings or structures erected in accordance therewith, there shall be provided sufficient space for access and off-street standing, parking, circulation, unloading, and loading of motor vehicles that may be expected to transport its occupants, whether as patrons, residents, customers, employees, guests, or otherwise, to an establishment, activity, or place of residence at any time under normal conditions for any purpose. When a use is expanded, accessory off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with the regulations herein for the area of capacity of such expansion in combination with the previously existing uses, structure, or activity. Existing off-street parking facilities actually being used on the effective date of this Ordinance, for the parking of automobiles in connection with the operation of an existing building or use shall not be reduced to an amount less than that hereinafter required for a similar new building or use unless additional parking facilities of the same amount are provided by the methods described herein.

b. Single-Family Residential Zone Districts. Every building intended for single- family residential occupancy shall provide on the same lot with such building, off-street parking facilities in the ratio of two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit. No part of the front open space shall be intended to provide such off-street facilities.

c. Non Residential Uses of Residential Buildings. In any Zone District a residential building being used for non residential purposes, except places of public assembly as hereinafter provided, shall provide in addition to the off-street parking space or spaces for the dwelling units required under subsection (b) hereof, off-street parking in the same amounts set forth in Section 22.28.020, for that portion of the floor area which is being utilized for nonresidential purposes.

d. Methods of Providing Parking Facilities. The required off-street parking facilities for buildings used for other than residential purposes may be provided by any one, or any combination of the following methods:

1. By providing the required off-street parking on the same lot as the building served.

2. By providing the required off-street parking within three hundred feet (300') of the building being served, measured without crossing a major thoroughfare, from the nearest point of the building or use to the nearest point of the off-street parking facility.

3. By the collective provisions of the required off-street parking for two (2) or more buildings or uses, provided that the total of such off-street parking area shall not be less than the sum of the requirements of the various buildings or uses computed separately and such parking areas are within three hundred feet (300') feet of the buildings being served, measured without crossing a major thoroughfare, from the nearest point of the building or use to the nearest point of the off-street parking facility.

e. Uses Not Specifically Mentioned. For those uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be in accord with a use which the Zoning Board of Appeals considers as being most similar in nature.

f. Change in Use of Parking. Any area once designated as required off-street parking shall never be changed to any other use unless and until off-street parking facilities are provided elsewhere in accordance with this Section.

g. Zoning of Accessory Parking. All accessory parking facilities, whether provided in fulfillment of or in excess of the requirements of this Section, and whether located on the same or on a different lot from the principal use as provided herein, shall be located on property zoned within the same, or less a restrictive zoning district as the principal use served by the parking.

h. Joint Parking Facilities. Off-street parking space for separate buildings or uses or mixed uses may be provided and used collectively or jointly in any zoning district in which separate off-street parking facilities for each constituent use would be permitted, subject to the following provisions:

1. A written agreement assuring the continuing joint usage of said common parking for the combination of uses or buildings is properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form and execution by the Village Attorney and the Village Council, and filed and made part of the application for a building permit.

2. All parking spaces are located within three hundred (300) feet of the uses they are intended to serve as measured by the most direct pedestrian access.

3. The total number of available off-street parking spaces provided collectively for all intended uses shall equal or exceed the number required to be provided if the parking spaces were considered separately for each use.

4. The Village Council may reduce the required total number of spaces provided collectively by up to fifty (50) percent upon making a determination that the continuing parking demands of all uses to be served do not overlap and do not create an off-street parking deficiency at any time.

5. Parking spaces which are provided to meet requirements for churches, public schools, and private schools may be collectively used to meet the off-street parking requirements of related accessory uses provided that the normal hours of operation of the accessory uses do not overlap with the normal hours of operation of the principal use and an agreement per SECTION 22.28.010(h) (1) is executed by all applicable parties. {Ord. 252, 5-12-91}

i. Mixed Uses. For building or land containing more than one (1) use, the total parking requirement shall be determined to be the sum of the requirements for each use.

j. Duty of Continuing Compliance. Upon any transfer of the title to the real estate on which building or buildings are located, the transferees and the occupants shall have the continuing duty to maintain the off-street parking requirements of this Ordinance. It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupants of any building to discontinue or change, or cause the discontinuance or change of the required off-street parking without establishing, prior to such discontinuance or change, alternative off-street parking which meets the requirements of and is in compliance with this Ordinance.

22.28.020 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS. The minimum number of off-street parking spaces by use shall be determined in accordance with the following schedule:

Land Use Category Standard	Standard
a. Residential	Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Per Each Unit of Measure
1. Single family dwellings	Two (2) per dwelling unit.
2. Multiple Family	
One (1) per efficiency apartments.

Two (2) per one and two bedroom dwelling units.

2 1/2 per three bedrooom dwelling unit.

Three (3) per dwelling unit with four or more bedrooms.

b. Institutional	 
1. Churches, temples, community centers and places of public assemly with fixed seating.	One (1) per three (3) seats or six feet (6') of benches in the main unit of seating.
2. Dance halls, assembly halls, mechanical amusement arcades and similar places of public assembly not having fixed seating.	One (1) per each three (3) persons allowed within a maximum occupancy as established by fire, building or health code.
3. Theaters and auditoriums.	One (1) per each three (3) seats, plus one (1) additional for each two (2) employees.
4. Child care centers, nursery schools	
One space for each 20 students at the facility's full capacity plus one space for each employee.

Additional spaces will be required for facility owned vehicles at one space per vehicle.

At least three spaces must be designated as a temporary drop off area and designed for safe access to the building.

5. Elementary and secondary schools	One space per classroom and other activity rooms used by students plus one space for every employee plus one space for every four students of driving age.
6. Nursing homes, convalescent care housing and similar institutional uses for care of the aged.	One for each four beds plus one for each employee.
7. Hospitals	Two for each bed plus one per peak hour employee.
c. Office Uses	 
1. General tenant offices, professional offices of lawyers, architects, engineers, urban planners, and similar professions.	One for each 250 sq. ft. of Gross Leasable Area (4 per 1,000 sq. ft. GLA)
2. Banks and similar financial institutions.	One for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area, plus six stacking spaces for each drive-in transaction window.
3. Professional offices of doctors, dentists and similar professions, and medical and dental clinics.	One for each 125 sq. ft. of gross floor area(8 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA)
4. Service offices, such as those of a realtor, insurance service center, and similar uses.	One for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area(5 per 1,000 sq. ft.GFA)
d. Retail Sales or Services	 
1a. Retail stores of 15,000 sq. ft.GFA or less, except as otherwise specified herein.	One for 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area.(5 per 1,000 sq. ft, GFA)
1b. Retail stores over 15,000 sq. ft. GFA, except as otherwise specified herein.	
One space for each 250 sq. ft. gross leasable area, but not less than 75 total spaces.

4.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GLA

1c. Freestanding discount store over 75,000 sq. ft.	
One space for each 227 sq. ft. of gross floor area

4.4 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA

2. Planned commercial or retail shopping centers having more than four (4) establishments.	
One space for each 200 sq. ft. of gross leasable area.

5.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. GLA

3. Furniture or major appliances, household equipment, personal service shops (other than barber and beauty shops), repair shops, showroom of a plumber, decorator, electrician or a similar trade, shoe repair and other similar uses.	One for each 800 sq. ft. of usable floor area, exclusive of that floor area used for processing for which one additional space shall be provided for each two persons employed therein.
4. Laundromats and self-service dry cleaning establishments.	One for each two machines.
5. Barber and beauty shops.	One for each employee and/or service operator, plus two for each service chair and one additional for every two stationary hair dryers.
6. Bowling Alleys.	Five per alley plus such additional spaces as are required for restaurants, bars, assembly rooms and affiliated facilities.
7. Automobile service and filling stations.	Two for each service bay, and one for each 200 sq. ft. of usable sales floor area; plus one for every two employees with a minimum of two spaces.
8. Auto washes.	One for each employee. In addition, stacking spaces equal in number to five times the maximum capacity of the auto wash for automobiles awaiting entrance to the auto wash shall be provided. "Maximum capacity" shall mean the greatest number possible of automobiles under-going some phase of washing at the same time, which shall be determined by dividing the length of each wash line by 20 feet.
9. Mortuary establishments.	One for each 50 sq. ft. of assembly room, parlor and slumber room usable floor area.
10. Public/Private Indoor recreation facilities, athletic clubs, physical exercise establishments, court recreation, health studios, sauna baths and similar uses.	One per each three patrons based on maximum occupancy as established by local, county or state fire, building or health codes, whichever is greater, plus one space per employee at peak shift; plus such space as required for affiliated uses such as but not limited to restaurants, bars, pro shops, satellite therapy services, and the like.
11. Public/Private Outdoor recreation facilities such as athletic, swimming, tennis, or similar uses.	One per each potential patron plus one per peak shift employee; plus such spaces as may be required for affiliated uses such as but not limited to restaurants, bars, pro shops, satellite therapy services, and the like.
12. Restaurants:	 
12a. Dining room, including banquet areas.	One per 65 sq. ft. of usable floor area.
12b. Lounge.	One per 50 sq. ft. of usable floor area. That portion of a larger dining facility utilized for lounge shall be computed at this rate.
12c. Fast food restaurant.	
One per 30 sq. ft. of usable floor area.
12d. Carry-out restaurant.	One per 80 sq. ft. of usable floor area or ten spaces, whichever is greater.
12e. Drive-in restaurant.	One per 30 sq. ft. of usable floor area plus ten stacking spaces for each drive-in or drive-thru transaction station.

13. Unspecified commercial.	One for each 50 sq. ft. of usable floor area, or such spaces as are required for the specified use which is most similar in nature, as determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
e. Wholesale and Warehouses	 
1. Wholesale, storage and warehousing establishments.	Five plus one for each employee in the peak working shift or one for each 1700 sq. ft. of usable floor area, whichever is greater. Any retail or service area shall be addressed separately.
{Ord. 299; 6-7-00}

22.28.030 OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE LAYOUT, STANDARDS,
CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.

a. No building, structure, or land shall be erected or used for parking or driveway purposes of more than three required parking spaces unless a site plan has been approved by the Village Council.

b. No parking lot shall be constructed without a permit issued by the Building Official. Application for a permit shall be submitted to the Building Department in such form as may be determined by the department and shall be accompanied by at least two sets of site plans for the development of the parking lot designed in accordance with this Section.

c. The parking facilities shall not be less than the following minimum requirements:

Parking Pattern	Maneuvering Lane Width	Parking Space Width	Parking Space Length	Total Width of One Tier of Spaces Plus Maneuvering Lane	Total Width of Two Tiers of Spaces Plus Maneuvering Lane
0 degrees (parallel parking)	12 ft.	8 ft.	20 ft.	20 ft.	28 ft.
30 to 53 degrees	12 ft.	9 ft.	19 ft.	32 ft.	52 ft.
54 to 74 degrees	15 ft.	9 ft.	19 ft.	36 ft.	57 ft.
75 to 90 degrees
*	20 ft.	9 ft.	
19 ft.

39 ft.	58 ft.* End islands shall be two feet shorter than adjacent parking spaces.
d. Except for parallel parking, all parking spaces shall be clearly striped with
four inch wide double lines, 23 inches apart, to facilitate movement and to help maintain an orderly parking arrangement.

e. Parking Space Standards.

1. Except for parallel parking, all parking spaces shall be nine feet in width, center to center, and 19 feet in length.

2. Off-street parking reserved for the handicapped shall be provided in accordance with the State of Michigan Barrier-Free Rules, Michigan Public Act No. 1 of 1966, as amended. {Ord. 280, 2-19-97}

Accessible Parking Spaces Per Michigan Barrier Free Design

f. Stacking spaces shall be a minimum of ten feet wide and 20 feet in length, shall not extend into any public street right-of-way and shall be distinctly separated from on-site parking so as not to interfere with ingress and egress to parking spaces.

g. Parallel parking spaces shall be 20 feet in length with a six foot maneuvering space for each two parking spaces.

h. All parking lots shall have clearly limited and defined access from roadways and said access shall not be less than 24 feet in width at the right-of-way line. Interior driveways shall also be clearly defined and not less than 12 feet wide for one-way and 20 feet wide for two-way traffic.

i. All parking spaces shall have access from an aisle on the site. Backing directly onto a street shall be prohibited.

j. The Village Council may require the posting of such traffic control signs as it deems necessary to promote vehicular and pedestrian safety.

k. Curbing shall be provided to prevent any vehicle from damaging or encroaching upon any required wall, berm, or buffer strips, upon any building adjacent to the parking lot, or upon any adjacent property. Freeway-type guard rails shall be prohibited. {Ord. 318, 9-7-04}

l. All lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall comply with Section 22.08.440 for residential uses in a Residential Zone District and Section 22.09.050 for nonresidential uses in a Residential Zone District and ll development in the P-Parking, O-Office, and B-Business Districts. {Ord. 318, 9-7-04}

m. The off-street parking facilities in all non-single family residential districts shall be provided with asphalt or concrete surfacing in accordance with the Village standards. Drainage of all off-street parking facilities must be provided so as to collect and dispose of surface water so that water will not flow onto abutting properties or otherwise become a nuisance or a health hazard.

n. In order to insure pedestrian safety, sidewalks, of not less than five feet in width, may be required to separate any driveway or parking area from a building.

o. Sidewalks, not less than five feet in width, shall be constructed along the right-of-way line of all abutting streets.

p. All interior circulation routes shall have rights-of-way of a sufficient width to accommodate the vehicular traffic generated by the uses permitted in the district or adequate provision shall be made at the time of the approval of the plan for such sufficient width of rights-of-way. The right-of-way provided to satisfy this condition shall conform to the requirements of the Village, County, or State.

q. Parking spaces adjacent to interior sidewalks may have their length reduced up to two feet where adjacent curbs do not exceed four inches in height and where the adjoining sidewalk width is at least seven feet. This standard does not include those sidewalks provided along any public or private street.

r. Parking areas for all uses that shall comply with Section 22.09 SITE DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS shall meet the parking lot screening requirements of Section 22.09.040 (g). {Ord. 299; 6-7-00} {Ord. 318, 9-7-04}

22.28.050 OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING. On the same premises with every building, structure, or part thereof, erected or occupied for storage, warehouse goods, display, a department store, a wholesale store, a market, a hotel, a hospital, a mortuary, a laundry, a dry cleaning establishment, or other such similar use involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles or materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, loading and unloading services adjacent to the opening used for loading and unloading in order to avoid undue interference with public use of the streets or alleys.

All such loading and unloading areas, including all access drives, shall be paved and shall be in addition to the required off-street parking area requirements.

Such loading and unloading space, unless otherwise adequately provided for, shall be an area ten feet (10') by forty feet (40') with a fourteen foot (14') height clearance and shall be provided according to the following table:

Gross Floor Area in Square Feet	Loading and Unloading Spaces
Required in Terms of Square
Feet of Usable Floor Space
0 to 3,000	None
3,001 to 20,000	One (1)

20,001 to 100,000	One (1) plus one (1) for each over 20,000 square feet
100,001 or more	Five (5) plus one (1) for each 40,000 square feet of excess over 100,000 square feet
No loading space may be on any street frontage and provision for handling all freight shall be on those sides of any building which do not face on any street or proposed street, except where such areas are obscured, from such street, with a solid masonry wall not less than six feet (6') in height.

22.28.070 VEHICLE STORAGE, SALE AND REPAIR PROHIBITED. The following is prohibited in all nonresidential off-street parking areas:

a. The storage of an inoperable or unlicensed motor vehicle as defined in the State of Michigan Motor Vehicle Code.

b. The storage of any recreational vehicle as defined in this ordinance.

c. The sale or offering for sale of a motor vehicle or recreational vehicle.

d. The non-emergency repair or maintenance of any vehicle. {Ord. 252, 5-12-91}

22.30 NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES AND STRUCTURES
22.30.010 NONCONFORMING USE LIMITATIONS

It is the intent of this Ordinance to permit legal nonconforming lots, structures, or uses to continue until they are removed but not to encourage their survival.

It is recognized that there may exist within the districts established by this Ordinance and subsequent amendments, lots, structures, and uses of land and structures which were lawful before this Ordinance was passed or amended which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this Ordinance or future amendments.

Such uses are declared by this Ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this Ordinance that nonconformitites shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.

A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this Ordinance by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by addition of other uses of a nature which would not be permitted generally in the district involved.

Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance and upon which actual building construction has been diligently carried on.

22.30.020 NONCONFORMING LOTS

In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this Ordinance, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district; provided that yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Yard requirement variances may be obtained through approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals.

a. Notwithstanding the foregoing, when two (2) or more of such nonconforming lots or any combinations of such nonconforming lots and/or portions of lots which are nonconforming are contiguous and owned by the same person at the time of passage or amendment of this Ordinance, said combination of lots or portions thereof shall be considered a single, individual lot for the purposes of this Ordinance, and no portions of said lot shall be used, occupied, divided or sold in any manner which would diminish compliance with the regulations of this Ordinance or which would leave remaining any lots that do not comply with the minimum lot width, minimum area of any other requirements of this Ordinance. {Ord. 243; 12-17-89}

22.30.030 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND

Where, on the effective date of this Ordinance, or the effective date of an amendment of this Ordinance, a lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this Ordinance as enacted or amended such use may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:

a. No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance.

b. No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance.

c. If such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than six (6) months, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this Ordinance for the district in which such land is located.

22.30.040 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES

Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this Ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, open space or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:

a. No such structure may be enlarged or altered unless the proposed enlargement or alteration conforms to the provisions of this Ordinance.

b. Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than sixty percent (60%) of its replacement costs, exclusive of the foundation, it shall be reconstructed only in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.

c. Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is relocated after it is moved. {Ord. 356; 11-28-15}

22.30.050 NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES AND LAND

If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and land in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, that would not be permitted in the district under the terms of this Ordinance, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to both 22.30.030 and 22.30.040 above.

22.30.060 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE

On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months on ordinary repairs or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent not exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the assessed value of the building, provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this Ordinance shall not be increased.

22.30.070 USES UNDER SPECIAL APPROVAL PROVISIONS NOT NON-CONFORMING USES

Any use which is permitted by a special approval, as provided in this Ordinance, or variance, or court of competent jurisdiction, shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall, without further action, be deemed a conforming use in such district.

22.30.080 REMOVAL BY COUNCIL

Whenever in the opinion of the Village Council an area will be improved by the removal of a nonconforming use, the Village Council may by resolution determine to cause such removal by purchase or condemnation or otherwise proceed in accordance with the Village Charter or laws and statutes of the State of Michigan, and may pay the cost and expense thereof by special assessment against the area especially benefitted in accordance with any Special Assessment Ordinance of the Village which may be applicable.

22.32 SIGNS
SECTION 22.32  SIGNS.

22.32.010.  PURPOSE AND INTENT.  It is hereby determined that regulation of the location, size, placement and certain features of signs is necessary to enable the public to locate goods, services and facilities without difficulty and confusion, to promote traffic safety, safeguard public heath and welfare, and discourage visual competition among businesses.

In addition, it is the intent of this section to develop a total and cohesive community environment through the adoption of discretionary controls designed to create a more attractive business climate, character and unique sense of place within the Village.

The Village encourages signage that is unique and creative to help reinforce the business brand and identification without creating visual blight.

22.32.020.  DEFINITIONS.  The following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth in this Section when they are used in this Section:

A-Frame or Sandwich Board Signs: An advertising or business sign constructed in such a manner as to form an A or a tent-like shape.  Such signs are movable and not secured or attached to the ground or surface upon which it is located.

Accessible Sign: A sign that designates a site, building, facility, parking space, or portion thereof as barrier-free, that can be approached, entered, and used by individuals with disabilities and complies with the Americans with Disabilities Act. Signs shall be marked with the International Symbol of Accessibility.

Airborne Devices: A sign supported by aerodynamic forces or propelled through the air by force, including but not limited to air filled balloons, signs animated by forced air, and lighter than air signs.

Back-lit Signage: Solid/opaque letters, numbers or symbols illuminated from behind.

Banner: A sign made of a non-ridged material not including pennants or flags.

Billboard Sign: An on site, free-standing sign upon which a display can be posted, painted or otherwise affixed in a manner that is readily changed.

Billboard-Road Advertising Sign: A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located.

Building Elevation: The perimeter vertical surface of a building set approximately parallel to a lot line.

Bulletin Board: A sign with temporary replaceable letters or characters, used to announce dates of functions or activities.

Business: Any legal use of a building, other than for religion, day care center, school, home occupation or residence, by a person, firm or corporation. Although contained in the same building as another business and may or may not be owned by the same person, an activity may be treated as a separate business only if the following exists:

The businesses are physically separated from each other in a manner that complies with the Village adopted building code for fire separation between business uses.
Each business provides distinctly different services.
Has a separate business address.
Building Frontage: The horizontal width of the building or tenant space on the side parallel to the street, or streets, if contiguous.

Canopy: A roof-like cover, often of fabric, metal, or glass, designed and intended for protection from the weather or as a decorative embellishment, and which projects from a wall or roof of a structure over a window, walk, door, or the like.

Canopy Sign: A sign affixed, applied to or a part of a canopy.

Canopy Valance: That portion of a canopy consisting of short strips or bands of material hung at the lower edge of the canopy.

Changeable Message Sign: A sign or portion thereof designed to accommodate frequent message changes composed of characters, letters, or illustrations and that can be changed or rearranged, either manually or electronically, without altering the face or surface of such sign.

Construction Sign: An on-premises sign erected during a construction of a project which identifies the project, the owner or developer of the site, the architect, engineer, contractor and subcontractors working on the project, and any funding sources for the project, but which does not act to advertise a product of service.

Development Identification Sign: A sign which, by means of symbol or name, identifies a shopping center or other development that may contain a mixture of uses, but does not include the name of a tenant.

Directional Sign: An on-premise sign whose primary purpose of which is to expedite the flow of vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian traffic to, from and within the premise.

External Lighting: Illumination resulting from light emitted directly from a lamp or luminary and is not light diffused through translucent signs or reflected from other surfaces such as the ground or building faces.

Flag: A sign made of non-rigid material having a distinctive size, color, and design used as a symbol or emblem.

Grade: The average elevations of an area within a radius of the sign base equal to two times the height of the sign.

Ground Sign: A sign suspended or supported by one or more uprights or braces anchored in the ground with no more than 24 inches clearance from the bottom of the sign to the grade below.

Indirect Lighting: Light that has been reflected or scattered off another surface to illuminate the sign surface.

Illuminated Sign: Any sign lighted by or exposed to artificial lighting either by light on or in the sign or directed toward the sign.

Institutional Ground Sign: A sign displaying the name of a religious institution, schools, government buildings, library, community center, or similar institution, and the announcement of its services or activities.

Internally illuminated Sign: A sign having an internal lighting source that allows light to be visible through the sign face.

Legal Nonconforming Sign: A pre-existing legal sign or portion thereof, which previously complied with the sign regulations in effect at the time the sign permit was issued, which was designed, erected, or structurally altered such that it does not conform to the current regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.

Mascot Sign  Any person dressed with a business logo or as a representation of a business logo/mascot for the purpose of drawing attention and advertising that business.

Menu Boards: A sign that displays the bill-of-fare for drive thru restaurant customers.

Moving Sign: A sign that has motion either constantly or at intervals or that gives the impression of movement through intermittent, flashing, scintillating or varying intensities of illumination.

Mural Sign: Artwork applied to the wall of a building that covers all or substantially all of the wall and depicts a scene or event of natural, social, cultural or historic significance and not interpreted by the Village to be advertising.  Murals determined to be advertising shall be considered a sign and shall be included in the calculations of allowable sign area.

Off-Premise Sign: A sign which contains a message related to a business, profession, commodity, service or activity sold or offered for sale on property other than the premises where such sign is located.

Outline Tubing Signs: A sign arranged of exposed tubing that outlines and calls attention to certain features of an advertising device such as individual letters, figures, shapes or words.

Parasite Signs: A sign intended to draw attention to any one or more of various services, items for sale, contests, etc., and is attached as an appendage to a sign, sign support or any part of a principal building, accessory building or other structure located on the premises.

Parked Vehicle Signs: Any sign attached to or upon any vehicle where said vehicle is allowed to remain parked in the same location, or in the same vicinity, for frequent or extended periods of time, where the intent is apparent to be one of using the vehicle and signs for purposes of advertising an establishment, service or product.

Pennant: A small, often triangular, flag used in multiples as a device to call attention to a land use or activity.

Pole Sign: A permanent sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole(s) or post(s) that is independent from any building or other structure.

Political Sign: A sign relating to the election of a person to public office or to a political party or the expression of a political opinion, or to an issue or matter to be voted upon.

Portable Sign: Any sign, which by its construction, is intended to be moved from one location to another.

Premises: Any contiguous real property under the same ownership or control that is not divided by a public street.

Principal Building Frontage: The width of the building on the side where the primary entrance to the business is located, which may or may not front a street. The Planning Commission may designate an alternative horizontal building width as the principal building frontage for signage purposes.

Projecting Sign: A sign erected and attached at one end to a building that extends beyond the attachment surface by more than 12 inches.

Real Estate Sign: A temporary sign that relates to the sale, lease, or rental of property or buildings, or to construction activities on a site.

Rear Entry Sign: A wall sign which is located near the rear entry door on a building.

Roof Sign: A sign, which is erected, constructed and maintained above any portion of the roof.

Sign: Any object, device, logo, display or structure, or part thereof, which is intended to advertise, identify, display, or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event, or location by any means. Signs shall include banners, bulbs or other lighting devices, streamers, pennants, balloons, propellers, flags and any similar device of any type or kind whether bearing lettering or not.  The official flag of any nation, state or nonprofit organization or a flag with no commercial advertising on its face, is not considered to be a sign, provided it is not used to attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location.  This definition does not include goods displayed in a business window, nor does it include religious symbols.

Sign Base: A support directly below a sign.

Sign Erector: Any person engaged in the business of erecting, constructing, altering, or removing signs.

Sign Face: The surface intended for the display of information on the sign excluding its base, foundation and erection supports.

Sign Height: The vertical measurement from the grade to the highest point of the sign.

Special Event Sign: A sign announcing an occasion such as a birth, graduation, birthday, anniversary or holiday greeting.

Streamers: A long narrow wavy strip resembling or suggesting a banner floating in the wind.

Temporary Sign: An informational sign, banner, pennant, commercial flag, without a structural frame, intended for a limited period of display, such as for sales events, or special decorative displays for holidays or public demonstrations.

Time/Date/Temperature Sign: A sign that displays the current time and/or date and/or temperature that may include the name, and/or insignia of a business on the premises.

Trailer Sign: A sign, which is attached to, or sitting upon a trailer, either stationary or mobile.

Valet Sign: A portable sign that designates a parking service is available and does not advertise any establishment or business offering valet services.

Wall Sign: A sign which is attached directly to or painted on the exterior wall of which is essentially in a plane parallel to the building or wall structure.

Window Sign: A sign that is affixed onto a window pane or glass or the intent of the indoor signage is to be visible from the outdoors viewed through the window pane or glass. Window Signage shall not obstruct view into business from walkway or public thoroughfare.

22.32.030.  MEASUREMENT OF SIGN AREA.  The total sign area is to be expressed in square feet and shall be computed as herein set forth and permitted in Section 22.32.110 of this Ordinance.

1. Single-Face Sign total area shall be computed as the number of square feet within lines drawn at the outer perimeter forming any single and/or combination of geometric shapes, such as a square, rectangle, triangle or circle encompassing the extreme limits of an individual letter(s), word(s), message(s), representation, emblem or any similar figure, including open space(s), together with any frame or other material forming an integral part of the display used to differentiate such sign from the background against which it is placed.

2. Double-Face Signs having two faces of equal or similar size arranged and/or positioned back-to-back and parallel or with the faces at an included angle of not more than 30 degrees in the plan or vertical view; the area of the sign shall be computed as one-half the total area of the two faces.  When the faces of such a sign are not of equal area, then the area of the sign shall be computed as the total area of the largest face.

3. When two Single-Face Signs are arranged and/or positioned within 36 inches of each other, the area of the two signs shall be computed as one Single-Face Sign and total area shall include the open space between the two separate faces.

4. The base of a ground sign shall not be counted as sign area.

22.32.040  SIGN ERECTION PERMITS AND APPLICATIONS

1. Sign Erection Permit Required.  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, re-erect, alter or relocate any sign unless a permit shall have been first obtained from the Village, except as provided in the EXEMPT SIGN Section 22.32.050.  The Planning Commission, except for temporary signs as stated in TEMPORARY SIGNS Section 22.32.100(4), shall review all signs for compliance with these regulations and according to the standards stated in APPROVAL STANDARDS Section 22.32.095.  A permit fee must be paid in accordance with the schedule adopted by resolution of the Village Council.  Any sign that makes use electricity shall, in addition to a sign permit, require an electrical permit, regardless of size.

2. Planning Commission Approval Required.  A type of sign not explicitly defined in DEFINITIONS of this Section must be approved by the Planning Commission before a permit shall be issued.

3. Sign Erection Permits.  Permits for the erection of signs shall only be issued to persons qualified to carry on such work under the provisions of this Section.

4. Sign Erection Permit Expiration.  A sign permit shall become null and void if the work for which the permit was issued is not completed within 90 days of the date of issue.
5. Sign Erection Permit Applications.  Applications for sign permits shall be made upon forms provided by the Village for this purpose and shall contain the following information:

a. Name, address and phone number of applicant.

b. Location of the building, structure, or lot on which the sign is to be attached or erected.

c. Position of the sign on the building, structure or lot on which the sign is to be attached or erected.

d. Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings, structures, property lines, and rights-of-way, existing or proposed.

e.12 copies of the plans and specifications and method of construction and attachment to the building or in the ground.

f. Copy of calculations, if deemed necessary by the Village, showing the structure is designed for dead load and wind pressure in accordance with the regulations adopted by the Village.

g. Name and address of the sign erector.

h. Insurance policy and/or performance bond as required herein.

i. Such other information as the Village may require to show full compliance with this and all other applicable laws of the Village and the State of Michigan.

j. When public safety so requires, the application containing the aforesaid material shall, in addition, bear the certificate or seal of a registered structural or civil engineer as a condition for issuance of a permit.

k. Indicate the zoning district in which the sign is to be located.

6. Servicing.  No permit shall be required for ordinary servicing, repainting of existing sign message, or cleaning of a sign.  No permit is required for change of message of a sign designed for periodic message change without change of structure, including a bulletin board or billboard.

22.32.050 EXEMPT SIGNS.  No erection permit shall be required for signs enumerated below.  Such exemptions, however, shall not be construed to relieve the owner of the sign from responsibility for its proper location, erection and maintenance.  Sign areas provided below are in addition to the sign area limits per premises of this Section:

1. Accessible Signs:  Signs that designate a site, building, facility, or portion thereof as barrier-free.

2. Flags:  The flag bearing the official designation of the United States of America when displayed on a flagpole of a height not exceeding 30 feet, but not more than one such flagpole per premises.  No more than two additional flags which bear the symbol of a nation, state or other governmental entity, may be displayed on each premises on flagpole(s) of a height not exceeding 30 feet.  Any site containing multiple businesses or containing multi?family dwelling units may display one United States flag for each separate business or dwelling unit, provided that the display of the flags is limited to areas directly leased or owned by the occupants of the individual structures or units.

3. Government Signs:  Signs erected on a Village, County, Township, State or Federal building or land which announce the name, occupancy, achievements, and information of the use or admission to the premises.

4. Gasoline Service Station Pump Island Signs .

5. Numerical Address Signs:  Letters and numbers shall not exceed 8 inches in height.

6. Political Signs:  Shall be solely for the purpose of providing information relating to the election of a person to public office, or to a political party, or the expression of a political opinion, or to any matter to be voted upon, and shall be permitted subject to the following conditions:

a. Maximum Area:  Individual signs shall not exceed six square feet in area.  Permission to locate subject signs shall be obtained from the owner or occupant of property on which the sign is located.  Failure to comply with this condition shall be cause for immediate removal of that sign.  Political signs shall not be attached to any utility pole, other sign, other sign parts or landscaping including trees.  Political signs shall be ground or wall signs.  No ground sign shall be higher than four feet above grade.

b. Political signs shall be removed within ten calendar days after the election or event to which they relate. 

c. Political signs shall not be erected in such a manner that they will or reasonably may be expected to interfere with, obstruct, confuse or mislead traffic.

7. Public or Private School Achievement Signs:  Signs erected by, or for, a public or private school announcing the achievements of the school or its students provided each such sign is no more than 18 square feet in area.

8. Real Estate:  Accessory signs advertising premises for sale, rent and/or lease, when not more than six square feet in area for a single dwelling or building or vacant land.

a. Open House Sign:  A non-accessory real estate sign not to exceed four square feet in area designed to give direction to a premises that is for sale, rent and/or lease may be located on private property.  The sign height shall not exceed three feet above grade. Permission to locate subject signs shall be obtained from the owner or occupant of property on which the sign is located.  Failure to comply with this condition shall be cause for immediate removal of that sign.

b. Removal:  All real estate signs shall be removed on or before ten (10) calendar days after the sale, lease, or rental of the premises or structure.

9. Small signs including "garage sale" signs:  Accessory signs, which are not more than two square feet in area, may be erected on a residential premises provided the total area of all such signs on one premises shall not exceed four square feet.  Garage sale signs shall be permitted to be displayed for periods of no more than four days in any 90 day period.

10. Stadium Signs:  Athletic scoreboards are exempt if all of the following conditions are met:

a. The total square footage for all athletic scoreboards within an individual athletic facility, such as a football or soccer stadium or a baseball or softball field, shall not exceed 200 square feet;

b. There is no commercial advertising;

c. An electronic changeable message sign shall not be included; and,

d. No smoke, fireworks or other special effects that have an off-site impact shall be produced.

e. In addition to any permitted scoreboard, one additional stadium sign is exempt if the following conditions are met:

i.  The total area of the additional stadium sign shall not exceed 100 square feet; and,

ii. The additional stadium sign is located no closer than 200 feet from the nearest right-of-way line. 

11. Street Signs:  Signs erected by the Village, County, State, or Federal government for street direction or traffic control and information.

12. Temporary Signs: Temporary signs, used for non-commercial messages such as for public demonstrations or promotions of civic welfare or charitable purposes on which there is no commercial advertising, provided the Village is held harmless and blameless for any damage or injury resulting therefrom.  These signs shall not exceed six square feet in area, and shall be displayed for a period not to exceed 30 cumulative days in any six month period unless approved, for other periods, by the Planning Commission.

13. General Expression Signs: Signs that are designed for the expression of religious, personal, or political messages may be erected on a residential premises provided not more than one sign per premises is permitted which does not exceed six square feet in area.

14. Construction Signs: One such sign may be allowed per development, provided it shall have a maximum height of 8 feet above grade and a maximum area of 32 square feet.

15. Indoor Open Signs: One such sign may be allowed per street frontage, with a maximum of two.  Such signs may be up to 4 square feet in area and shall be installed no less than 5 feet and no greater than 7 feet above the finished floor.

22.32.060  SIGN ERECTOR REQUIREMENTS.  Permits may be issued only to licensed persons in compliance with the following provisions:

1. License Application:  Any person before engaging or continuing in the business of erecting or repairing signs in the Village shall apply for an annual sign erector's license subject to the following conditions:

a. Insurance Certificates:  Before a license is issued, the installing company shall submit for filing with the Village Clerk a valid Certificate of Insurance, approved by the Village Attorney, for bodily injury liability in the amount of $250,000.00 for injuries to one person and $500,000.00 for injury to more than one person, and property damage liability in the amount of  $50,000.00 for damage to any property due to the actions of himself or any of his agents or employees.

Said certificate shall provide for notification of the Village ten days prior to the expiration of insurance.

b. Lapsing of Insurance:  If at any time, the insurance of any sign erector is permitted to lapse, his license and right to obtain permits shall automatically be revoked.

c. Notification of Change:  A sign erector shall notify the Village of any change in address, and if a firm or corporation, any change in ownership or management if other than that indicated on the Insurance Certificates.

2. Revocation:  The license may be suspended or revoked as otherwise provided for in this Section.

22.32.070  CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.

1. Materials and Design:  All signs shall be designed, constructed and maintained in conformity with the provisions for materials, loads, and stresses of the latest adopted edition of the Village Building Code and requirements of this Section.

2. Erector's Imprint:  Signs that require a permit under this Section, must carry the identification and address of the sign erector, electrical voltage, when applicable, and date of erection in clearly legible letters whether for the initial erection or rehanging of a sign.

3. Fastenings:  All signs must be erected in such a manner and with such materials to remain safe and secure during the period of use and all bolts, cables, and other parts of such signs shall be kept painted and free from corrosion.  Any defect due to the fault of the erector shall be repaired by the erector.
  
4. Fire Escapes:  No signs of any kind shall be attached to or placed upon a building in such a manner as to obstruct any fire escape routes.

5. Support Location:  No pole, cable or support of any nature shall be placed on any publicly owned property, street right-of-way, or proposed street right-of-way.

6. Changeable Message Signs and Time/Date/Temperature Signs:  Although changeable message signs and time/date/temperature signs are prohibited signs in Section 22.32.091, the message change cycle of these types of signs which may be currently in existence shall not be not less than ten seconds per message, except on a combined time/date/temperature message, in which case the change cycle shall not be less than two (2) seconds.

7. Flashing Signs:  All flashing or intermittent illumination of signs shall be prohibited.

8. Proximity to Electrical Conductors:  No sign shall be erected so that any part including cables, guys, etc. will be within ten feet of any electrical conductor, electric light pole, street lamp, traffic light, or other public utility pole or standard.

9. Rehanging:  In case of rehanging or re-erection of any sign, the new erector must place his identification, address and the date on the sign.

10. Sanitation:  Property surrounding any ground sign shall be kept clean, sanitary and free from obnoxious and offensive substances, free from weeds, rubbish, and flammable material.

11. Maintenance:  All signs shall be maintained in a condition of good repair.  Peeling or missing paint, holes, broken, cracked, bent, warped, rotted, discolored, sagging, out?of?plumb, worn, torn, rusted or missing material parts shall be repaired within ten days of written notification of the Village.

12. Compliance with Code:  The construction and maintenance of signs shall be regulated by the current edition of the adopted Building Code for the Village unless the provisions of this Section are more stringent.

22.32.080  COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.

1. Compliance Certification:  All signs shall be inspected at original installation and if found to be in full compliance with the provisions of this Section, shall be issued a Certificate of Compliance.

2. Inspections:  The Village shall cause existing signs to be inspected if deemed necessary by him to determine continuation of compliance with the provisions of this Section.

3. Concealed Work: In cases where fastenings are to be installed and enclosed in such a manner that the Village cannot easily remove material to see the fastenings and material used, the Sign Erector must advise the Village so that the inspection may be made before concealment.

4. Removal of Signs:  Should any sign be found unsafe, insecure, improperly maintained or constructed or not in accordance with the requirements of this Section, the erector and/or owner shall be required to make any such sign safe, secure and otherwise in compliance with the requirements of this Section within seven calendar days of notice.  Failure to comply shall result in an order to remove the sign within 48 hours from the time of notification in writing to that effect from the Village.

5. Exception:  Existing signs determined to be unsafe and in immediate hazard to health or safety shall be removed or repaired within 12 hours of notification.

6. Exemptions:  Exempt signs as provided in Section 22.32.050 shall not be issued a Certificate of Compliance.

7. Responsibility of Compliance:  The owner of any property on which a sign is placed and the person maintaining the sign are declared to be equally responsible for the erection, safety and condition of the sign and the area in the vicinity thereof subject to the provisions of Section 22.32.070.

22.32.090  GENERAL PROVISIONS IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS.  The following provisions shall apply to all signs erected or located in any Zoning District:

1. Sign Location:

a. No sign, except those established and maintained by the Village, County, Township, State, or Federal Governments, shall be located within, project into, or overhang a public right-of-way or dedicated public easement, unless otherwise authorized in this Section.

b. No sign above a height of 36 inches shall be located within, project into, or overhang the triangular area formed at the intersection of any two street right-of-way lines (existing or proposed) by a straight line drawn between said right-of-way lines at a distance along each line of 25 feet from their point of intersection, unless visual under clearance can be assured on the plans.

c. No wall sign shall project beyond or overhang the wall, or any permanent architectural feature, by more than 12 inches, and shall not project above the roof line or parapet.

d. Construction signs advertising buildings or projects under construction or repair may be erected and maintained for a period not to exceed the term of construction or repair, and such sign shall be erected on the site of construction.  Said sign shall advertise only the building or project under construction and information related thereto such as its developers, contractors, engineers, brokers and architects.

e. No sign shall be permitted at any location which, in the sole discretion of the Village, creates any type of safety hazard or visual impediment to pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

2. Sign Height:  No ground sign, except as otherwise provided herein, shall project above the maximum height limitation of 8 feet above grade.

3. Liability Insurance:  If the vertical distance of a sign above the street is greater than the horizontal distance from the sign to the street right-of-way line and is so located as to be able to fall or be pushed onto public property, then the owner of such sign shall keep enforce a bodily injury liability insurance policy in the amount of $250,000.00 for injury to one person and $500,000.00 for injury to more than one person and property damage liability in the amount of $50,000.00 for damage to property.  In lieu of an insurance policy as required herein, an owner may present proof satisfactory to the Village Attorney that said owner is financially capable of self-insurance in the above amounts.

22.32.091.  PROHIBITED SIGNS IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS.  The following signs are prohibited in all Zoning Districts

1. Signs that are not clean, i.e. are covered with materials that obscure the message, in whole or in part. Signs that are not in good repair, i.e. having broken foundation, base, or support structures, lighting fixtures, etc. and/or having a faded appearance.

2. Signs that are not securely affixed to a substantial structure that will hold the sign in a fixed position under normal weather conditions or deemed to be unsafe by the Village.

3. Signs that are attached to any natural growth, such as trees, shrubs, rock or other foliage.

4. Signs, which by reason of their location, shape, size, or color appear to regulate, warn, or direct the movement of vehicular traffic on public thoroughfares or interfere with or resemble an official traffic sign or device.

5. Signs other than utility company signs affixed to power poles or other utility structures of fixtures.

6. Signs located so far as to interfere with the view necessary for motorists to proceed safely through intersections or to enter onto or exit from public streets or private roads.

7. Signs in public rights-of way.

8. All types of flags, banners, pennants, streamers, and airborne devices attached to the ground or buildings (unless specifically authorized elsewhere in this Section).

9. All billboard and billboard-road advertising signs.

10. Internally illuminated signs except for those specifically allowed in 22.32.110.

11. Off premise signs.

12. Roof signs.

13. Pole signs.

14. Changeable electronic message signs.

15. Moving or revolving signs.

16. Time/Date/Temperature signs.

17. Trailer signs.

18. Parked vehicle signs.

19. Outlined tubing signs.

20. Parasite signs.

21. Mascot signs.

22. No red or green illumination within 200 feet of traffic signal.

23. Any sign that advertises, identifies, or pertains to a business no longer conducted, or product no longer sold, on a premise where such a sign is located. Such signs shall be removed within fifteen (15) days following cessation of the relevant activity.

24. No sign which advertises a business related transacted or goods sold or produced, shall be constructed or maintained that does not advertise a business related transaction or goods sold or produced on the premises on which the sign is located.

25. For Sale, For Lease, or For Rent signs posted on ground signs, signage bands, projecting signs or canopies are prohibited.

22.32.095.  STANDARDS FOR ALL SIGNS:

1. Number and square footage requirements

a. Each business shall be allowed a maximum of two (2) types of signs per any single building elevation that has public frontage. Types of signs are:

Wall sign
Ground sign
Canopy sign
Individual businesses within a multi tenant building shall not have individual ground signs but can have (1) Development Identification Sign or a collective ground sign (subject to the provisions of Section 22.32.110) in addition to the (1) allowable sign listed above. Professional and medical offices in a multi tenant building shall have a Development Identification Sign only.

b. For the purpose of determining the number of signs, where graphic material is displayed in a random manner without organized relationship of elements, each element shall be considered a single sign; a number of small signs randomly placed on a wall shall not be construed to be a single sign.

c. A two-sided or multi-sided sign shall be regarded as one sign so long as the interior angle of a V shaped sign does not exceed thirty (30) degrees and the two sides are at no point separated by a distance that exceeds five (5) feet; and the distance between the backs of each face of a double faced (back-to-back) sign does not exceed three feet.

d. Canopy signs can be up to 30% of the allowable wall sign square footage.

e. Window signs are allowed provided they do not exceed 25% of the total window pane area and does not exceed ten (10) square feet, whichever is less.

2. Height, setback, and projection requirements

a. When measuring sign height, the height of the entire structure, including decorative elements, shall be included.

i. For ground signs, height shall be calculated as the vertical distance measured from grade to the highest point of the sign.

ii. For signs attached to buildings, height shall be calculated as the vertical distance from the grade at the building to which a sign is attached to the building to the highest point of the sign.
chap 22 sec 32_clip_image002

b. No sign may extend above any parapet of a flat roof or above the eve line of a sloped roof.

c. No wall sign attached to a building may project more than twelve (12) inches from the building wall. In those instances, where a wall sign is affixed to the wall of a structure, which lies on a right-of-way line, the bottom of the wall sign may be no closer than eight (8) feet from the grade.

d. No part of a ground sign may be closer than four (4) feet to the right-of-way.

e. No part of a projecting sign  or sign bracket may extend more than five feet and six inches (5-6) over private property or more than thirty six (36) inches beyond the property/R.O.W line

f. Except for awning signs hanging entirely over private property, no part of an canopy sign may be closer than eight (8) feet above grade level.

3. Signage Information

a. A development identification sign shall contain no other advertisement display, including the name of any individual tenant.

4. Illumination/lighting

a. All electrical wiring shall be concealed from view or placed underground.

b. Signs shall be lit indirectly or externally (see exception in 22.32.110). Lighting shall be directed either downward or upward onto the sign face and shielded so that it illuminates only the sign face and does not shine directly into a public right-of-way or residential premises.

Exceptions:

i. Wall or ground signs may be internally illuminated not exceeding 30% of the total signage area.

ii. Back lit wall or ground signage

c. No signage shall be illuminated by flashing or intermittent lights or lights changing degrees of intensity.

d. No receptacle or device housing a permitted light source for a sign shall protrude more than thirty six (36) inches from the face of the sign or building to which it is attached

e. All illuminated signs shall be equipped with a functional timer control.  No sign shall be illuminated after 11:00 PM or one-half hour following the close of the business day, whichever is later.  No sign shall be illuminated before 7:00 AM, or one-half hour prior to the beginning of the business day, whichever, is earlier.  These provisions do not apply to residential subdivision identification signs.

f. Any illuminated sign located on a lot abutting or across a street from, any residentially zoned or occupied property shall not be illuminated between the hours of 9:00 PM and 7:00 AM except that such sign may remain illuminated during such time as the activity to which the sign pertains is open for business.

5. Sign Materials

a. Sign and base materials shall be constructed of durable materials able to withstand Michigans four seasons.

b. E.I.F.S. is prohibited as a sign construction or base material.

c. It is recommended that the sign be constructed of materials compatible with the existing structure.

6. Sign Colors: No sign shall contain more than three (3) colors. Black and White shall be considered to be colors except when either is used only as the background of the sign.

Exception: Multiple color company logos may be permitted under the discretion of the Planning Commission.

7. Lettering Styles: A maximum of two differing type of styles shall be allowed on any single sign.

8. Obstruction of Accessways: No sign or sign structure shall obstruct free ingress to or egress from a fire escape, door, window, or other required accessway.

9. Obstruction of window surface: No sign shall project over, occupy, or obstruct any window surface required for light or ventilation by any applicable provision of the adopted Village of Beverly Hills Building Code.

10. Sign spacing: No sign shall be nearer than twenty (20) feet to any other sign or structure other than a structure to which it is lawfully attached. The Planning Commission may reduce this spacing when existing conditions preclude an otherwise permissible sign.

11. General safety: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no sign shall be constructed or maintained in any area or in any manner so as to create a nuisance or a threat to the public safety or welfare.

12. Landscaping of ground signs: All ground signs shall be located within a landscaped area of not less than two hundred (200) square feet in area.  Ground signs shall be landscaped with grass, small shrubs, perennials and/or other live ground cover.

13. Standards for specific uses: All signs must comply with 22.32.110, unless otherwise provided.

a. Signs relating to automotive service stations, including any business selling automotive fuel.

i. In addition to the signs allowed in 22.32.110, automotive fuel service stations, including any business selling fuel, may display one other sign, with a sign face not exceeding eighteen square feet, for the purposes of advertising the price of gasoline or other accessory products sold on the premises, including information regarding accepted credit cards. For purposes of this subsection, the sign area advertising the price of gasoline or fuel may be electronic. Other areas of the signage must be illuminated by external means.

b. Development Identification Center Signs. Notwithstanding 22.32.110, in the case of a shopping center or other integrated group of stores or commercial buildings one freestanding center sign may be erected. The maximum area for such sign face shall be equal to one-half (0.5) square foot of sign face area for each foot of building frontage, or fifty (50) square feet, whichever is less. All multi-tenant, business center signs shall be located within a landscaped area of not less than two hundred (200) square feet in area.

22.32.110  DISTRICT REGULATIONS.

Permanent Business Sign Standards

Type of Sign

Permit Required

Maximum Area

Maximum Height

Illumination

Maximum Number

Canopy Sign

Yes

1 square foot for each linear foot of principal building frontage not to exceed 15 square feet

3 feet max. Canopies signs shall not be attached to the outer wall at a height of less than 8 feet above a public sidewalk and at a height of less than 15 feet above public driveways, roadways, alleys and thoroughfares.

External lighting with building compatible light fixture located above canopy. No internal illumination allowed.

1 canopy sign allowed per business. 2 identical principal canopy signs are allowed if business fronts 2 streets.

Canopy Valance Signs

Yes

No more than 33% of canopy valance area

Canopy valance shall not be more than 9 inches in height. Canopies may not extend from the wall at the height of less than 8 feet above walkway or public right-of-way

No illumination

1 per canopy allowed

Directional Signs

Yes

5 square feet

4 feet above grade

No illumination

No maximum; however, logo of business not permitted.

Development Identification sign

Yes

50 square feet

No more than 8 feet high (including base). If base is used, 1/3 base (max.) to 2/3 sign proportion allowed.

Back-lit, indirect or external lighting source. Sign may have internal illumination not to exceed 30% of total sign area. No illuminated wall signs on side or rear of building.

One per multi-tenant building or center. A second sign may be permitted where such a building has two or more street frontages with a minimum separation between signs of 300 feet.

Ground Sign

Yes

30 square feet

No more than 8 feet high (including base). If base is used, 1/3 base (max.) to 2/3 sign proportion allowed.

Back-lit, indirect or external lighting source. Sign may have internal illumination not to exceed 30% of total sign area. No illuminated wall signs on side or rear of building.

1 sign for single business use which abuts one street, 2 signs if business has 2 or more street frontages with a minimum separation between signs of 300 feet.

Menu Board

Yes

25 square feet (not counted toward sign area)

8 feet

Permitted during business hours. Internal or external illumination permitted.

1 sign per drive thru lane

Projecting Sign

Yes

10 square feet

No less than 8 feet above grade.

Permitted

1 projecting sign per business. Sign cannot be located within 20 feet of any other projecting sign; however, this provision shall not deny any place of business at least one projecting sign.

Rear Entry Signs

Yes

6 square feet (not counted towards total sign area)

N/A

Permitted

1 sign

Wall Sign

Yes

One square foot for each linear foot of principal building frontage not to exceed 30 square feet. A business with 15,000 square feet or more may have up to 60 square feet.

Wall signs shall not be attached to the outer wall at a height of less than 8 feet above a public sidewalk/grade and at a height of less than 15 feet above driveways, roadways, alleys and thoroughfares. Wall signs that project more than 3 inches from the building facade shall not be attached to the outer wall at a height of less than 8 feet above a public sidewalk or at a height of less than 15 feet above public driveways, and thoroughfares.

Back-lit, indirect or external lighting source. Sign may have internal illumination not to exceed 30% of total sign area. No illuminated wall signs on side or rear of building.

1 sign per business. 2 identical principal wall signs are allowed if businesses fronts 2 streets.

Window Signs

No

10 total square feet not to exceed 25% of total window area, whichever is less

N/A

Not permitted

Limited by window area.

Temporary Business Sign Standards

 

 

Type of Sign

Permit Required

Maximum Area

Maximum Height

Illumination

Maximum Number/Duration

Special Event Signs (grand opening)

Yes

30 square feet

8 feet above grade

Not Permitted

1 sign per new business. Display period not to exceed 30 cumulative days in any six month period.

"A" frame or sandwich boards

No

9 square feet

4 feet

Not permitted

1 sign. Locate directly in front of the primary building frontage, on property, only during business hours.

Valet Sign

No

9 square feet

4 feet

Not permitted

1 sign, in place for a duration not to exceed 12 hours a day.

Permanent Residential Sign Standards

 

 

Type of Sign

Permit Required

Maximum Area

Maximum Height

Illumination

Maximum Number

Institutional Ground Sign

Yes

30 square feet

No more than 8 feet high (including base). If base is used, 1/3  base (max.) to 2/3 sign proportion allowed.

Maximum distance from ground sign not to exceed 36 inches. Sign may have internal illumination not to exceed 30% of total sign area.

1 sign for single business use which abuts one street, 2 signs if business has 2 or more street frontages with a min. separation between signs exceeding 300 feet.

Institutional Wall Sign

Yes

1 square foot for each linear foot of principal building frontage not to exceed 30 square feet. If single business tenant building square footage is 15,000 square feet or more, signage may not exceed 60 square feet

3 feet max. Wall signs shall not be attached to the outer wall at a height of less than 8 feet above a public sidewalk/grade and at a height of less than 15 feet above public driveways, roadways, alleys and thoroughfares. Wall signs that project more than 3 inches from the building facade shall not be attached to the outer wall at a height of less than 8 feet above a public sidewalk or at a height of less than 15 feet above public driveways, alleys and thoroughfares.

Back-lit, indirect or external lighting source. Sign may have internal illumination not to exceed 30% of total sign area. No illuminated wall signs on side or rear of building.

 1 sign per institution. (2) identical principal wall signs are allowed if institution fronts 2 streets.

Multiple-Family Residential Signs

Yes

30 square feet

No more than 8 feet high (including base). If base is used, 1/3  base (max.) to 2/3 sign proportion allowed.

Maximum distance from ground sign not to exceed 36 inches. Sign may have internal illumination not to exceed 30% of total sign area.

1 sign per development which abuts one street, 2 signs if development has 2 or more street frontages with a minimum separation between signs exceeding 300 feet.

Home Occupation Wall Signs

No

1 square foot

N/A

Not permitted

1

Ground Signs - subdivisions

Yes

65 square feet

8 feet above grade

External lighting only

1 sign per major entry to subdivision.

Temporary Residential Sign Standards

 

 

Type of Sign

Permit Required

Maximum Area

Maximum Height

Illumination

Maximum Number

Advertising Lots and/or Buildings in One Subdivision Sign

No

32 square feet

6 feet above grade

Not permitted

1 sign

Institutional Special Event

Yes

15 square feet

8 feet above grade

Not permitted

1 sign at a time, maximum f 6 per calendar year

Home Improvement or professional services Signs

No

4 square feet

4 feet above grade

Not permitted

1 sign.

Special Event Signs

No

N/A

10 feet above grade

Not permitted

1 sign

22.32.120  NONCONFORMING SIGNS.

1. Lawful Existing Signs:  Any sign lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this Section which does not fully comply with all provisions shall be considered a legal nonconforming sign and may be permitted to remain as long as the sign is properly maintained and not detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the community except as hereafter provided.

2. Continuance:  A nonconforming sign shall not:

a. be expanded, change type, or change to another nonconforming sign;

b. be relocated or structurally altered so as to prolong the life of the sign, or so as to change the shape, size, type, placement, or design of the sign's structural parts;

c. be repaired or re-erected after being damaged if the repair or re-erection of the sign would cost more than 60 percent of the cost of an identical new sign.

3. No nonconforming sign shall be altered or reconstructed, unless the alteration or reconstruction is in compliance with the provision of this Section.  For the purpose of this Section only, the term "altered" or "reconstructed" shall not include normal maintenance; changing of surface sign space to a lesser or equal area, ornamental molding, frames, trellises, or ornamental features or landscaping below the base line; or the addition, construction, installation, or changing of electrical wiring or electrical devices, backgrounds, letters, figures, or characters, or other embellishments.  Nonconforming signs and sign structure shall be removed or made to conform within 90 days of the termination of the use to which they are accessory.

4. Intent:  It is the intent of this Section to encourage eventual elimination of signs that may, as a result of the adoption of this Section, become nonconforming over a period of time, and to administer this Section to realize the removal of such nonconforming signs and avoid any unreasonable invasion of established private property rights.  Therefore;

a. No person shall be required to remove a sign that was erected in compliance with previous regulations of this Section if said sign becomes nonconforming due to a change in regulations occurring upon adoption of this Section, or of the location of buildings, streets or other signs that change, is beyond the control of the owner of the sign and the premises on which it is located.

b. If the owner of a sign or the premises on which a sign is located structurally alters a building, changes the location of a property line, or sign or changes the use of a building, or otherwise alters site features, so that any sign on the premises is rendered nonconforming, such sign must be removed or made to conform to this Section.

c. All nonconforming signs shall be brought into compliance when an existing building is expanded by 25% or more, when a new building is constructed, or when development under the Village Center option is pursued (Section 22.23). {Ord. 354; 9-12-15}

22.34 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
22.34.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of this article is to regulate the use of land in those areas of the Village which are subject to predictable flooding by preserving the capacity of flood plains to store and convey flood flows which can reasonably be expected to occur, in order to protect the public health and to better maintain environmental factors and the proper ecological balance, through prohibiting or regulating unnecessary encroachments. Such regulations, while permitting reasonable economic use of such properties, will help protect the public health and reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental units and its individuals by frequent and periodic floods and inundation of lands, reserve such areas for the impoundment of water to better stabilize stream flow and to better maintain the proper ecological balance.

22.34.020 FLOOD PLAIN

Flood plain as used herein is deemed to mean that area in and adjoining the Rouge River within the Village of Beverly Hills which would be covered by flood waters equal in intensity and character to the "100-Year Flood Plain" as determined by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for the Village of Beverly Hills, Michigan" dated June 15, 1979, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary - Floodway Maps, the contents of such flood plain study are incorporated herein by reference fully as though set forth in detail herein, copies of which study are on file in the office of the Village Clerk.

22.34.030 BOUNDARIES

When there is a question as to the exact location of the flood plain boundary, the Village of Beverly Hills Engineer may determine the limits. Such determination may include assistance rendered by the Michigan Water Resources Commission and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.

The Village Council may, upon petition, permit minor modification to the delineation of the flood plain boundary after review and recommendation from the Village Engineer and upon a finding by the Village Council that existing land contours or planned changes in land contours require such minor modification. Provided, however, that no changes in land contours or resulting changes in flood plain boundaries shall be approved which would alter the discharge capacity of the flood plain.

22.34.040 GENERAL REGULATIONS

There shall be no new construction of buildings, substantial improvements (equal to fifty percent (50%) or more of market value), or changes in existing topographical features within the flood plain except as hereinafter approved:

a. Piers, pilings, roadways, paved areas, and structures not intended for human habitation or occupancy may be constructed within the flood plain, provided that they will not impede, obstruct or divert the flow of water or debris in the flood plain so as to alter its discharge capacity or otherwise adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare, or cause damage to public or private property in the event of flood. For purposes of flood plain regulation, the term "structure" shall mean any assembly of building materials, earth, logs, or rocks forming a construction for use, including among others, bridges, buildings, cages, docks, fences, platforms, sheds, shelters, signs, tanks, towers, trestles, walls and wharfs.

b. Filling, land balancing, and landscaping (including new plant materials, patios, and other such features) may be constructed or placed in the flood plain, provided that they will not impede, obstruct or divert the flow of water or debris in the flood plain so as to alter materially its discharge capacity, or otherwise adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare, or cause damage to public or private property in the event of flood. Any filling or topographical change of lands in the flood plain or adjacent to flood plain boundaries shall have erosion control to prevent soil from being washed into the flood plain.

c. Alterations and additions may be made to existing buildings within the flood plain provided that they will not impede, obstruct or divert the flow of water or debris in the flood plain so as to alter materially its discharge capacity, or otherwise adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare, or cause damage to public or private property in the event of flood, and provided they are designed to afford protection to the occupants of the building from injury or loss attributable to flood.

d. New buildings may be constructed within the flood plain only if they are designed and situated in such manner that they will not impede, obstruct or divert the flow of water or debris in the flood plain so as to alter materially its discharge capacity, or otherwise adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare, or cause damage to public or private property in the event of flood.

e. Where buildings or structures are permitted in the flood plain or on any land immediately adjoining the flood plain by other sections of this ordinance, the elevation of the lowest floor shall be determined by the use to be made thereof in accordance with the following:

1. The elevation of the lowest floor designed or intended for human habitation in residential buildings, and the elevation of the lowest floor designed or intended for retail, office, or other business uses in a business building shall be at least three feet (3') above the elevation of the flood plain boundary.

2. The elevation of a basement floor or other floor not designed or intended for human habitation in a residential building, and the elevation of a basement floor used for storage, mechanical equipment, and similar uses in a business building shall be no lower than the elevation of the flood plain boundary.

3. Floors of mechanical equipment buildings, garages, parking areas, carports, and similar accessory buildings may be below the elevation of the flood plain boundary.

f. When a parcel or lot is R-A, R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-2A or R-3 District and a portion thereof is within the flood plain, the portion thereof within the flood plain may be used to compute the lot area requirements set forth in the Schedule of Regulations. For all other uses the area of the flood plain which may be used to compute density and for parking thereon shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the property involved. In no instance shall the density credit and parking area exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the area outside the flood plain. The restrictions imposed herein shall be in addition to the restrictions imposed by any other Zoning District in which said lands shall be located.

g. Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be:

1. Anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure;

2. Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; and

3. Constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.

h. Utilities:

1. All new and replacement water supply systems eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems.

2. All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges for systems into flood waters. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to the system during flooding.

3. All public utilities and facilities shall be designed, constructed, and located to eliminate flood damage.

i. Subdivision proposals shall be reviewed to assure that:

1. Such proposals minimize flood damage and that adequate drainage is provided; and

2. When the proposal is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, base flood elevation data shall be provided.

j. Flood proofing methods are permitted for non-residential structures only. Minimum flood proofing standards shall require that the portion of the structure below the base flood level, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities shall be watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyance, and be certified by a registered engineer or architect that the flood proofing standards of this subsection are met.

22.34.050 FLOOD PLAIN USE PERMITS

a. No activity regulated herein shall be undertaken except as authorized by a flood plain use permit to be issued by the Building Official upon adoption of a resolution of approval by the Village Council and upon a showing that such regulated activity shall have been permitted by an order or rule of the Water Resources Commission of the State of Michigan or by a valid permit issued therefor by the Department of Natural Resources of the State of Michigan under the provisions of State law, and upon a determination that the applicant has complied with all other applicable provisions of Village ordinances, and that all necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal government agencies from which prior approval is necessary.

b. Applications for flood plain use permits shall be referred by the Building Official to the Village Council for review and consideration as to whether or not a resolution of approval should be adopted. The Village Council may, at its sole discretion, request advisory recommendations from the Village Engineer, the Planning Board, or other municipal officials or bodies. A resolution of approval shall be adopted by the Village Council if it should determine that the proposed use would be consistent with the public health, safety and welfare after considering the following factors:

1. Private or community use for the proposed facility or use.

2. Importance of a proposed waterfront location.

3. Alternative locations not subject to flooding.

4. Compatibility with existing and proposed flood plain development and use.

5. Relationship to comprehensive plans and flood plain management program.

6. Environmental compatibility.

7. Danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities cause by encroachments.

8. Danger from materials swept downstream.

9. Ability of public utilities to function during floods and the prevention of disease and contamination.

10. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage.

11. Potential flood heights, velocities, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport.

12. Accessibility to ordinary and emergency vehicles.

13. Such other factors as may be relevant to the proposed use and the purpose of this Section.

c. Applicants for flood plain use permits shall submit their applications or, upon subsequent request of the Building Official or the Village Council, such topographical data, engineering studies, and other information as may be requested at the applicant's expense. The applicant may be required to submit engineering data prepared or certified by a registered professional engineer.

d. Applicants may appeal any administrative action of the Building Official made hereunder to the Zoning Board of Appeals in the same manner and subject to the same conditions as set forth for appeals in this Ordinance. The action by the Village Council herein shall not be subject to nor form the basis of such an appeal and shall be deemed to constitute a final determination by the Village of Beverly Hills as to whether a resolution of approval should be adopted pursuant to this section.

e. The Building Official shall:

1. Obtain and maintain records of elevation as required in Section 22.34.040 (e) and floodproofing certification as required in Section 22.34.040 (f); and

2. Notify adjacent communities, the Michigan Department of Natural Resources, Water Management Division, and the Federal Insurance Administration prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and execute this section so as to maintain within the altered or relocated watercourse the flood carrying capacity so that it is not diminished.

22.34.060 FLOODWAY

Located within the area of special flood hazard established in Section 22.34.020 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, all encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial development, and other development unless a technical evaluation demonstrates that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge, shall be prohibited.

22.36 ADMINISTRATION
22.36.010 ESTABLISHMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER

The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered by the Building Official or such other official designated by the Village Manager. The Building Official shall have the power to:

a. Grant Certificates Of Occupancy.

b. Make inspections of buildings and premises necessary to carry out the duties of the enforcement of this Ordinance.

c. Issue building permits.

22.36.020 BUILDING PERMIT APPLICATION

a. No building or structure within the Village of Beverly Hills shall hereafter be erected, moved, repaired, altered or razed, nor shall any work be started to erect, move, repair, or raze until a building permit shall have been obtained from the Building Official, nor shall any use be added to an existing use, nor shall any change be made in the use of any building or land without a building permit having been obtained from the Building Official, except that no building permit shall be required for nonstructural alterations costing less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). No such building permit shall be issued to erect a building or structure or make any change of use of a building or land unless it is in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance and all amendments hereto. Unless construction is started within six (6) months after the date of issuance of a building permit, the building permit shall automatically become void and fees forfeited. The Building Official may reinstate a building permit that has become void for failure to commence construction without payment of further fees at his discretion as long as site plan approval, if required, has not expired. Fees for inspection and the issuance of permits or certificates or copies thereof required or issued under the provisions of this Ordinance shall be collected by the Building Official in advance of issuance. The amount of such fees shall be established by resolution of the Village Council.

b. The Building Official shall record all nonconforming uses for the purposes of carrying out the provisions of Section 22.30 hereof.

c. The Building Official shall not refuse to issue a permit when conditions imposed by this Ordinance are complied with by the applicant despite violations of contracts, such as covenants or private agreements which may occur upon the granting of such permit.

d. The Building Official shall issue appearance tickets for violations pursuant to this Ordinance.

e. The Building Official shall require that all applications for building permits be accompanied by plans and specifications including a plot plan in duplicate, which shall agree with the site plan approved by the Village Council, when required, under Section 22.08.290 of this Ordinance. The plot plan shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by a registered professional civil engineer or a registered professional land surveyor, and shall show the following:

1. Legal description of the property and a statement affirming that the property has been surveyed and that the boundary corners of the property have been marked by placing permanent points at each corner of the property.

2. North point and scale of not less than 1" = 100'.

3. Exact dimensions of the property including bearings and distances as described in the legal description.

4. Property relationship of subject property with all abutting property lines.

5. Two foot contours or pegged grade elevations at fifty feet (50') on center for the entire property and for a distance not less than fifty feet (50') outside the entire perimeter of the property.

6. The existing finish grade elevations of all existing buildings or structures on or within fifty feet (50') of the property.

7. The location of all existing and/or proposed drives and parking areas.

8. The location of all existing or proposed underground utilities.

9. Proposed finished grade of all buildings, the site itself, and the entire perimeter of the property including property corners.

10. The location and widths of all existing and/or proposed rights-of-way and/or easements and all abutting streets and alleys.

11. The point, area, ditch, or enclosure to which storm water is to drain, including discharge of sump pumps.

12. The location of the existing and/or proposed buildings on the property shall be clearly shown and shall include the dimensions to front, side, and rear property lines and ties from the proposed building to any adjoining building on or within fifty feet (50') of the proposed building.

13. Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provision of the Ordinance are being observed.

14. Prior to pouring concrete for any footings, the builder shall demonstrate to the Building Official that the footing forms are properly located on the lot and that the footing grade is set to the proper elevation, both according to the dimensions and elevations as indicated on the plot plan. One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the Building Official, after the Building Official shall have marked such copy either as approved or disapproved. The remaining copy shall be retained in the office of the Building Official.

f. Upon the completion of the work authorized by a building permit, the holder thereof shall seek final inspection thereof by notifying the Building Official who shall then make final inspection promptly.

g. Whenever the building, land and uses thereof as set forth in the application are in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance it shall be the duty of the Building Official to issue within seven (7) working days after the receipt of said application a building permit, and when such permit is refused, to state such refusal in writing with the reasons therefore.

h. Whenever the application for a building permit involves an addition or alteration to an existing building or structure, the Building Official may waive the requirements herein of the furnishing of a plot plan when he determines that the public health, safety and welfare will not be adversely affected by doing so.

22.36.030 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY

No land, building, structure, or part thereof shall be occupied by or for any use for which a building permit is required by this Ordinance unless and until a Certificate of Occupancy shall have been issued for such new use. The following shall apply in the issuance of any certificate:

a. Certificates not to be Issued. No Certificates of Occupancy pursuant to the Building Code of the Village of Beverly Hills shall be issued for any building, structure or part thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all provisions of this Ordinance.

b. Certificates Required. No building or structure, or parts thereof, which is hereafter erected or altered, shall be occupied or used or the same caused to be done, unless and until a Certificate of Occupancy shall have been issued for such building or structure. Such certificate shall not be issued until the following requirements are complied with and are approved by the Building Official.

1. Prior to the official issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy the Building Official shall inspect the site to determine if the grading is in accordance with the approved plot plan. If, in the judgment of the Building Official, there is doubt that such grading is in accordance with the plot plan, the Building Official shall request a grading certificate prepared, signed and sealed by a registered professional civil engineer or a registered professional land surveyor be submitted to the Building Official, in duplicate, attesting to the fact that the site has been constructed and graded in accordance with the plot plan, permanent irons at each lot corner are in evidence, and that the drainage pattern is in accordance with the plot plan as approved at the time of issuance of the building permit.

2. In lieu of a grading survey, a surety bond, letter of credit, or cash deposit in an amount set by the Building Official may be required to insure grading and submission of such survey at a later date when a building, land or structure is otherwise suitable for occupancy during that season of the year when weather conditions make finish grading unfeasible. In such case a temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be issued and the date for completion of grading shall be indicated on the temporary Certificate of Occupancy or its related documents.

c. Certificates Including Zoning. Certificate of Occupancy as required by the Building Code for new buildings or structures, or parts thereof, or for alterations to or changes of use of existing buildings or structures, shall also constitute Certificate of Occupancy as required by this Ordinance.

d. Certificates for Existing Buildings. Certificates of Occupancy will be issued for existing buildings, structures, or parts thereof, or existing uses of land, if after inspection it is found that such buildings, structures, or parts thereof, or such use in land are in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.

e. Temporary Certificates. Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent the Building Official from the issuing of a temporary Certificate of Occupancy for a portion of a building or structure in process of erection or alteration, provided that such temporary certificate shall not be effective for a period of time in excess of six (6) months nor more than five (5) days after the completion of the entire building, to a state ready for occupancy, and provided further that such portion of the building, structure, or premises is in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.

f. Records of Certificates. A record of all certificates issued shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Official, and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person.

g. Certificates for Dwelling Accessory Buildings. Buildings accessory to dwellings shall not require separate Certificates of Occupancy but may be included in the Certificate of Occupancy for the dwelling when shown on the plot plan and when completed at the same time as such dwellings.

h. Application for Certificates. Application for Certificates of Occupancy shall be made in writing to the Building Official on forms furnished by the Department, and such certificates shall be issued if, after final inspection, it is found that the building or structure, or part thereof, or the use of land is in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. If such certificate is refused for cause, the applicant therefore shall be notified in writing of such refusal and cause thereof.

22.38 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
22.38.010 CREATION

There shall be established and appointed by the Village Council of the Village of Beverly Hills, in accordance with Act 110 of the Public Acts of 2006, as amended, a Zoning Board of Appeals consisting of nine (9) members, each to be appointed for a term of three (3) years; provided, however, that those persons serving the Board of Appeals prior to the adoption hereof are hereby reappointed to the Zoning Board of appeals for the balance of their unexpired terms on the Board of Appeals. One member of the Zoning Board of Appeals may also be a member of the Village Planning Board.

One regular or alternate member of the Zoning Board of Appeals may also be a member of the Village Council. Such a member shall not serve as chairperson of the Zoning Board of Appeals. An employee or contractor of the legislative body may not serve as a member of the zoning board of appeals.

A member of the Zoning Board of Appeals who is also a member of the Village Planning Board or Village Council shall not participate in a public hearing on or vote on the same matter that the member voted on as a member of the Planning Board or the Village Council. However, the member may consider and vote on other unrelated matters involving the same property.

The Village Council may appoint not more than two (2) alternate members for the same term as regular members to the Zoning Board of Appeals. An alternate member may be called as specified to serve as a member of the Zoning Board of Appeals in the absence of a regular member if the regular member will be unable to attend one (1) or more meetings. An alternate member may also be called to serve as a member for the purpose of reaching a decision on a case in which the regular member has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest or due to the fact that the regular member already voted on the same matter as a member of the Planning Board or Village Council. The alternate member appointed shall serve in the case until a final decision is made. The alternate member has the same voting rights as a regular member of the Zoning Board of Appeals, while serving. {Ord. 332; 7-1-09}

22.38.020 PROCEDURE

Meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the Chairman, and at such other times as the Board may determine. Such Chairman, or in his absence, the Acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt rules and procedures and shall keep records of applications and the action thereon, which shall be a public record. The fees to be charged for appeals shall be set by resolution of the Village Council.

22.38.030 APPEALS, HOW TAKEN

An appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals based in whole or in part on the provisions of this Ordinance may be taken by any person, firm or corporation aggrieved, or by any governmental officer, department, board or bureau affected by any decision of the Building Official. Such appeal shall be taken by filing a notice of appeal with the Zoning Board of Appeals on appropriate forms provided by the Building Official, payment of the required fee, and shall specify the grounds for such appeal. The Building Official shall transmit all papers constituting the record of such appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Upon a hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals any person or party may appear in person, or by agent, or by attorney. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and give a minimum of five (5) days notice thereof to the parties, including all owners of record of property within three hundred feet (300') of the premises in question, such notice to be delivered personally or by mail addressed to the respective owners at the addresses given in the last assessment roll, and shall decide the same within a reasonable time. The Zoning Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be made on the premises, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse an order, requirement, decision, or determination of an administrative official or body, or to decide in favor of the applicant a matter upon which the Board is required to pass under an ordinance, or to effect a variation in an ordinance except that a concurring vote of 2/3 of the members of the Board shall be necessary to grant a variance from uses of land permitted in an ordinance. The decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall not become final until the expiration of five (5) days from the date of entry of such order unless the Board shall find the immediate effect of such order is necessary for the preservation of property or personal rights and shall so certify on the record. The Village Council may authorize the payment, not to exceed five dollars ($5.00) per member for attendance at regular meetings of such Board. {Ord. 264, 6-27-93}

22.38.040 POWERS

The Zoning Board of Appeals is authorized in those cases where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provision hereof results in unnecessary hardship and practical difficulty, to approve issuance of a permit containing such variations of the terms hereof or such special requirements or conditions as the Board may impose. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power to allow variances as will remove existing hardships and practical difficulties, and which are not contrary to the public interest, nor inconsistent with the spirit and intent of this Ordinance, and not injurious to the surrounding neighborhood or that will imperil public safety. The decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall, in absence of any showing of mistake, fraud, misrepresentation or undue influence, be final insofar as the same involves discretion or the finding of facts.

The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have the power to change the Zone District classification of any property, nor to make any change in the term of this Ordinance, but to act on these matters where this Ordinance provides for an administrative review, interpretation, and to authorize a variance as defined in this Section and the law of the State of Michigan. Said powers include:

a. Administrative Review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order, requirement, permit, decision, or refusal made by the Building Official or any other administrative official in carrying out or enforcing any provisions of this Ordinance.

b. Interpretation of Zoning Map. To hear and decide in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map, and for the decisions on other special questions on which this Ordinance specifically authorized the Zoning Board of Appeals to pass. Any interpretation shall be subject to such conditions as the Zoning Board of Appeals may require to preserve and promote the character of the Zone Districts in question and otherwise promote the purpose of this Ordinance.

c. Variance. To authorize, upon an appeal, a variance from the district applications of the provisions of this Ordinance, where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape or area of a specific piece of property on August 31, 1959, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions of such property, the strict application of the regulations enacted would result in peculiar or exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional or undue hardship upon, the owner of such property, provided such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this Ordinance. In granting a variance the Board may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed uses as it may deem reasonable in furtherance of the purpose of this Ordinance. A variance shall become null and void if the grantee has not secured a building permit to construct under the variance before one (1) year from the date the variance was granted by the Board.

d. Public Service or Public Utility Building Variance. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power to permit the erection and use of a building, or an addition to an existing building, of a public service corporation or for public utility purposes, in any Zone District to a greater height or larger area than the Zone District requirements herein established, and permit the location in any Residential Zone District of a noncommercial public utility building or use if the Board shall find such use, building or structure reasonably necessary for public convenience and service, and provided such building, structure or use is designed, erected and landscaped to conform harmoniously with the general architecture and plan of such Residential Zone District.

22.40 AMENDMENTS
22.40.010 PROCEDURE

The Village Council may amend, supplement, modify or change this Ordinance upon recommendation by Planning Commission, provided that a public hearing shall be held before any such amendment, supplement, modification or change shall be passed. Notice of such public hearing shall be given in conformance with the requirements of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act and any other applicable laws. {Ord. 377, 1-21-20}

22.40.020 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS

In the case of an amendment to the Village Zoning Map, the following information shall accompany the application form:

a.   A legal description and street address of the subject property, together with a map identifying the subject property in relation to surrounding properties.

b.   The name, signature and address of the owner of the subject property, a statement of the applicant's interest in the subject property if not the owner in fee simple title, and proof of consent from the property owner.

c.   The existing and proposed zoning district designation of the subject property.

d.   A site analysis site plan or current aerial photograph illustrating existing conditions on the site and adjacent properties such as woodlands, wetlands, soil conditions, steep slopes, drainage patterns, views, existing buildings, adjacent land uses, any sight distance limitations and relationship to other developed sites and access points in the vicinity.

e.   A written environmental assessment describing site features and anticipated impacts created by the host of uses permitted in the requested zoning district.

f.   A traffic impact study shall be provided if any use permitted in the requested zoning district could generate 100 or more peak hour directional trips, or 1,000 or more vehicle trips per day.  The traffic study should contrast the daily and peak hour trip generation rates for representative use in the current and requested zoning district.  The determination of representative uses shall be made by the Planning Commission with input from Village staff and consultants.

g.   A conceptual plan at a scale not less than 1 = 100, demonstrating that the site could be developed with representative uses permitted in the requested zoning district meeting requirements for setbacks, lot coverage, building spacing, parking, loading, drainage, general landscaping, access spacing, and other site design factors; while the anticipated use can be shown, an illustration of the maximum development permitted under the requested zoning shall also be provided.

h.   A written description of how the requested rezoning meets Sec. 22.40.040 "Criteria for Amendment to the Village Zoning Map." {Ord. 377, 1-21-20}

22.40.030 AMENDMENTS ON FILE

All amendments to this Ordinance shall be on file in the Village Clerk's office. The Ordinance effecting any amendment to the Zoning Map shall include the written description of the property that has been zoned or rezoned.

22.40.040 CRITERIA FOR AMENDMENT TO THE VILLAGE ZONING MAP

In considering any proposed amendment to the Ordinance and/or the Official Zoning Map, the Planning Commission and Village Council shall consider the following criteria in making its findings, recommendations and decision:

a.   The proposed amendment shall be consistent with the goals, policies, and future land use map of the Master Plan.

b.   The proposed amendment shall be in accordance with the intent and purpose of the Zoning     Ordinance.

c.   The proposed amendment shall comply with all requirements of the zoning classification. 

d.   The Planning Commission and Village Council may consider how the proposed zoning may be is consistent with the trends in land development in the general vicinity of the property in question.

e.   The proposed zoning is consistent with or provides a beneficial transition to the zoning classification of surrounding land.

f.    The proposed zoning is compatible with the site's physical, geological, hydrological and other environmental features, and with the uses permitted in the proposed zoning district.

g.   All the potential uses allowed in the proposed zoning district are compatible with surrounding uses and zoning in terms of environmental impacts, density, nature of use, traffic impacts, and infrastructure.

h.   The impact, if any, of the proposed zoning on public health, safety and welfare on the capacity of public utilities and services to accommodate the uses permitted in the proposed zoning district.  {Ord. 377, 1-21-20}

22.40.050 ZONING AGREEMENTS FOR CONDITIONAL REZONING

a.   An applicant for a rezoning may voluntarily offer a zoning agreement as a condition for rezoning.  An election to file a conditional rezoning with a zoning agreement shall be pursuant to the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006) and this Ordinance.  The conditions set forth in the zoning agreement must be voluntary and equally or more restrictive than the regulations that would otherwise apply under the proposed zoning district.  The zoning agreement shall be a written agreement that is approved and executed by the applicant and the Village and recorded with the County Register of Deeds.  When necessary, the zoning agreement shall also include and incorporate, by reference, a site plan.  This plan shall not replace the requirement for a site plan as outlined in Section 22.08.290.  The zoning agreement must be voluntarily offered by the applicant and the Village shall not have the authority to require modification to a zoning agreement without the consent of the petitioner; provided, the Village shall not enter into a zoning agreement that is not found acceptable to the Village Council.

b.   The zoning agreement may include limitations on the uses permitted on the property in question, specification of lower density or less intensity of development and use, or may impose more restrictive measures on the location, size, height, or other measure for buildings, structures, improvements, setbacks, landscaping, buffers, design, architecture and other features.  The zoning agreement may not authorize uses or developments of greater intensity or density, or which are not permitted in the proposed zoning district; nor may a zoning agreement permit variances from height, area, setback or similar dimensional requirements that are less restrictive than the proposed zoning district.  The zoning agreement may include conditions related to the use and development of the property that are necessary to:

      1.   Serve the intended use of the property, such as improvements, extension, widening, or realignment of streets, utilities, storm drains, or other infrastructure serving the site;

      2.   Minimize the impact of the development on surrounding properties, such as landscape screening above and beyond minimum requirements or design elements to create transition to adjoining uses; and

      3.   Preserve natural features, historic resources, and open space.

c.   In addition to any limitations on use or development of the site, preservation of site features or improvements described in paragraph b above, the zoning agreement shall also include the following:

      1.   Acknowledgement that the zoning agreement was proposed voluntarily by the applicant and that the Village relied upon the agreement and may not grant the rezoning but for the conditions offered in the zoning agreement.

      2.   Acknowledgement that the zoning agreement and its terms and conditions are authorized by all applicable state and federal law and constitution, and that the zoning agreement is valid and was entered into on a voluntary basis.

      3.   Agreement and understanding that the property shall only be developed and used in a manner that is consistent with the zoning agreement.

      4.   Agreement and understanding that the rezoning is conditioned upon obtaining site plan approval under Section 22.08.290, or subdivision approval under Chapter 23, Subdivision Ordinance and obtaining other necessary approvals required by the Village and all applicable county and state agencies.

      5.   Agreement and understanding that no part of the zoning agreement shall permit any activity, use, or condition that would otherwise not be permitted in the new zoning district.

      6.   Agreement and understanding that the approval of the conditional rezoning and the zoning agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the property owner and the Village, and also their respective heirs, successors, assigns, receivers or transferees.

      7.   Agreement and understanding that, if a rezoning with a zoning agreement becomes void in accordance with this section, that no further development shall take place and the land shall revert back to its original zoning classification.

      8.   A legal description of the land to which the agreement pertains.

      9.   Any other provisions as are agreed upon by the parties.

d.   Any use(s) proposed as part of a zoning agreement that would otherwise require site plan approval or special land use approval shall be subject to the applicable review and approval requirements of Sections 22.08.290 and 22.08.300.

e.   Nothing in the zoning agreement, nor any statement or other provision, shall prohibit the Village from later rezoning all or any portion of the land that is the subject of the zoning agreement to another zoning classification.  Any rezoning shall be conducted in compliance with this ordinance and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006).

f.    Failure to comply with the zoning agreement at any time after approval will constitute a breach of the agreement and also a violation of this ordinance, and further use of the property may be subject to legal remedies available to the Village.  {Ord. 377, 1-21-20}

22.42 PENALTIES, PUBLIC NUISANCE PER SE, VIOLATIONS, INTERPRETATIONS, VESTED RIGHT, SEVERABILITY, CONFLICTING PROVISIONS, EFFECTIVE DATE AND SAVINGS CLAUSE

22.42.010 PENALTIES

Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a civil infraction, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined no less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such offense, or such fine in the discretion of the court, together with the costs of such prosecution. Each day that a violation of this Ordinance continues shall be a separate offense.

a. Enforcement. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and expenses, the judge or magistrate shall be authorized to issue any judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of this Chapter. {Ord 359; 10-20-2017}

22.42.020 PUBLIC NUISANCE PER SE

Any building or structure which is erected, altered or converted, or any use of premises or land which is begun or changed subsequent to the date of this Ordinance or the effective date of the adoption or amendment of this Ordinance and in violation of any of the provisions thereof is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se.

22.42.030 VIOLATIONS

The owner or occupant of any building, structure or premises of part thereof, where any condition in violation of this Ordinance shall exist or shall be created, and any person who has assisted knowingly in the commission of such violation shall each be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be liable to the fines and imprisonment set forth in section 22.42.010.

22.42.040 INTERPRETATION

The provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience or general welfare. It is not intended by this Ordinance to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way to impair or interfere with any existing provision of law or Ordinance, other than the above-described Zoning Ordinance, or with any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or premises; provided, however, that where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction than is required by existing Ordinance or by rules, regulations or permits, the provisions of this Ordinance shall control.

22.42.050 VESTED RIGHT

It is hereby expressly declared that nothing in this Ordinance shall be held or construed to give or grant to any person, firm or corporation any vested right, license, privilege or permit.

22.42.060 SEVERABILITY

This Ordinance, and the various chapters, sections, paragraphs and clauses thereof, are declared to be severable. If any article, section, paragraph or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of the title shall not be affected thereby.

Chapter 23 - Subdivisions
23.01 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
23.02 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS AND AUTHORITY
23.03 DEFINITIONS
23.04 PREAPPLICATION PROCEDURE FOR SUBMISSION OF PLATS
23.05 PRELIMINARY PLAT
23.06 APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL OF SKETCH PLAN
23.07 PRELIMINARY PLAT
23.08 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT
23.09 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS
23.10 UTILITIES AND IMPROVEMENTS
23.11 APPROVAL OF VILLAGE COUNCIL REQUIRED
23.12 METES AND BOUNDS PLATTING
23.13 SALES CONTRARY TO REQUIREMENTS
23.14 PUBLIC WATER AND SEWER SERVICE
23.15 VARIANCES
23.16 LAND DIVISION REGULATIONS
23.17 PRIVATE ROAD REQUIREMENTS
23.18 EXISTING PRIVATE ROAD REGULATIONS
23.19 FEES
23.20 VIOLATIONS 
23.01 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS

The subdivision of land is regulated for the following purposes:

a. To provide for orderly growth and development of the community.

b. To provide a street framework that is adequate for proper traffic circulation within the Village of Beverly Hills and with neighboring thoroughfares.

c. To provide for the subdivision of lands into home sites of reasonable qualities and adequate design.

d. To provide for adequate provision for water supply, sanitary sewerage, drainage and other health factors.

e. To provide for adequate public facilities such as school sites, recreation areas, utilities and municipal facilities.

f. To provide an orderly and efficient method for the processing and installation of subdivision improvements.

These regulations address the plat of land (refer to Section 23.04 through Section 23.14), land divisions (refer to Section 23.16) and private road requirements (refer to Sections 23.17 and 23.18). Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no land shall be subdivided except in conformity with the regulations herein specified. Plats specified herein are subject to the approval of the Village Council and Village Planning Board of the Village of Beverly Hills. {Ord. 282, 4-27-97}

23.03 DEFINITIONS

Alley: A public way which permits or intends to permit the secondary means of ingress and egress to abutting property.

Easement: An acquired privilege or right of use which one person may have in the land of another.

Lot, Subdivision: A measured portion of a parcel or tract of land, which is described and fixed in a plat recorded with the Oakland County Register of Deeds, including an outlot. {Ord. 282, 4-27-97}

Plat: A map or drawing, or series of maps or drawings on which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is presented and which is submitted for approval with the intention to record.

Plat, preliminary: A map or drawing, or series of maps or drawings submitted for approval with the intention to secure a plat.

Street: A public way which permits or intends to permit the principal means of ingress and egress to abutting property.

Street, cul-de-sac: A so-called dead-end street which provides a greater right-of-way at the closed end of the street for the purpose of providing adequate turning radii and maneuverability to drivers of self-propelled vehicles.

Subdivide or Subdivision: The splitting or partitioning of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his or her heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns, for the purpose of sale or lease of more than one year, or of building development that results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and is not listed as exempt from platting requirements in Section 108 of the Land Division Act, Public Act 591 of 1996, as amended or replaced. {Ord. 282, 4-27-97}

Subdivider: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation or any legal entity commencing proceedings under this chapter to effect the subdivision of land for himself or for another.

Subdivision: Any division or resubdivision of property of which two (2) or more lots are created.

Zoning Ordinance: The Zoning Ordinance of the Village of Beverly Hills, Michigan.

23.04 PREAPPLICATION PROCEDURE FOR SUBMISSION OF PLATS

a. The subdivider may meet formally with the Village Planning Board to present a general outline of the subdivision proposal. The subdivider may present the following information:

1. A sketch plan and intent of development regarding land use, street layout, lot arrangement, tentative lot sizes, etc.

2. Proposals regarding utilities, water, sewer, street improvement, etc.

3. General indication of size and character of proposed buildings and structures.

b. The Village Planning Board may discuss the subdivision proposal with the subdivider regarding the regulations of this chapter, zoning ordinances and other ordinances or community plans which have a bearing or relationship to the property in question and the property in the general area.

23.05 PRELIMINARY PLAT

a. The Village Planning Board shall schedule a public meeting with the subdivider to consider the subdivision proposal. The public meeting shall be held at a regular meeting approximately thirty (30) days after the date of the meeting held in accordance with Section 23.04. The subdivider shall submit the following information to the Village Planning Board at such public meeting:

1. Ten (10) copies of necessary documents which indicate legal ownership interest of the property in question.

2. Ten (10) copies of an application in writing, indicating the intent to subdivide, the area to be subdivided and signed by the subdivider.

3. Ten (10) copies of a sketch plan which shall indicate intent regarding land use, street layout, lot arrangement, topography, tentative lot sizes, utilities, water, sewer, street improvements and general size and character of proposed buildings and structures. The sketch plan shall be at a scale of not more than two hundred feet (200') to the inch.

4. Ten (10) copies of an area development plan in sufficient detail to indicate neighboring land uses, access to major and minor streets, and locations of neighboring schools, churches and similar features.

b. Prior to the public meeting as indicated above, the Village Planning Board shall consider the information as submitted in accordance with Section 23.04. The Village Planning Board shall also:

1. Inspect the site and general area so as to become familiar with the physical aspects of the site.

2. Analyze the zoning of the site and general area and consider zoning changes if deemed desirable and necessary.

3. Review school and open space requirements of the area.

4. Inspect the improvement features of the area.

c. The Village Planning Board may deem it advisable to schedule an additional meeting or meetings to consider the information presented on the preliminary plat. In such case, additional meeting or meetings shall also be public meetings.

23.06 APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL OF SKETCH PLAN

The Village Planning Board shall notify the subdivider in writing of its approval or disapproval of the sketch plan and area development plan. Such notification of approval or disapproval shall be submitted to the subdivider within fifteen (15) days of the date of such decision. In the event that the Village Planning Board indicates its approval of the sketch plan, area development plan and other submitted material, the Village Planning Board shall advise the subdivider that he may proceed with the development of preliminary plat. In the event that the Village Planning Board indicates its disapproval of the material submitted, the Village Planning Board shall advise the subdivider of the items that do not conform to the regulations of this chapter, Zoning Ordinance, community plan or other ordinances or plans, and suggest methods in which such items may become acceptable to this chapter, Zoning Ordinance, community plan or other ordinances or plans.

23.07 PRELIMINARY PLAT

a. Upon written approval of the subdivision proposal from the Village Planning Board, the subdivider may submit ten (10) copies of a preliminary plat to the Village Planning Board. The preliminary plat shall be at a scale of not more than one hundred feet (100') to the inch and shall include the following:

1. Title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded, description of the land to be platted, name and address of owners and technical author of the plan.

2. Location of existing property lines, streets, utilities, buildings, structures, water courses, railroads and other physical features within the boundaries of the plan.

3. The location of adjoining streets, utilities, buildings, structures, and other physical features which relate to the development of the subdivision.

4. Topography by contours related to the U.S.G.S. survey datum, contour intervals to be five feet (5') where grade exceeds five percent (5%) and two feet (2') for grades of five percent (5%) or less.

5. The location, name and width of proposed streets, alleys and easements for public utilities. The location of parks, plantings, lots and building lines on the property to be subdivided.

6. The proposed method of water supply, sewage disposal and storm drainage.

7. Proposed use of property.

8. Areas proposed to be dedicated for public purposes.

9. Tentative draft of protective covenants whereby the subdivider proposes to regulate land uses and otherwise protect the proposed subdivision development.

10. Names and addresses of persons to whom the subdivider desires notices of hearings shall be sent.

11. Date, north point and graphic scale.

b. Upon receipt of the preliminary plat from the subdivider, the Village Planning Board shall schedule at least one (1) public hearing to consider said preliminary plat. Notices of the public hearing or hearings shall be sent by registered or certified mail to the persons indicated on the preliminary plat of the time and place of such public hearing not less than five (5) days prior to the date fixed therefore. Similar notice shall be mailed to the owners of land immediately adjoining the land of the preliminary plat as their names and addresses appear on the records in the Village Clerk's office.

c. The preliminary plat shall be subject to the conditional approval of the Village Planning Board which shall consider the Village's requirements and the most appropriate use of the land. Particular attention will be given to the standards of design, the justification for the development of public improvements, the subdivisions conformity to the existing street arrangements, safety of proposed uses from flooding and other health factors and economy of which public services can be obtained for the type of development proposed.

d. Within thirty (30) days of the public hearing, the Village Planning Board shall act thereon as submitted and/or modified, and if approved, the Village Planning Board shall express its approval to the subdivider as conditional approval of the Village Planning Board and shall state the conditions of such conditional approval, or if disapproved, shall express the reasons for such disapproval. In the event that the preliminary plat receives the conditional approval of the Village Planning Board, such conditional approval shall also be expressed to the Village Council. The Village Planning Board shall forward at least one (1) complete copy of the copy of the plans, action and other related material to the Village Council which shall be signed by the Chairman or Vice-Chairman and the date of such conditional approval. The conditional approval of the Village Planning Board shall not be interpreted as an acceptance by the Village of Beverly Hills of such subdivision proposal.

23.08 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT

a. The Village Council upon written notification of the conditional approval of the preliminary plat by the Village Planning Board, shall accept an application for the submission of the final plat from the subdivider. Said application shall be submitted to the Village Council at least ten (10) days prior to the Village Council meeting at which the application is to be presented. The Village Council may accept and file the application for approval of the final plat of the subdivider. In the case where the Village Council accepts the application for the submission of the final plat, the subdivider may proceed with the development of the final plat. Five (5) copies of the final plat and other exhibits prepared for approval shall be submitted to the Village Council within one (1) year after the conditional approval of the preliminary plat by the Village Planning Board; otherwise such conditional approval of the Village Planning Board shall become null and void, unless an extension of the time is applied for and granted by the Village Planning Board.

b. The Village Council shall submit a copy of the final plat to the Village Planning Board. The Village Planning Board shall review the final plat to determine if the final plat conforms substantially to the preliminary plat. The Village Planning Board shall recommend to the Village Council that the final plat either conforms or does not conform to the preliminary plat.

c. The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as conditionally approved, and if desired by the subdivider, may constitute only that portion of the preliminary plat which he proposes to record and develop at the time, provided that such portion conforms to all requirements of the regulations herein prescribed. The subdivider shall forthwith submit the sum of sixty dollars ($60.00) plus five dollars ($5.00) per lot as determined from the preliminary plat, payable to the Village of Beverly Hills, should the Village Council accept and file the application for the submission of the final plat, to defray the expenses incurred for inspections and other costs.

d. The final plat shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer or registered land surveyor and shall indicate reference to any private restrictions which accompany the plat and shall contain proper acknowledgment of owner and mortgagee accepting said platting restrictions and which shall be in the proper form for recording. In addition to these requirements, the subdivider shall furnish the Village Council with information concerning the following:

1. Ownership of the property proposed to be subdivided as evidenced by an abstract of title certified to date, or a policy of title insurance.

2. The improvements and utilities to be installed by the subdivider. (See Section 23.10).

3. The alleys, streets and parks which are to be dedicated to the use of the public.

4. The total area in acres of the tract to be subdivided.

5. The net area in lots and in public ways and parks.

6. Cross sections and profiles of street showing grades and elevations based on a datum plan approved by the Village.

7. Plans for yard grading and drainage.

8. A proper bond or certified check to be posted with the Village of Beverly Hills and in sufficient amount to assure completion of all required improvements.

e. The Village Council upon receipt of the five (5) copies of the final plat and other information as described herein, shall consider the final plat for conformance to the preliminary plat, Zoning Ordinance, community plan and any other ordinance or plans which may have a bearing on the proposed subdivision. In the case that the Village Council accepts the final plat, the Village Council shall certify its approval on the final plats which shall be signed by the President and Village Clerk.

23.09 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS

The following design standards are required for a subdivision:

a. Streets

1. Continuation of Existing Street. The arrangement of streets shall make provision for the continuation of principal existing streets in adjoining or adjacent subdivision, insofar as they may be necessary for public convenience. Such streets shall be of a width as great as the street so continued or projected and the centerline shall continue with the centerline of existing streets.

2. Interior Streets. Interior streets shall be designed in such a way so as to discourage through traffic insofar as is possible.

3. Reverse Curves. A tangent of at least one hundred feet (100') shall be provided between reverse curves on collector and arterial streets. All streets intersecting a major street shall do so with a tangent section of the centerline not less than fifty feet (50') in length measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the major street. 

4. Unsubmitted Portions of Subdivisions. Where the plats submitted cover only a part of the subdivider's property, a sketch of the proposed future street system of the unsubmitted portion shall be considered with the street system of the part submitted.

5. Major Arterial Streets. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street of one hundred twenty feet (120') or more in width, the Village Planning Board may require marginal access streets paralleling the arterial street, reverse frontage upon the arterial street with a prohibition of access along the rear property line, deeper lots with rear service alleys, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.

6. Topography. Proposed streets shall be so designed in relation to existing and proposed topography so as to produce lots and streets of reasonable grades.

7. Access to Adjoining Property. In general, proposed streets shall extend to the boundary of the subdivision to provide proper access to adjoining property, and provide for proper connection with the street system in the general area. In general, these extensions shall not be more than seventeen hundred feet (1,700') apart.

8. Street Intersections. Streets shall be required to intersect each other at as nearly right angles as practicable, and no street shall intersect any other street at less than sixty (60) degrees. Streets converging at one point shall be reduced in number to the least practical number.

9. Street Jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty feet (120') shall be avoided.

10. Limited Access Highways. Where a subdivision borders on an existing or proposed limited access highway, the Village Planning Board may require a street right-of-way on each side of and parallel to such limited access highway, of a width suitable for requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.

11. Dedication of Half Streets. The dedication of half streets will be permitted only where the proposed subdivision adjoins a recorded subdivision and where there exists a dedicated and recorded half street; the other half of the street must be dedicated on the proposed plat to make the street complete.

12. Dead-end or Cul-de-sac Street. Dead-end and Cul-de-sac streets may be up to 1,500 feet long, subject to approval by the Village Council. The Village Council may require that a reduced street length and/or an emergency access be provided where conditions such as but not limited to site terrain, narrow road width, or deep roadside ditches limit access of emergency vehicles to the development. {Ord. 300; 6-7-00}

13. Street Widths. The minimum width for minor streets shall be sixty feet (60'), the minimum width for boulevard streets shall be ninety feet (90'), the minimum width of the wider end of a dead-end or cul-de-sac street shall be one hundred twenty feet (120'), the minimum width of arterial streets shall be one hundred twenty feet (120') or two hundred and four feet (204') when so designated on a community plan and the minimum width of a marginal access street shall be thirty feet (30') when abutting a major arterial street.

14. Street Grades. The minimum grade of streets shall be 0.40 percent for concrete street and 0.50 percent for all other streets. The maximum grade of streets shall be five percent (5%) provided that, where essential to reasonable development, seven percent (7%) grade may be permitted for minor streets.

15. Street Cross Sections and Elevations. The street cross sections shall indicate a slope from property line to the curb or edge of the street roadway. There shall be a minimum grade of one-quarter inch per foot for sidewalks if installed, and a minimum of three-eights inch per foot for the area between property line and curb or street roadway. In general, all street crowns shall be a minimum of eight inches (8") below the grade of adjoining property lines and indicated on the cross sections of the streets.

16. Curb Corners. Curb corners shall be rounded with a radius of not less than twenty feet (20'). Intersections where the interior angle is less than sixty (60) degrees, shall have curb corners rounded with a minimum radius of thirty feet (30') and when the interior angle is less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees the curb corners shall be rounded with a minimum radius of ten feet (10'). Property lines at such corners shall be rounded or otherwise set back sufficiently to permit such construction.

17. Access Over Water or Ditches. Access over water courses or ditches shall be provided by streets in a standard manner approved by the Village Engineer.

18. Street Names. All proposed streets in alignment with existing streets must bear the same name as the existing street. New street names shall not duplicate existing street names and all names shall be approved by the Village Planning Board.

b. Lots.

1. Lot Size. Lot size shall not be less than the minimum required by the Zoning Ordinance for the Zone District in which the plot is located. When a parcel of land is subdivided into lots of one-half (1/2) acre or more, the depth of such lots shall not be greater than three (3) times the length of the front lot line.

2. Side Lot Lines. All side lot lines should be at right angles to straight street lines, or radial side lot lines to curved street lot lines unless a variation from the rule would indicate a better street and lot plan.

3. Corner Lots. Corner lots shall have extra width sufficient to permit the maintenance of building lines on both the front and side streets. In normal cases, the width required will not be less than the established building lines on the side street, plus the irreducible buildable width and such side open space requirements as are required by the Zoning Ordinance.

4. Lots Abutting Major Arterial Streets. Where a subdivision abuts a major arterial street, the abutting property must be treated accordingly by any one of the following methods:

(a) When lots face the major thoroughfare, the lots must be large enough to provide a one hundred twenty foot (120') setback from the centerline of the major arterial street to the front building line of such lot, with a complete turn around for vehicular traffic.

(b) Provide a parallel access roadway along the major arterial street.

(c) Arrange lots to back up to the major arterial street with sufficient depth to provide and maintain a twenty foot (20') green belt along said major arterial street.

(d) Provide a system of cul-de-sac street leading from a street that is parallel to the major arterial street.

(e) Where a pattern for any one of the four items immediately above has been established along a major arterial street, the Village Planning Board may require the installation of similar pattern in order to obtain a measure of uniformity wherever practical.

c. Alleys.

1. Alleys must be provided in Business Zone Districts, except that the Village Planning Board may waive alley requirements where other definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading and parking that is consistent and adequate for the uses proposed. Such alley or services access shall be suitably paved and placed upon an appropriate base.

2. The width of all proposed alleys shall not be less than twenty feet (20').

3. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but where necessary, corners shall be rounded or cut sufficiently to provide a minimum turning radius of not less than twenty feet (20') along the inner property line.

4. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turn around facilities at the dead-end.

d. Easements. Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities and shall have a minimum width of twelve feet (12'). Easements generally shall be direct and continuous from block to block. Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such water course, and such added width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose of the easement. Such easement shall have the approval of the Village Engineer and Oakland County Drain Commission.

e. Monuments. Monuments shall conform to and shall be placed as required in Act 288, Public Acts of 1967 as amended, known as the Subdivision Control Act of 1967.

f. Blocks. Residential blocks shall not be less than two hundred sixty feet (260') wide, and shall not be less than six hundred feet (600') long and shall be no more than seventeen hundred feet (1,700') long. Where lots are one-half acre or more in area, blocks up to twenty one hundred feet (2,100') in length may be approved. Block lengths shall be subject to the discretion of the Village Planning Board. Pedestrian crosswalks of not less than ten feet (10') in width may be required to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds or other similar uses.

g. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required to be constructed as a condition of approval of the plat in all new plats or subdivisions that bound on a major street or county primary road or that portion of said plat or subdivision bounding on said major street or county primary road unless the Village Council, prior to approval of the plat, shall determine that the public health, safety and welfare does not require said sidewalk, in which event the Council may waive such requirement. All sidewalks shall be installed, inspected and approved in accordance with the then current engineering specifications of the Village. A cash bond shall be filed with the Village prior to final approval of the plat to guarantee said improvement being made.

h. Open Spaces. Where a proposed park, playground, school or other public use is located in whole or in part in the subdivision, the Village Planning Board may require the dedication or reservation of such area if considered practical.

i. Use. No property shall be subdivided for residential use if such property is considered unsuitable for residential building purposes by the Village Planning Board. All property uses and area regulations must be in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance.

23.10 UTILITIES AND IMPROVEMENTS

a. Improvements Required. Subdivision plats shall not be approved by the Village Council unless a cash bond is filed with the Village Council to guarantee the following improvements:

1. Roadway Surfacing. Roadway surfacing on all streets and intersections shall have a minimum width of twenty-seven feet (27') for all residential streets. The roadway shall consist of a concrete pavement placed upon a suitable base for all residential streets; such concrete pavement shall be approved and installed in accordance with the engineering standards of the Village of Beverly Hills. Said improvements shall be installed, inspected and approved by the Village Engineer prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit by the Building Inspector for any use improvement adjoining said roadway.

2. Curbs of appropriate material shall be provided along roadways.

3. The installation of trunk line and lateral sewers and storm inlets and/or other suitable surface water sheds and any other necessary appurtenances.

4. The installation of trunk line and lateral sanitary sewers with building connections to the property lines and from the nearest lateral or trunk line sewer, and any other necessary appurtenances.

5. The installation of water mains, fire hydrants and any other necessary appurtenances.

6. All plans and specifications of utilities and/or improvements heretofore mentioned must be approved by the Village Council and the construction must be carried out under the direction of the Village Engineer in strict accordance with the Village of Beverly Hills engineering specifications and designated on the plans for the various kinds of improvements, which specifications are made a part hereof fully as much as if set forth herein in full.

b. Grading. All open spaces in the subdivision shall be graded in such a manner as will avoid the ponding of storm water in the rear open spaces of the subdivision.

c. Drainage. Each lot shall drain generally to the street, with a grade of not less than one percent (1%) so that water will be allowed to flow over the surface of the ground and away from the walls of the building.

d. Grade. In general, the rear open spaces shall slope from the rear property line towards the building, and also from the building towards the rear property line. The valley formed in the rear open space shall slope towards the side open space or to the driveway on the one side of the lot. The driveways or side open space shall be so graded as to allow the water to drain over the surface of the ground from the side or rear open spaces of the lot to the streets. In the event that prevailing grade conditions do not permit drainage of rear open spaces to the streets, a minimum longitudinal slope of the rear easement may be permitted, which shall not be sloped more than four-tenths of a foot per hundred feet (100'), with a maximum run from the high point to low point not to exceed eight hundred feet (800'). Low points shall be drained with beehive type inlets and enclosed drain to proper storm drain. Each detail plan shall be prepared by the builder and approved by the Village Engineer prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit for use improvements adjoining said drainage improvements.

e. Slopes. No rear open spaces shall be graded to adjacent rear or side property lines as to require a slope of more than one foot in two feet, and such slope shall lie wholly within 6 feet (6') of the lot line. The Village Engineer may require a retaining wall to be placed on the rear or side lot line where excessive cut or fill may interfere with normal use of the whole lot or adjoining property.

f. Water Drainage. Buildings shall be placed on lots so as to minimize the interference with the natural flow of surface water. Any grading on the lot shall not divert surface water to adjoining lots other than the manner expressed above.

g. Street Signs. Street signs shall be provided and erected by the subdivider of the same type and design in general use within the Village of Beverly Hills.

h. Trees. Street trees shall be provided and installed by the subdivider in accordance with a planting plan approved by the Village Council.

23.11 APPROVAL OF VILLAGE COUNCIL REQUIRED

No plat shall be transmitted to any County or State approving agency for official approval until each plat shall have been approved by the Village Council.

23.12 METES AND BOUNDS PLATTING

The description of any lot or parcel of a subdivision, filed hereafter, by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transfer, is a violation of these regulations, unless the aggregate lot area conveyed meets the required minimum size of platted lots.

23.13 SALES CONTRARY TO REQUIREMENTS

No person shall sell or convey any lot in any plat by reference thereto until such plat has been duly recorded in the office of the County Register of Deeds.

23.14 PUBLIC WATER AND SEWER SERVICE

Public water or sewer service shall not be provided for any dwelling or other structure located on a plat subdivided or sold in violation of these regulations excepting that such services may be installed in any structure when deemed necessary by the Health Department for the protection of public health.

23.15 VARIANCES

a. Hardship. Where the Village Planning Board determines that extraordinary hardship may result from the strict compliance with these subdivision regulations, it may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and public interests secured; provided that such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of any community plan or the regulations herein.

b. Conditions. In granting subdivision variances and modifications, the Village Planning Board may require such conditions as will substantially secure the standards or requirements so varied or modified.

23.16 LAND DIVISION REGULATIONS

a. Purpose. In the interest of promoting orderly development and protecting the public health, safety and welfare, the Village Council of Beverly Hills finds that it is necessary to regulate the division of land that is otherwise not subject to platting procedures and requirements. The purpose of this Chapter is to carry out the provisions of the State Land Division Act as amended, and to prevent the creation of parcels of property which do not comply with applicable ordinances and said Act. It shall be unlawful for any person to divide any lot, outlot, or other parcel of land in a recorded plat except in accordance with Section 263 of the Land Division Act, the ordinances of the Village of Beverly Hills, and this Section, or to divide any unplatted parcel or tract of land, except in accordance with the provisions of this Section, unless the division is approved and a part of a recorded subdivision, pursuant to the Village Subdivision Regulations (Chapter 23 of the Village Code) and the Land Division Act, Public Act 591 of 1996, as amended.

b. Applicability. Land divisions of any platted or unplatted lot, parcel or tract of land are subject to the requirements of this Section, including a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel. Exempt divisions from this Section include:

1. A parcel proposed for subdivision through a recorded plat pursuant to the Village Subdivision Regulations.

2. The division of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his or her heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors, or assigns that does not result in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent. For a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of the Land Division Act, as amended, the Village Zoning Ordinance and this Section. Documentation of such divisions shall be provided to the Assessor or other designated official.

c. Definitions. Whenever used in this Section, the following words and phrases shall have the following meaning ascribed to them:

1. Accessible: In reference to a parcel, means that the parcel meets one or both of the following:

(a) Has an area where a driveway provides vehicular access to an existing road or street and meets all applicable location standards of the Village or the Road Commission for Oakland County, or has an area where a driveway can provide vehicular access to an existing road or street and that will meet all applicable location standards.

(b) Is served by an existing easement that provides vehicular access to an existing road or street that meets all applicable location standards of the Village or the Road Commission for Oakland County, or can be served by a proposed easement that will provide vehicular access to an existing road or street and that will meet all applicable location standards.

2. Acreage Tract or Acreage Land: Land or real estate that is not located in, or a part of, a recorded plat or a condominium plan.

3. Applicant: An individual, firm, association, including a condominium association, partnership, corporation, or combination thereof, or other legal entity that holds ownership interest in land whether recorded or not, and is seeking approval for a division of land in accordance with this Ordinance.

4. Condominium Lot: The land portion of a condominium unit, together with the land in any adjacent and appurtenant limited common element.

5. Development Site: Any parcel or lot which exists or which is intended for building development, except agricultural or forestry uses as provided in Section 102 of the Land Division Act.

6. Divide, Division, Division of Land: The splitting or partitioning of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his or her heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns, for the purpose of sale or lease of more than one year, or of building development that results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and that satisfies the requirements of Sections 108 and 109 of the Land Division Act.

7. Forty acres or the equivalent: 40 acres, a quarter-quarter section containing not less than 30 acres, or a government lot containing not less than 30 acres.

8. Governing body: The Beverly Hills Village Council.

9. Land: All land areas occupied by real property.

10. Land Division Act or Act: Act 591 of Public Acts of 1996, as amended.

11. Lot: a measured portion of a parcel or tract of land, which is described and fixed in a recorded plat.

12. Parcel: A contiguous area or acreage of land as described in the Land Division Act.

13. Parent Parcel or Parent Tract: A parcel or tract, respectively, lawfully in existence on March 31, 1997.

14. Person: An individual, trustee, executor, other fiduciary, corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, or other legal entity acting as a unit.

15. Plat: A map or chart of a subdivision of land that has been approved in accordance with the Land Division Act, Michigan, as amended, or any predecessor act.

16. Private Road: A portion of land used for ingress and egress to and from two or more parcels, lots, zoning lots, or condominium lots, where such land or road has not been accepted for dedicated public use and maintenance by the Village of Beverly Hills, the Road Commission for Oakland County, or the State of Michigan.

17. Public Road: A road which is dedicated for use of the public for travel, which is maintained by a public agency, such as the Village of Beverly Hills, or the Road Commission for Oakland County, and is recognized by the State of Michigan under the provisions of Public Act 51 of 1951, as amended.

18. Tract: Two or more parcels that share a common property line and are under the same ownership.

19. Width (lot, parcel or tract): The length of a straight line drawn between the points where the front setback intercepts the side lot, parcel or tract lines.

20. Zoning Ordinance: Chapter 22 of the Village of Beverly Hills Municipal Code, as amended.

d. Application Requirements, Review Process and Fees.

1. Application Requirements: An applicant shall file all of the following with the Building Official for review and approval of a proposed land division before making any division either by deed, land contract, lease for more than one year or for building development.

(a) 20 copies of a completed application for land division, along with the required application fee, as established by Village Council resolution. The fee shall be set by the Village Council to cover the cost of staff and consultant reviews, meetings, administrative time, public hearings, and notifications.

(b) Adequate and accurate legal descriptions of the parent parcel or parent tract and each proposed parcel.

(c) The parent parcel or parent tract and each resulting parcel to be created by the proposed division shall be included on a tentative parcel map. The drawing shall be drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet and shall include the following:

(i) Scale
(ii) North arrow
(iii) The area and width of the parent parcel to be divided.
(iv) The area and width of each resulting parcel.
(v) All parcel line dimensions of the parent parcel and resulting parcels.
(vi) Separate and distinct designation of existing and resulting parcels.
(vii) Proposed method of providing access to each resulting parcel, demonstrating that said parcels are accessible, as defined in this Section.
(viii) The location, setbacks and size (area and height) of all structures on and within 100 feet of the resulting parcels.
(ix) Location of all existing and proposed public and private easements and rights-of-way.

(x) Location of surface water; drains; floodplains; and wetlands as identified by a recognized wetlands expert or the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.
(xi) Location of existing water, sanitary sewer, storm drains, and power utility services within 100 feet of the existing and proposed parcels.
(xii) All other information needed to determine compliance with this Section and Section 109 of the Land Division Act.

(d) Copies of all recorded documents which demonstrate the lawful existence and date of creation of the parent parcel. If any portion of the parent parcel was included in a previous application for division, the applicant shall specify the date(s) of such application(s) and the action(s) taken. The information must be sufficient to verify that the parent parcel was lawfully in existence as of March 31, 1997,

(e) A current commitment or policy of title insurance which indicates that the applicant is owner in fee title to the property described and written consent from all title or deed holder(s) of the parent parcel.

(f) Written approval from the Village Engineer or the Road Commission for Oakland County with regard to compliance with applicable location standards for all means of accessibility.

(g) A listing of each existing land parcel located within 500 feet of any portion of the parent parcel or parent tract proposed for division including the area of each. Said list shall be prepared, sealed and certified as accurate by a licensed engineer or registered land surveyor.

(h) Verification of adequate sight distance from the Village Engineer or Road Commission for Oakland County .

(i) If any portion of the land is subject to a farmland or open space development rights agreement pursuant to Michigan Public Act 116 of 1974, as amended, the Farmland and Open Space Preservation Act or an agreement pursuant to Michigan Public Act 451 of 1994, then a copy of the agreement shall be provided to the Village for review.

(j) If transfer of division rights are proposed, the applicant shall provide written disclosure of the terms and availability of the proposed division rights transfer.

(k) Documentation that all due and payable taxes or installments of special assessments pertaining to the land proposed to be divided are paid in full.

(l) Verification that all requirements of the Land Division Act, as amended, are met.

(m) Any other information the Village deems necessary to make the determination required by this Section.

2. Land Division Review Process

(a) Pre-Application Meeting (Optional). Applicants may request an optional pre-application meeting with the Building Official and, if desired, the assessor and planning consultant. Preliminary review meeting requests shall be submitted to the Building Official. The purpose of a pre-application meeting is to provide the applicant with preliminary procedural and design guidance regarding proposed land divisions prior to formal application.

(b) Submission of Application to Building Official. All applications for division of land shall be submitted, together with the required information and fees, to the Building Official or a designated representative. The application shall be submitted 14 days prior to the next available Planning Board meeting. If the Planning Board is not able to meet in a timely manner that permits review by the Village within the 45 day statutory requirement, due to holidays or other events, the application shall be forwarded directly to the Village Council. In all cases, the application shall be submitted 30 days before the Village Council meeting during which the application will be reviewed.

(c) Application Sufficiency Review. Applications for review must include all required information. The Building Official shall review within five days the application for completeness of data and to determine whether it is in compliance with this Section. The Building Official may involve the assessor, planning consultant, and a representative of the Planning Board to determine the completeness of the application.

(d) Consultant and Departmental Review. If the Building Official determines that all required information is provided for review, the Building Official shall submit the application to various departments and consultants of the Village for review and recommendations, including but not limited to departments or consultants having jurisdiction over assessing, planning, and engineering. If the Building Official determines that the application is incomplete, the Building Official shall notify the applicant in writing, and shall indicate areas of deficiency.

(e) Scheduling for Public Hearing. Upon finding that an application is complete, the Building Official shall request the Clerk to schedule a public hearing before the Planning Board. If a public hearing cannot be scheduled before the Planning Board due to circumstances noted in subsection "b" above, the hearing shall be scheduled before the Village Council. A public hearing notice shall be published in a newspaper of local circulation and mailed to all residents within at least 500 feet of the subject site not less than five days prior to the public hearing.


(f) Review by Planning Board. The Building Official shall provide the completed application and review materials to the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing review and consider the application at its next regular meeting. Following the public hearing and review of the proposed division of land, and after consideration of the comments from the public, Village departments and consultants, the Planning Board shall submit a recommendation to the Village Council. If the Planning Board finds the submittal does not meet the standards for approval, the applicant may request a postponement to allow resubmittal of a revised application for review or to allow for a Zoning Board of Appeals review of applicable variance requests, but the applicant shall waive the 45 day approval requirement. If a public hearing cannot be scheduled before the Planning Board due to circumstances noted in subsection "b" above, the hearing shall be scheduled before the Village Council.

(g) Final Decision of Village Council. After reviewing the complete application, the findings and recommendation submitted by the staff, and Planning Board (if applicable), the Village Council shall make the final decision within 45 days after the receipt of complete application as determined by the Building Official concerning any application for division of land, based on the standards set forth in this Ordinance. The Village Council may approve, approve with conditions or deny the application.

3. Notice of Decision:

(a) All decisions regarding land divisions shall be in writing.

(b) All decisions approving land divisions shall include a statement that:

(i) the approval of a land division is not a determination that any of the resulting parcels comply with other ordinances or regulations;
(ii) the Village and its officers, employees and contractors shall not be liable if any or all of the resulting parcels may not be used for building or other purposes;
(iii) all outstanding and due special assessment installments and taxes, including delinquent taxes, must be paid as a condition to the issuance of new parcel identification numbers.

(c) A decision denying an application shall include all the reasons for denial.

(d) Where a land division is approved for a parcel which does not satisfy Zoning Ordinance requirements, the applicant shall file with the Village an affidavit, suitable in form for recording with the office of the register of deeds, signed by all persons having a legal or equitable interest in the parent parcel and resultant parcels, stating that the signatories understand that the resultant parcels may not be developed or used separately for building purposes, except in combination with adjoining parcels which, when joined together, satisfy the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. If, however, the Zoning Board of Appeals has granted the applicable variances to the zoning requirements then an affidavit is not warranted and the notice of decision by the Planning Board shall include a reference to the Zoning Board of Appeals action(s).

(e) The Village shall require that the applicant submit the affidavit in recordable form to the Village, to be recorded by the Village attorney.

4. Fees: Fees for meetings and reviews will be established by Village Council resolution to cover the cost of staff and consultant reviews and meetings, administrative time, recording notices and affidavits and public notifications. All fees shall be paid in full by the applicant.

e. Review Standards

The following standards shall be used as the basis upon which applications for division of land are reviewed:

1. Compliance with State Law. An application for division of land shall not be approved unless it is in compliance with the Land Division Act. Accordingly:

(a) All acreage tract or acreage parcel divisions shall be in compliance with Sections 108, 109, 109a and 109b of the Land Division Act. The number of divisions, including previous divisions of the parent parcel or parent tract, shall not exceed the maximum permitted in Section 108 of the Land Division Act.

(b) No lot, outlot or other parcel of land in a recorded plat shall be further partitioned or divided unless in conformity with the Land Division Act and the ordinances of the Village. 

2. Dimensional Requirements. Resulting parcels shall comply with the applicable area, frontage, width, yard, setback and floodplain standards of the Zoning Ordinance or Building Code. All divisions shall result in parcels containing sufficient buildable area outside of wetlands, floodplains, and other areas where buildings are prohibited, and with sufficient area to comply with all required setbacks, minimum floor areas, off-street parking spaces, on-site sewage disposal and water well locations (where public waste and sewer service is not available), and maximum coverage of buildings and structures on the site. A proposed division which does not comply with applicable yard, frontage and area requirements of the Zoning Ordinance shall not be approved unless the Zoning Board of Appeals has granted a variance from the applicable zoning standard with which the proposed division does not comply or an affidavit, as described in section d.3.d, has been submitted to the Village.

3. Easements for Public Utilities. Each resulting parcel that is a development site shall have adequate easements for public utilities. For purposes of this subsection, an easement shall be deemed adequate if it is in a reasonable and lawful location, and the easement is recorded as a condition of approval of the division.

4. Depth to Width Ratio. The depth to width ratio of a resulting parcel created through land division shall not exceed four to one. The Village Council may allow a variance from this requirement if the Village Council finds that any of the following apply:

(a) The proposed depth or width is warranted because a substantial amount of the described land area is located within a 100 year floodplain or designated wetland;

(b) The width and depth of the adjoining lots or parcels are similar to the dimensions of the proposed parcel;

(c) The proposed division of land reduces the degree of nonconformity of existing parcels;

(d) The affected land is located entirely within a platted subdivision, represents less than 15% of the area of a lot of record, is not being subdivided with intent of creating a new development site, and is being processed concurrently with combination with an existing lot.

5. Disruption of Flow of Water. Where divisions of land would result in subsequent development that may disrupt existing or natural flow of water within drainage ditches, natural water courses, storm drains, or government maintained drains, evidence of a feasible alternate method of drainage shall be presented.

6. Consideration of Deed Restrictions. The consistency of a proposed land division with existing deed restrictions, made known at the time of review, may be considered by the Village Council to determine if the proposed land division would be consistent with sound community planning principles. However, such deed restrictions shall not be binding upon the Village under this Section, unless the Village is a party to such deed restriction.

7. Consent of the Title Holder. No land division shall be approved without the consent of the current title or deed holder of the subject parcel.

8. Character of Surrounding Development. The Planning Board and Village Council shall consider the impact of subsequent construction on the character of surrounding development. In evaluating character of surrounding development, the Planning Board and Village Council shall consider the size, dimensions, and proportions of existing surrounding parcels. The Village Council shall not approve a division of land resulting in a parcel which has a land area less than the average land area of all land parcels of a like zoning classification located within the Village within 500 feet of any portion of the proposed division. The average land area of the surrounding parcels shall be computed, sealed and certified as accurate by a licensed engineer or registered land surveyor at the expense of the petitioner.

9. Parking Requirements. An application for land division shall not be approved if it would result in a loss of parking such that development on any of the resulting parcels would be unable to comply with the minimum parking requirements in the Zoning Ordinance.

10. Accessibility. All resulting parcels shall be accessible, shall have the required minimum frontage on a public road, or on a private road that complies with the requirements in Section 23.17 of this Code and Section 22.08 of the Zoning Ordinance, and shall have adequate sight distance. Compliance with this subsection shall be confirmed in writing by the Village Engineer or the Road Commission for Oakland County.

11. Compliance with Village Regulations. A land division shall not be approved, except as provided in d.3.(d), if it would have the effect of avoiding the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, would prevent the enforcement of provisions of site plan approval, or would result in the creation of a nonconformity or a violation of any municipal ordinance.

12. Compliance with Village Master Plan. A proposed land division may be denied if the Village Council finds that it is inconsistent with the Village Master Plan.

13. Taxes or Assessment Liens. Any due unpaid taxes or special assessments upon the property shall be paid before the division of land is given final approval.

f. Appeals and Variances. Refer to Section 23.15 {Ord. 294, 6-17-99}

23.17 PRIVATE ROAD REQUIREMENTS

a. Review and Approval. Proposal for construction of private roads shall follow the following review procedures.

1. Process: In order to provide the applicant and Village Council with adequate opportunity to discuss a private road, a three-step approval process is provided for private roads:

(a) Pre-application meeting(s): Such meeting(s) shall be requested by the applicant to discuss basic layout, design, and procedural issues with Village staff and planning consultants.

(b) Preliminary Review by the Planning Board: Following the pre-application meeting, the applicant shall submit a completed application (Sub-Section 2 (a) and (d) below) for preliminary review. The preliminary review provides the applicant with an opportunity to receive review comments from Village representatives in advance of incurring costs for preparation of final surveys and legal descriptions for a complete final application. Applicants have the option of submitting final plans and specifications for preliminary review.

(c) Final Review: All information required in Section 23.17, Sub-Section a.2 Application Requirements below must be submitted for final review.

(d) Fees: Fees for pre-application meetings, preliminary and final reviews will be set by the Village Council to cover the cost of staff and consultant reviews and meetings, administrative time for public hearings and public notification.

2. Application Requirements: An applicant shall file the required number of copies of all of the following with the Building Official for review and approval of a private road.

(a) A request for approval of a private road submitted in writing to the Village Council.

(b) Copies of the proposed easement.

(c) Copies of the proposed Private Road Maintenance Agreement.

(d) A private road plan drawn to scale and prepared by a registered professional engineer which indicates the following:

(i) A drawing of the proposed private road and road easement in relation to intersecting streets and adjacent properties.
(ii) The location of existing structures on adjacent properties.
(iii) The location of all existing and proposed public and private easements and rights-of-way.
(iv) Topography on the site and within 100 feet of the site at two foot contour intervals, reference to a U.S.G.S. benchmark.

(v) Location of surface water, drains, floodplains, and wetlands.
(vi) Location of existing water, sanitary sewer, and power utility services.
(vii) Road cross section, showing type and depth of base and surface materials.
(viii) Proposed method of drainage.
(ix) Other information deemed necessary by the Village Engineer to make the determination required by this Ordinance.

(e) A survey drawing of the road, sealed by a Professional Surveyor, and final engineering plans, sealed by a Registered Professional Engineer.

3. Approval Procedures

(a) Submission to Building Official. All applications for private roads shall be submitted, together with the required information and fees, to the Building Official or a designated representative. The materials submitted to the Planning Board shall include all information as required for preliminary or final review in Sub-Section a.2 Application Requirements.

(b) Review for Application Completeness by Staff. Applications for preliminary and final review must provide all required information. The Building Official shall review the application for completeness of data and determine whether it is in compliance with this Section.

(c) Notification of Incomplete Application. The Building Official shall notify the applicant in writing if an application for preliminary or final review is incomplete. The Building Official shall submit the application to various departments and consultants of the Village for review and recommendations, including but not limited to, departments or consultants having jurisdiction over assessing, planning, and engineering, and the Village Attorney.

(d) Preliminary Review by Planning Board. Applications for preliminary review, prepared in accordance with the information required in Sub-Section a.2.(a) and (d), shall be submitted to the Building Official. When a complete application is received, the matter will be placed on the agenda of a regular Planning Board meeting for review.

(e) Planning Board Public Hearing and Notification. In conjunction with the Final Review by the Planning Board, the Building Official shall request the Clerk to schedule a public hearing before the Planning Board. A public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of local circulation and mailed to all residents within at least 500 feet of the subject site not less than five nor more than fifteen days prior to the public hearing.

(f) Final Review by Planning Board. The Building Official shall provide the completed application and review materials to the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall consider the application at a regular meeting. Following review of the private road, and after consideration of the comments from the Village departments, consultants, and the public, the Planning Board shall submit a recommendation to the Village Council.

(g) Final Decision of Village Council. After reviewing the complete application, the findings and recommendations submitted by the staff, and Planning Board, the Village Council shall make the final decision concerning any application for a private road, based on the standards set forth in this Ordinance. The Village Council may also hold a public hearing on the application. Notice shall be given in the same manner set forth in Sub-Section a.3. (e) above. The Village Council may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. {Ord. 295, 7-16-99}

23.18 EXISTING PRIVATE ROAD REGULATIONS

Private roads in existence as of the effective date of this Ordinance are allowed to continue to serve their original functions, subject to the following provisions:

a. Village Not Responsible. The Village is not responsible nor shall the Village be obligated in any manner to perform regular inspections of a private road or to provide necessary repairs or maintenance.

b. Maintenance. All maintenance of private roads shall be the responsibility of the property owner(s) served by the roads.

c. Issuance of Construction Permits. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, an applicant for a permit for new construction on any property where the only means of access is a private road, shall (a) present a legally binding Private Road Maintenance Agreement for said private road which meets the requirements in Section 23.17(e) of this Code and (b) satisfy Section 23.18(f) of this Code.

d. Maintenance Agreement Required. All existing private roads shall have a legally binding Private Road Maintenance Agreement in effect with the Village no later than twelve (12) months following the effective date of this Ordinance (April 3, 1991). Each agreement on an existing private road shall meet the requirements of Section 23.17(e) of this Code.

e. Continuation of Village Services. Effective fifteen (15) months following the effective date of this Ordinance (April 3, 1991), the Village shall discontinue all nonemergency services (such as regular police patrols and refuse collection) provided to any owner or occupant of property which has a private road as its only means of access requiring use of the private road, and is not (a) referenced in an approved legally binding Private Road Maintenance Agreement and (b) in compliance with Section 23.18(f) of the Code. A public hearing shall be held by the Village Council prior to the discontinuance of any current service. Each property owner or occupant located on a private road shall be notified in writing of the hearing by the Village Manager.

f. Easement Requirements. The easement documents on an existing private road shall be reviewed by the Village Manager and the Village Attorney prior to the approval (or waiver pursuant to Section 23.18(g) of this Code) of any Private Road Maintenance Agreement. The easement documents must comply with the following requirements: If the Village Manager and the Village Attorney determine that any of the following requirements are not met, a public hearing shall be held by the Village Council to determine if the requirements have been met. Each property owner or occupant located on a private road shall be notified in writing of the hearing by the Village Manager.

1. The existing easement width, roadway width, and roadway condition shall be adequate to serve the area.

2. Emergency vehicles shall have access to all of the involved properties.

3. All appropriate parties, including the Village, shall be guaranteed access to the properties.

4. The Village shall be sufficiently held harmless for liability.

g. Condominiums. A separate Private Road Maintenance Agreement shall not be required for a condominium with private roads if, after submission of the pertinent condominium documents to the Village Attorney, the Village Attorney determines that the condominium documents satisfy the requirements of Section 23.17(e) of this Code.

23.19 FEES

All engineering and inspection fees, in addition to those in Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of 1967, shall be paid or secured onto the Village prior to time service or action called for is to be performed. Required fees for the following service or action shall be as established by resolution by Village Council.

Service Provided

CHECKING

Pre-Preliminary. Examination, from engineering viewpoint for general conformance to contours and topographic features. Also includes general consultation.

Plat Layout. Checking preliminary plat. Predevelopment examination of land area to be developed, for easements, highway accesses, terrain, water supply, sewer service, etc. (this will not be a formal review of lot areas or dimensions since dimensions are generally approximate at this stage).

Checking final plat, this includes a review of lot dimensions and areas for final platting.

Streets. Checking street plans. Examination of final construction drawings to assure their adequacy and conformance to adopted standards and/or stipulated requirements.

Sidewalks. Examination of final construction drawings to assure their adequacy and conformance to adopted standards and/or stipulated requirements.

Subdivision Grading. Checking grading plans. Examination of final construction drawings to assure proper elevations and according to accepted standards.

Water System. Checking distribution system plans. Examination of final construction drawings to assure their adequacy and conformance to adopted standards and/or stipulated requirements.

Checking pump station plans. Examination of final construction drawings to assure their adequacy, and their conformance to adopted standards and/or stipulated requirements.

Pump house without treatment
Pumping and treatment

Sanitary Sewage Facilities. Checking sewerage system plans. Examination of final construction drawings to assure their adequacy and their conformance to adopted standards and/or stipulated requirements.

Off-Site Improvements. Checking fees for off-site improvements, such as water mains and/or sanitary sewer extensions being constructed to provide service to a development, will be determined at the time of submittal.

All work involved in the checking of the initial plan submitted, and the subsequent review of the first submittal of revised plans is included in the fees noted above.

Additional reviews of plans which are revised subsequent to the first submittal of revised plans will require payment of an additional fee. This fee will be an amount no less than one-half of the fees noted above and in the event of a complete revision in the design concepts, may equal the amount of the original fee. The actual amount to be assessed will be determined at the time of such submittal.

EXAMINATION OF CONSTRUCTION AFTER SUBSTANTIAL COMPLETION

On-site examination of subdivision grading. Check subdivision grading after road subgrade approval to determine general conformance to plan. (Inspection
of the final lot grading to be by the Building Inspector prior to issuance of an occupancy permit.)

SUBDIVISION MONUMENTS

On-site examination to verify the existence of monuments as indicated on the final plat.

INSPECTION OF CONSTRUCTION

Fee for inspection per crew day per calendar day of inspection. The basis of computing crew days is as follows:

Through 4 hours One-half crew day
4-1/2 hours through 8 hours One crew day
Over 8 hours One-quarter crew day
for each 2 hours or
part thereof

Construction operations requiring full-time inspection are generally defined as follows:

General. Checking of barricades and signs for compliance with permits when requirements are furnished by authorities issuing permits. Material testing and checking. (Operations performed by a testing laboratory not included.)

1. Checking batch plants.
2. Making concrete test cylinders.
3. Checking all material and equipment for specification compliance.

Inspection of appurtenances can be done by the same inspector performing the inspection for the primary construction (main or tunneling, etc.) provided they are in the proximity of the primary construction and further provided the contractor cooperates to the extent that the inspector is informed of the construction of appurtenances and that no work be covered prior to inspection. Proximity shall mean a distance not to exceed one thousand feet (1,000').

Street and Roads.

a. Excavation and preparation of the site.

(1) Salvaging gravel or base material.
(2) Constructing compacted fills.

b. Subbase construction.

c. Checking forms.

d. Placement of wearing course (concrete, asphalt, gravel, seal coat, etc.)

e. Laying and sealing.

f. Plant inspector when required by the agency having jurisdiction.

Water

a. Excavation, bedding and backfill.

b. Tunneling, jacking and boring.

c. Installation of all materials.

d. Installation and construction of all appurtenances.

e. Pressure testing and disinfecting.

Sewer and Drains

a. Excavation, bedding and backfill.

b. Tunneling, jacking and boring.

(1) 3 Shaft construction
(2) Mining
(3) Forming
(4) Placement of concrete
(a) One inspector in tunnel
(b) One concrete inspector top side

c. Installation of all materials.

d. Construction of all appurtenances.

e. Infiltration of exfiltration tests, on sanitary only.

Structures

a. Excavating and shaft construction.

b. Checking forms and re-steel.

c. Placement of concrete.

d. Backfilling around structures.

e. Checking installation of equipment.

Cleanup and Complaints

a. Restoration of conditions existing prior to construction. This can be done by one inspector with the cooperation of the contractor.

(1) Drives, sidewalks, fences, landscaping, etc.
(2) Handling of complaints.
(3) General clean-up.

b. Construction of new drives, sidewalks, fences and landscaping where called for.

23.20 VIOLATIONS

Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall subject the violator to the penalties set forth in Section 1.06.

Chapter 24 - Building Code
24.01 AGENCY DESIGNATED
24.02 CODE REFERENCED
24.03 CHANGE IN CODE
24.04 FEES
24.05 MICHIGAN ENERGY CODE ADOPTED
24.06 ENERGY CODES AVAILABLE
24.07 VIOLATIONS
24.01 AGENCY DESIGNATED

Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Building Code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the Building Official of the Village of Beverly Hills is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge responsibility of the Village of Beverly Hills under Act 230, of Public Acts of 1972, as amended, State of Michigan. The Village of Beverly Hills assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act throughout its corporate limits.{Ord. 284, 9-27-97}{Ord. 302, 7-28-01}

24.02 CODE REFERENCED

All building materials in any buildings, structures and premises covered by this Ordinance shall be designed, constructed, installed, altered and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the State Code. This Code provides reasonable safeguards to the public health, safety and welfare as they are affected by the installation and/or maintenance of building materials. {Ord. 302, 7-28-01}

24.03 CHANGE IN CODE

Pursuant to Section 14 of Act 230 of 1972, the following section of the BOCA Building Code is hereby amended or deleted as set forth herein, section number referring to like section of the BOCA Building:

Section 124.0 Amended to Read:
Section 126.2 Construction Board of Appeals.

The Village Council of the Village of Beverly Hills is hereby constituted the Construction Board of Appeals under this Building Code.

24.04 FEES

(A) FEES FOR INSPECTION.

When an application is made for a permit, license, or registration required under the terms of this Ordinance, a fee shall be paid in an amount as prescribed by Resolution of the Village of Beverly Hills Council.

(B) RIGHT OF ACCESS TO BUILDINGS.

Subject to the Constitution and the laws of the State of Michigan, the Building Official and/or his or her deputy shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building in this discharge of his or her official duties for the purpose of making any inspection or test of the installation of electrical wiring and building materials contained therein and shall have the authority to cause the turning off of all electrical supply and to disconnect, in cases of emergency, any wire where such electrical currents are dangerous to life or property or may interfere with the work of the Fire Department.

(C) PERMITS.

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install, alter, maintain, service or repair building materials in or on any building, structure or part thereof, or on premises or cause or permit therein or thereon the installation, altering, maintaining, servicing or repairing of any building materials without a permit having been obtained therefore as provided herein. {Ord. 302, 7-28-01}

24.05 MICHIGAN ENERGY CODE ADOPTED

The Village of Beverly Hills hereby adopts by reference the Michigan Energy Code as developed by the Construction Code Commission under authority of Act 230 of the Public Acts of 1972 as amended and promulgated in accordance with the Michigan Administrative Procedures Act of 1969 as amended.

24.06 ENERGY CODES AVAILABLE

Notice is hereby given that complete copies of the Michigan Energy Code are available for public inspection at the office of the Village Clerk and office of the Building Official.

24.07 VIOLATIONS

Any building or structure erected, used, moved, demolished, occupied or maintained in violation of this Ordinance is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se. Upon application, the court may order the nuisance abated or the violation, or threatened violation restrained and enjoined. Any person erecting, using, moving, demolishing, occupying or maintaining any building or structure in violation of this Building Code or causing, permitting or suffering any such violation to be committed, shall also subject the violator to the penalties set forth in Section 1.06.

Chapter 25 - Electrical Code
25.01 AGENCY DESIGNATED
25.02 CODE REFERENCED
25.03 FEES FOR INSPECTION
25.04 RIGHT OF ACCESS TO BUILDINGS
25.05 PERMITS
25.06 INSPECTION
25.07 REINSPECTION
25.08 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
25.09 APPROVED MATERIALS
25.10 RECORD AND REVIEW
25.11 LICENSE FOR ELECTRICAL WOR
25.12 EXCEPTIONS
25.13 LIABILITY
25.14 VIOLATIONS
25.01 AGENCY DESIGNATED

Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Electrical Code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the Building Official of the Village of Beverly Hills is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge responsibility of the Village of Beverly Hills under Act 230, of Public Acts of 1972, as amended, State of Michigan. The Village of Beverly Hills assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act throughout its corporate limits.{Ord. 285, 9-27-97}{Ord. 303, 7-28-01}

25.02 CODE REFERENCED

All electrical equipment in any buildings, structures and premises covered by this Ordinance shall be designed, constructed, installed, altered and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the State Code. This Code provides reasonable safeguards to the public health, safety and welfare as they are affected by the installation and/or maintenance of electrical equipment. {Ord. 303, 7-28-01}

25.03 FEES FOR INSPECTION

When an application is made for a permit, license, or registration required under the terms of this Ordinance, a fee shall be paid in an amount as prescribed by Resolution of the Village of Beverly Hills Council. {Ord. 303, 7-28-01}

25.04 RIGHT OF ACCESS TO BUILDING

Subject to the Constitution and the laws of the State of Michigan, the Building Official and/or his or her deputy shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building in this discharge of his or her official duties for the purpose of making any inspection or test of the installation of electrical wiring, electrical devices and/or electrical materials contained therein and shall have the authority to cause the turning off of all electrical supply and to disconnect, in cases of emergency, any wire where such electrical currents are dangerous to life or property or may interfere with the work of the Fire Department. {Ord. 303, 7-28-01}

25.05 PERMITS

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install, alter, maintain, service or repair electrical equipment in or on any building, structure or part thereof, or on premises or cause or permit therein or thereon the installation, altering, maintaining, servicing or repairing of any electrical equipment without a permit having been obtained therefore as provided herein. Nothing in this section shall be considered as applying to any person engaged in repairing and maintaining electrical appliances. {Ord. 303, 7-28-01}

25.06 INSPECTION

Upon the completion of the wiring of any building, it shall be the duty of the person, firm or corporation installing the same to notify the Electrical Inspector to inspect the installation as soon as possible, and if it is found to be fully in compliance with this Code and does not constitute a hazard to life and property, he shall issue on request to such person, firm or corporation for delivery to the owner a certificate of inspection authorizing connection to the electrical service and the turning on the current. All wires which are to be hidden from view shall be inspected before concealment and any person, firm or corporation installing such wires shall notify the Village of Beverly Hills, giving sufficient time in which to make the required inspection before such wires are concealed.

25.07 REINSPECTION

The Electrical Inspector may make periodically a thorough reinspection of the installation in buildings of all electric wiring, electric devices and electric material now installed or that may hereafter be installed, within the Village of Beverly Hills and when the installation of any such wiring, devices, and/or material is found to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition, the person, firm or corporation owning, using or operating the same shall be notified and shall make the necessary repairs or changes required to place such wiring, devices and material in a safe condition and have such work completed within fifteen (15) days, or any longer period specified by the Electric Inspector in said notice. The Electrical Inspector is hereby empowered to disconnect or order in writing the discontinuance of electrical service to such wiring, devices, and/or material so found to be defectively installed until the installation of such wiring, devices and material has been made safe as directed by the Electrical Inspector.

25.08 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS

No certificate of inspection shall be issued unless the electrical installation is in strict conformity with the provisions of this Code, the statues of the State of Michigan, the rules and regulations issued by the Michigan Public Service Commission under the authority of the State statutes, and unless they are in conformity with approved methods of construction for safety to persons and property. The regulations as laid down in the National Electrical Code, as approved by the American Standards Association and in the National Electrical Safety Code, as approved by the American Standards Association, and in the Village of Beverly Hills' rules and regulations established as hereinafter provided (Section 25.11f) shall be prima facie evidence of such approved methods.

25.09 APPROVED MATERIALS

It shall be unlawful to install or use any electrical device, apparatus, or equipment designed for attachment to, or installation on any electrical circuit or system for heat, light or power that is not of good design and construction and safe and adequate for its intended use. The Electrical Inspector shall have power to disapprove the use or installation of devices not fulfilling these requirements. Devices, apparatus and equipment approved by such generally recognized authorities as United States Bureau of Standards, Electrical Testing Laboratories of New York, or Underwriters Laboratories shall be held to have the approval of the Electrical Inspector unless explicitly disapproved by said Authority for reasons for faulty design nd poor construction involving danger to persons and/or property.

It shall be the duty of the Electrical Inspector from time to time to inspect devices, apparatus and equipment offered to the public for use in installation to see that such items conform to the above requirements.

25.10 RECORD AND REVIEW

(a) The Village of Beverly Hills shall keep complete records of all permits issued and inspections made and other official work performed under the provisions of this Code.

(b) When the Electrical Inspector condemns all or part of any electrical installation the owner or his agent may within five (5) days after receiving written notice from the Electrical Inspector, file a petition in writing for review of said action of the Electrical Inspector with the Board of Electrical Examiners, upon receipt of which the said Board of Electrical Examiners shall at once proceed to determine whether said electrical installation complies with this Code, and within three (3) days shall make a decision in accordance with its findings.

25.11 LICENSE FOR ELECTRICAL WORK

(a) A Board of Electrical Examiners is hereby constituted consisting of the Electrical Inspector of the Village of Beverly Hills, a representative of an electrical utility company, a licensed Electrical Contractor, who is also a licensed Master Electrician, a licensed Journeyman Electrician, and the said Electrical Contractor and Journeyman Electrician shall have had at least ten (10) years experience in electrical work. The members of said Board of Examiners shall be appointed by the Village Council of the Village of Beverly Hills for such terms as shall be designated at the time of appointment. This Board shall examine all applicants for either Master Electrician's or Journeyman Electrician's licenses. Applicants failing to pass will not be eligible for re-examination in any reciprocating municipality for a period of thirty (30) days. All applicants for licenses shall designate their legal address as the location for their residence in the case of Journeyman and Master Electricians, and their legal address as the principal place of business in the case of electrical contractors. All Electrical Contractors, Master Electricians, and Journeymen Electricians having their legal address within the corporate limits of the Village of Beverly Hills shall secure their license from the Village of Beverly Hills.

The Board of Electrical Examiners shall prepare the application blanks, prescribe the examination and meet at least once a month on call of the Village of Beverly Hills to hold examinations. Due notice shall be given applicants of the date of examination.

All applications for examinations shall be in writing. The examination shall consist of an oral or written examination as the Examining Board shall determine, and such other practical tests in examination at the discretion of the Examining Board.

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage as an independent contractor in the installation, alteration, maintenance or repair of electrical wiring, equipment, apparatus or fixtures for light, heat or power purposes, where the electromotive force exceeds thirty (30) volts in or about buildings and/or structures located within the Village of Beverly Hills without first having procured a license.

(b) ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR'S LICENSE REQUIREMENTS

An applicant for an Electrical Contractor's License shall be over eighteen (18) years of age and shall be the holder of a Master Electrician's License, or shall regularly employ a person who is the holder of a Master Electrician's License who shall be actively in charge of work for the applicant.

To be issued by community in which business is located.

It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the occupation or trade of Journeyman Electrician in the installation, alteration, maintenance or repair of electrical wiring equipment, apparatus or fixtures for light, heat, power or medical purposes where the electromotive force exceeds thirty (30) volts in or about buildings and/or structures within the Village of Beverly Hills without having first taken the examination and obtained a license as herein provided. This provision shall not apply to helpers and apprentices, provided such work as they may do is performed under the direction and supervision of licensed Journeyman Electricians who shall be on the premises at all times when such helpers or apprentices are performing such work on the premises.

(c) JOURNEYMAN ELECTRICIAN LICENSE REQUIREMENTS

An applicant in order to qualify for examination for Journeyman electrician License shall have attained the age of eighteen (18) years and shall be able to show four (4) years of practical experience in the type of electrical construction or maintenance work for which a license is required. In lieu of four (4) years of practical experience, an applicant shall present evidence of a total of not less than four (4) years in a combination of practical experience and training at a recognized trade or technical school, provided this includes a minimum of one (1) year practical experience. Evidence in writing from employers and technical schools shall be submitted by the applicant, showing type of work performed and length of time employed. All applicants shall submit to an examination as hereinafter provided.

(d) MASTER ELECTRICIAN LICENSE REQUIREMENTS

An applicant for a Master Electrician License shall submit to the examination hereinafter provided and have attained the age of eighteen (18) years. Said applicant for a Master Electrician License shall have passed the examination for and had issued to him a Journeyman Electrician License for a period of at least two (2) years. He shall further agree that if a Master Electrician License is issued, he will notify the Board in writing within seventy-two (72) hours (three working days) of a change of employment where such employment was necessary to qualify his employer as an Electrical Contractor. Willful or negligent failure to give such notice of the Board shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of such license.

(e) The fee for an Electrical Contractor's, Master Electrician's and Journeyman Electrician's License shall be prescribed by the Village Council. Licenses shall expire on December 31st of each year, and shall be renewed upon application by the licensee, together with the payment of the required fee. After March 1st, all licenses not renewed shall be considered cancelled and may not be renewed except upon approval of the Examining Board. Electrical Contractor's, Master Electrician's and Journeyman Electrician's Licenses shall be issued by the Village of Beverly Hills upon recommendation of the Examining Board. Licenses issued under this Code shall be nontransferable and shall be displayed when required. Electrical Contractor's Licenses under the terms of this Code shall not secure permits for work to be done by any person not employed by said Electrical Contractor, and license may be revoked for violation for this rule.

No license shall be recognized by the Village of Beverly Hills unless such licenses are issued by a cooperating municipality having an Examining Board.

The Village of Beverly Hills shall permit Electrical Contractors lawfully licensed by other municipalities of the State of Michigan to install, alter or repair electrical wiring, equipment, apparatus or fixtures for light, heat or power purposes within the corporate limits of the Village of Beverly Hills, upon payment of Five Dollars ($5.00) registration fee, provided that such municipalities reciprocate in recognizing Electrical Contractors who are duly licensed under the provisions of this Code by granting them the same privilege and charging the same uniform license and registration fees. Provided further, that the licensing ordinances are substantially equal to the requirements of this Code. Journeyman Electricians duly licensed by any municipality cooperating in the reciprocal arrangement shall be permitted to work in the Village of Beverly Hills without the payment of a registration fee. provided, however, that any Journeyman Electrician doing work within the Village of Beverly Hills, and holding a license from a cooperating municipality, shall register with the Village of Beverly Hills.

No Electrical Contractor's Licenses shall be recognized, for the purpose of registration, by the Village of Beverly Hills of applicants who maintain their principal place of business in a municipality which fails to approve, by affirmative action of its legislative body, the reciprocal and mutually interchangeable licensing arrangements covered by this Code.

Corporations applying for Electrical Contractor's Licenses, whose principal place of business is not in the State of Michigan, should obtain such license from the State of Michigan Electrical Administrative Board upon the payment of the prescribed fee.

Any Electrical Contractors, Master or Journeyman's License may, after a hearing, be suspended or revoked by the Examining Board having issued such license upon evidence present that false statements have been made upon application for license or upon evidence presented that the person firm or corporation holding such license willfully or by reason of incompetence repeatedly violates any rules and regulations relating to the inspection, maintenance, alteration or repair of electrical wiring, devices, appliances or equipment.

(f) The Board of Electrical Examiners is hereby empowered and it shall be their duty to promulgate and recommend such rules and regulations concerning electrical work in the Village of Beverly Hills as may be required to properly provide for the situations therein. The rules and regulations so made by the Board of Electrical Examiners shall be effective upon approval by the Village of Beverly Hills, and shall take precedence over plans specifications and National Electric Code Rules.

(g) A licensed electrician shall not be required for any wiring in or on a home and accompanying outbuildings owned, occupied or to be occupied by the person performing the installation, alteration or repair of wiring, devices, appliances and appurtenances, providing the Inspector deems such person qualified to perform such work and such person obtains a permit as required by this Code.

25.12 EXCEPTIONS

The provisions of this Code shall not apply to the following:

(a) The installing of radio receiving sets and equipment. (The installation of convenience outlets for power supply to a radio set shall be subject to such rules and regulations.

(b) This Code and its provisions shall not apply to apparatus and equipment installed by or for any public utility operating under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Public Service Commission in the exercise of its function as a utility and when such apparatus or equipment is used primarily for the generation or distribution of electric current or for signal or communication purposes.

25.13 LIABILITY

This Code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any party owning , operating, controlling or installing any electric wiring, electric devices and/or electric material for damages to person or property caused by any defect therein nor shall the Village of Beverly Hills be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection authorized herein, or certificate of inspection issued as herein provided.

25.14 VIOLATIONS

Any person, firm or corporation who shall fail to comply with any of the provisions hereof, shall upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 1.06.

Chapter 26 - Plumbing Code
26.01 CODE ADOPTED
26.02 REFERENCES IN CODE
26.03 FEES
26.04 ENFORCEMENT
26.05 VIOLATIONS
26.01. AGENCY DESIGNATED

Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Plumbing Code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the Building Official of the Village of Beverly Hills is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge responsibility of the Village of Beverly Hills under Act 230, of Public Acts of 1972, as amended, State of Michigan. The Village of Beverly Hills assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act throughout its corporate limits. {Ord. 286, 9-27-97}{Ord. 304, 7-28-01}

26.02 CODE REFERENCED

All plumbing equipment in any buildings, structures and premises covered by this Ordinance shall be designed, constructed, installed, altered and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the State Code. This Code provides reasonable safeguards to the public health, safety and welfare as they are affected by the installation and/or maintenance of plumbing equipment. {Ord. 304, 7-28-01} 

26.03 FEES

(A) FEES FOR INSPECTION.

When an application is made for a permit, license, or registration required under the terms of this Ordinance, a fee shall be paid in an amount as prescribed by Resolution of the Village of Beverly Hills Council.

(A) RIGHT OF ACCESS TO BUILDINGS.

Subject to the Constitution and the laws of the State of Michigan, the Building Official and/or his or her deputy shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building in this discharge of his or her official duties for the purpose of making any inspection or test of the installation of electrical wiring, plumbing devices and/or plumbing materials contained therein and shall have the authority to cause the turning off of all plumbing supply and to disconnect, in cases of emergency, any plumbing where such plumbing is dangerous to life or property or may interfere with the work of the Fire Department.

(B) PERMITS.

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install, alter, maintain, service or repair plumbing equipment in or on any building, structure or part thereof, or on premises or cause or permit therein or thereon the installation, altering, maintaining, servicing or repairing of any plumbing equipment without a permit having been obtained therefore as provided herein. {Ord. 304, 7-28-01}

26.04 ENFORCEMENT

The Michigan Plumbing Code as adopted herein shall be administered and enforced by the Village of Beverly Hills through its Plumbing Inspector appointed by the Village Council.

26.05 VIOLATIONS

Any building or structure erected, used, moved, demolished, occupied or maintained in violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se. Upon application to a court of competent jurisdiction, the court may order the nuisance abated or the violation, or threatened violation, restrained and enjoined. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall also subject the violator to the penalties set forth in Section 1.06.

Chapter 27 - Fire Prevention
CHAPTER 27 - FIRE PREVENTION
27.01 CODE ADOPTED
27.02 REFERENCES IN CODE
27.03 DEFINITIONS
27.04 FALSE FIRE ALARMS PROHIBITED
27.05 FIRE EQUIPMENT; INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED
27.06 FIRE HYDRANTS; OBSTRUCTION PROHIBITED
27.07 OPEN BURNING
27.08 THROWING HOT OR BURNING SUBSTANCES PROHIBITED
27.09 FIRE HYDRANTS; TAKING WATER PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION
27.10 UNDUE HARDSHIP; MODIFICATIONS OF PROVISIONS
27.11 STATE LAW, COMPLIANCE REQUIRED
27.12 PENALTIES

27.01. CODE ADOPTED. Pursuant to the provisions of the State Construction Code Act (Act 230 of 1972, MCLA 125.1501, et seq.) as amended, the National Fire Prevention Code, 1996 Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc. (BOCA), is hereby adopted by reference. Notice is hereby given that complete copies of the Code are available for public use and inspection at the office of the Village Clerk.{Ord. 287, 9-27-97} {Ord. 323, 9-30-06}.

27.02 REFERENCES IN CODE. References in the BOCA Code to "State" and "Michigan" shall mean the State of Michigan; references to "municipality" shall mean the Village of Beverly Hills; references to "local ordinances" shall mean ordinances of the Village of Beverly Hills.

27.03 DEFINITIONS. In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:

Building: Includes tanks, reservoirs or other receptacles for storage.

Fire Hazard: Means any building, or parts and accessories thereof, premises, place or material of any kind which, by reason of its nature, location, occupancy, condition or use may cause loss, damage, or injury to persons or property by reason of fire, explosion, or action of the elements.

Inspector: Means the Director of Public Safety or any member of the Public Safety Department designated by the Director to make inspections under this chapter.

Owner: Includes the executor, administrator, trustee or a board of trustees.

27.04 FALSE FIRE ALARMS PROHIBITED. It shall be unlawful for any person wilfully or designedly to give, assist in giving, countenance or request or cause to be given any false alarm of fire in any manner; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to members of the Public Safety Department or any person in making tests or repairs under the direction of the Director of Public Safety.

27.05 FIRE EQUIPMENT; INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED. It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, injure, molest, remove or otherwise interfere with any fire fighting apparatus or equipment of the Village.

27.06 FIRE HYDRANTS; OBSTRUCTION PROHIBITED. No person shall place anything or any object within fifteen feet (15') of any fire hydrant nor otherwise obstruct same.

27.07 OPEN BURNING. No person shall place or cause to be placed any ashes, clinkers, smoldering coal or embers or similar residue from any heating appliance in any other than metal or non-flammable containers, nor shall such ashes be piled against any combustible wall or partition or on any combustible floor; provided, however, that dead ashes may be placed in paper cartons or boxes when placed out of doors at the rear of the premises to await the pickup of such ashes and other debris. When such ashes are placed out of doors in containers as herein specified, such containers must be placed at least three feet (3') away from any wooden wall, fence, building or combustible material. {Ord. 323; 9-30-06}.

27.08 THROWING HOT OR BURNING SUBSTANCES PROHIBITED. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw hot or burning substances, or objects such as cigars, cigarettes, papers, matches, and ashes from any window or door of any building or from any moving vehicle.

27.09 FIRE HYDRANTS; TAKING WATER PROHIBITED, EXCEPTION. No person shall open or cause to be opened fire hydrant without first procuring a permit therefore from the Director of Public Safety, as provided in Section 7.16(b).

27.10 UNDUE HARDSHIP; MODIFICATIONS OF PROVISIONS. The Director of Public Safety shall have power to modify temporarily any of the provisions of this chapter upon the request of the owner or the occupants or the duly authorized agent of any premises when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this chapter, provided that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the Director shall be entered upon the inspection records of the department.

27.11 STATE LAW, COMPLIANCE REQUIRED. No person shall violate any state law nor any rule or regulation adopted by any duly authorized State agency or department relative to fire prevention.

27.12 PENALTIES. Any person violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and upon a finding of responsibility thereof shall be fined not exceeding $500.00 {Ord. 323; 9-30-06).

Chapter 28 - Mechanical Code
28.01 CODE ADOPTED
28.02 REFERENCES IN CODE
28.03 PURPOSE
28.04 SCOPE
28.05 FEES
28.06 VIOLATIONS
28.01 AGENCY DESIGNATED

Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Mechanical Code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the Building Official of the Village of Beverly Hills is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge responsibility of the Village of Beverly Hills under Act 230, of Public Acts of 1972, as amended, State of Michigan. The Village of Beverly Hills assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act throughout its corporate limits. .{Ord. 288, 9-27-97}{Ord. 305, 7-28-01}

28.02 CODE REFERENCED

rdinance shall be designed, constructed, installed, altered and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the State Code. This Code provides reasonable safeguards to the public health, safety and welfare as they are affected by the installation and/or maintenance of mechanical equipment. {Ord. 305, 7-28-01}

28.03 PURPOSE

This Code shall be construed liberally and justly to insure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the installation and maintenance of mechanical systems.

28.04 SCOPE

The design, installation, maintenance, alteration and inspection of mechanical systems, including heating systems, ventilating systems, cooling systems, steam and hot water heating systems, water heaters, process piping, boilers and pressure vessels, appliances utilizing gas, liquid or solid fuel, chimneys and vents, mechanical refrigeration systems, fireplaces, barbecues, incinerators, crematories, fire suppression systems and air pollution systems as herein defined shall comply with the requirements of this Code.

28.05 FEES

(A) FEES FOR INSPECTION.

When an application is made for a permit, license, or registration required under the terms of this Ordinance, a fee shall be paid in an amount as prescribed by Resolution of the Village of Beverly Hills Council.

(B) RIGHT OF ACCESS TO BUILDINGS.

Subject to the Constitution and the laws of the State of Michigan, the Building Official and/or his or her deputy shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building in this discharge of his or her official duties for the purpose of making any inspection or test of the installation of electrical wiring and mechanical equipment contained therein and shall have the authority to cause the turning off of all mechanical equipment and to disconnect, in cases of emergency, any mechanical equipment where such is dangerous to life or property or may interfere with the work of the Fire Department.

(C) PERMITS.

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install, alter, maintain, service or repair mechanical equipment in or on any building, structure or part thereof, or on premises or cause or permit therein or thereon the installation, altering, maintaining, servicing or repairing of any mechanical equipment without a permit having been obtained therefore as provided herein. {Ord. 305, 7-28-01}

28.06 VIOLATIONS

Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter, or repair mechanical equipment or systems in violation of an approved plan or directive of the mechanical official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not in excess of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not in excess of ninety (90) days or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court together with costs of prosecution. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.

Chapter 29 - International Property Maintenance Code
29.01 CODE ADOPTED
29.02 REFERENCES IN CODE
29.03 SAVINGS CLAUSE
29.04 SEVERABILITY CLAUSE
29.05 PENALTIES

29.01 CODE ADOPTED. That a certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the Village Clerk of the Village of Beverly Hills, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the Village of Beverly Hills, in the State of Michigan for regulating and governing the conditions of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the Clerk's office of the Village of Beverly Hills are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section 29.02 of this Ordinance.

29.02 REFERENCES IN CODE. The following sections are hereby revised:

Section 101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of the Village of Beverly Hills, hereinafter referred to as "this code".

Section 103.5. Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be as indicated in a schedule adopted by Village Council Resolution.

Section 302.4. Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of eight (8) inches in height. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens.

Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and destroy weeds after service of a notice of violation, they shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with Section 106.3 and as prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with the notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the property.

Section 304.14. Insect screens. During the period from April 1st to October 31st, every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.

Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.

Section 602.3. Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from October 1st to April 30th to maintain a temperature of not less than 68 degrees F (20 degrees C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms.

Exceptions:

1. When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code.

2. In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30 degrees F (-1 degree C) a minimum temperature of 65 degrees F (18 degrees C) shall be maintained.

Section 602.4. Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period from October 1st to April 30th to maintain a temperature of not less than 65 degrees F (18 degrees C) during the period the spaces are occupied.

Exceptions:

1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions.

2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities.

29.03 SAVINGS CLAUSE. That nothing in this Ordinance or in the Property Maintenance Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in Section 3.01 of this Ordinance; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this Ordinance.

29.04 SEVERABILITY CLAUSE. That if any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrse of this Ordinance is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance. The Village of Beverly Hills hereby declares that it would have passed this Ordinance, and each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof, respective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases to declared unconstitutional.

29.05 PENALTIES. Any persons violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and upon a finding of responsibility thereof shall be fined not exceeding $500.00. {Ord. 324, 11-15-06}

Chapter 30 - Surface Water Drainage
30.01 SURFACE WATER DRAINAGE REGULATIONS; ADMINISTRATION
30.02 ILLICIT DISCHARGE CONTROL
30.03 APPLICABILITY
30.04 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION
30.05 ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY
30.06 DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS
30.07 WASTE DISPOSAL PROHIBITIONS
30.08 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION
30.09 DISCHARGES IN VIOLATION OF INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY NPDES STORM WATER DISCHARGE PERMIT
30.10 MONITORING OF DISCHARGES
30.11 NOTICE OF VIOLATION
30.12 REQUIREMENT TO REMEDIATE
30.13 APPEAL

30.01 SURFACE WATER DRAINAGE REGULATIONS; ADMINISTRATION
(a) Surface water drainage matters in Beverly Hills shall be administered by the Village, Oakland County Health Department (herein referred to as WCHD), and the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (herein referred to as MDEQ). The Village Engineer and/or its Engineering Consultant shall review and comment on said drainage plans.
(b) This Chapter applies to all residential and commercial areas in the Village of Beverly Hills.
30.02  ILLICIT DISCHARGE CONTROL
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the Village of Beverly Hills and protect all water bodies within the Village and the Great Lakes through the regulation of illicit discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system as required by federal and state law. This Chapter establishes methods of controlling the discharge of pollutants into the Municipal separate storm sewer system owned or operated by the Village of Beverly Hills in order to comply with the requirements of the Clean Water Act and State of Michigan National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) Permit program. The objectives of this Chapter are: (a) to regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system associated with discharges from any user of the municipal separate storm sewer system. (b) To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. (c) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this Chapter.

(2) Definitions. For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions are applicable:

Authorized agency means employees or designees of the director or directors of the municipal agency or agencies of the Village of Beverly Hills designated to administer or enforce this Chapter.

Illicit connection means any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows the discharge of sanitary waste to the municipal separate storm sewer system and any connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system from indoor drains and sinks.

Illicit discharge means any discharge to a municipal separate storm sewer that is not composed entirely of storm water except discharges authorized by an NPDES permit or other discharges authorized by the Village and MDEQ.

Municipal separate storm sewer or MS4 means a conveyance or systems of conveyances including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels or storm drains which meets the following criteria:

(1) Owned or operated by the Village of Beverly Hills.
(2) Designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water.
(3) Which is not a combined sewer conveying both sanitary wastewater and storm water.
(4) Which is not part of publicly owned wastewater treatment works that provides secondary or more stringent treatment.

Non-storm water discharge means any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of storm water.

Storm Water means surface runoff and drainage of rainfall and snow or ice melt.

Waters of the State means those portions of the Rouge River and the Great Lakes within the boundaries of Michigan, all lakes, bays, rivers, streams, springs, ponds, well, impounding reservoirs, marshes, water courses, drainage systems and other surface water or groundwater, natural or artificial, public or private within the state or under its jurisdiction, except those waters which are entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a person.

30.03 APPLICABILITY

This Chapter shall apply to all discharges to the MS4 and to all activities that can reasonably be expected to result in a discharge to the MS4.

30.04 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION

The Village of Beverly Hills shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this Chapter.  Any powers granted or duties imposed by this Chapter upon the authorized agency may be delegated by the Village to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the Village.

30.05 ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY

The standards set forth herein and promulgated to this Chapter are minimum standards; therefore, this Chapter does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution nor unauthorized discharges.

30.06 DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS

(1) Prohibition of Illicit Discharges.

No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the MS4 or waters of the State of any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than storm water. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illicit discharge to the MS4 is prohibited. The following categories are prohibited non-stormwater discharges if identified as significant contributors of pollutants to the Villages MS4:

1. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources

2. Landscape irrigation runoff, lawn watering runoff, and irrigation waters

3. Diverted stream flows and flows from riparian habitats and wetlands

4. Rising groundwaters and springs

5. Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration and seepage

6. Uncontaminated pumped groundwater, except for groundwater cleanups specifically authorized by NPDES permits

7. Foundation drains, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, and basement sump pumps

8. Air conditioning condensation

9. Waters from noncommercial car washing

10. Street wash water

11. Dechlorinated swimming pool water from single, two, or three family residences.

(2) Prohibition of Illicit Connections.
(a) The construction, use maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the MS4 is prohibited.
(b) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
(c) A person is considered to be in violation of this Chapter if the person connects a line conveying sanitary waste in the MS4 or allows such a connection to continue.
(d) If, subsequent to eliminating a connection found to be in violation of this Article, the responsible person can demonstrate that an illegal discharge will no longer occur, said person may request Village approval to reconnect. The reconnection or reinstallation of the connection shall be at the responsible person's expense.

30.07 WASTE DISPOSAL PROHIBITIONS

No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, left, or maintained, in or upon any public or private property, driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, component of the storm drain system, or waters of the State, any refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution. Wastes deposited in streets in proper waste receptacles for the purposes of collection are exempted from this prohibition.

30.08 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION

Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property reasonably free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. The owner or lessee shall not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that actually necessary for maintenance, nor remove said vegetation in such a manner as to increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion. The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining and stabilizing that portion of the watercourse that is within their property lines in order to protect against erosion and degradation of the watercourse originating or contributed from their property.

30.09 DISCHARGES IN VIOLATION OF INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY NPDES STORM WATER DISCHARGE PERMIT

Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the Public Works Director prior to or as a condition of a subdivision map, site plan, building permit, or development or improvement plan; upon inspection of the facility; during any enforcement proceeding or action; or for any other reasonable cause.

30.10 MONITORING OF DISCHARGES

Access to Facilities

The authorized agency shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this Chapter as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this Chapter. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized agency. During any inspection as provided herein, the authorized agency may take any samples and perform any testing deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or to record site activities.

Notification of Spills

Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, the MS4, or water of the state, said personal shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release.  In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services.  In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day.  Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the authorized agency within three business days of the phone notice.

30.11 NOTICE OF VIOLATION

Whenever the Village finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this Article, the Village may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person.  Such notice may require without limitation:

a. The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;

b. The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;

c. That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;

d. The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and

e. Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and

f. The implement of source control or treatment BMPs.

30.12 REQUIREMENT TO REMEDIATE

Whenever the Village finds that a discharge of pollutants or illicit connection is taking place or has occurred which will result in or has resulted in pollution of storm water, the storm drain system, or water of the United States, the Village may require by written notice to the owner of the property and/or the responsible person that the pollution be remediated and the affected property restored within 120 days of notification.

30.13 APPEAL

Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 14 below, any person receiving a Notice of Violation under Section 11 above may appeal the determination of the Village Manager.  The notice of appeal must be received by the Village Manager within 5 days from the date of the Notice of Violation.  Hearing on the appeal before the Village Manager or his/her designee shall take place within 15 days from the date of Villages receipt of the notice of appeal.  The decision of the Village Manager or designee shall be final.

30.14 ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES AND REMEDIES

a. Penalties.  Any person(s) violating any provision of this Ordinance shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. {Entire Chapter Added Ord. 352; 10-11-14}

Chapter 32 - Solicitors
32.01 PURPOSE
32.02 DEFINITIONS
32.03 LICENSE REQUIRED
32.04 LICENSE APPLICATION
32.05 ADMINISTRATIVE FEE
32.06 LICENSE SUSPENSION
32.07 LICENSE REVOCATION
32.08 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES
32.09 HOURS OF OPERATION
32.10 EXEMPT PERSONS
32.11 LIST OF PERSONS NOT WANTING TO BE SOLICITED
32.12 PENALTY
32.01 PURPOSE

The Village Council having determined that it is in the best interest of the Village of Beverly Hills to enact an ordinance regulating organizations and persons soliciting in the Village and the enactment of the ordinance being necessary to promote and protect the public safety of those persons soliciting as well as those persons in the Village being solicited.

32.02 DEFINITIONS

The following words and terms shall have the following definitions for the purposes of this ordinance:

Person: An individual, organization, group, association, partnership, corporation, trust, business entity or any combination of the above.

Seasonal License: A seasonal license shall be available for not more than 120 days for the solicitation or sale of seasonal items, such as dairy products, vegetables, poultry, eggs, and other farm and garden produce. No more than five seasonal licenses shall be available in the Village at any one time. {Ord 327; 12-1-07}

Soliciting Material: Printed or similar materials including, but not limited to, labels, posters, brochures, flyers, pamphlets, magazines, booklets, books and other like items used in the course of and for the purpose of soliciting.

Solicitor:

1. A person who solicits either by foot, automobile, motor truck or other means if conveyance from place to place, from house to house or within a public right-of-way.

2. A person who hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, hotel, room, shop or any other place for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples or soliciting material and taking orders for future delivery.

3. The word solicitor shall include, but not be limited to, the words peddler and hawker.

Solicits: The act of offering or attempting to offer wares, merchandise, services, items of personal property, real property, either for immediate or future delivery; or the act of seeking or attempting to seek contributions either in money or services, for charitable or commercial purposes.

32.03 LICENSE REQUIRED

No person shall be a solicitor and/or solicit in the Village of Beverly Hills without first obtaining a license therefor. An application for a license shall be made to the Village Clerk. In the event that the application is a made by an organization, group, association, partnership, corporation, trust, business entity or any combination of the above, an application must be made for each agent or employee who shall be engaging in the act of soliciting. Upon certification by the Village of Beverly Hills Public Safety Department to the Village Clerk that the requirements of Section 32.03 have been satisfied, after investigation and after receipt of payment for applicable fees, the license shall be issued by the Village Clerk. The license shall be displayed on the outer garments of the licensee at all times during solicitations. The term of a license shall be for one (1) year, expiring December 31.

32.04 LICENSE APPLICATION

A license application filed hereunder shall furnish the following information:

(a) Name and description of the applicant.

(b) Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant.

(c) A brief description of the nature of the solicitation contemplated.

(d) If the applicant is an employee of a person engaged in soliciting, the name and address of the employer, together with the credentials establishing the exact employer/employee relationship.

(e) The length of time the applicant intends to solicit.

(f) The place of the wares, merchandise, services, items of personal property or real property are located, manufactured or produced, where such items are located at the time said application is filled and the proposed method of delivery.

(g) Two photographs of the applicant, one photograph being a photograph taken within 120 days prior to the date of filing of the application and the other photograph being from the applicant's driver's license, a copy of said driver's license to be attached to the applicant's application. The photograph which is not from the applicant's driver's license shall be at least 2" x 2" and shall show the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. In the event that the applicant does not have a driver's license then the applicant shall submit a second separate photograph with his application, said photograph being at least 2" x 2" and showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner.

(h) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any felony, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.

32.05 ADMINISTRATIVE FEE

An administrative processing fee for a solicitor's license shall be established by resolution of the Village Council and said administrative processing fee shall be paid when the application is filed with the Village.

32.06 LICENSE SUSPENSION

A license may be suspended by the Village Clerk for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days upon his or her own investigation or upon certification by the Village of Beverly Hills Public Safety Department that:

(a) A licensee has provided false information on an application; or

(b) A licensee has engaged in conduct in violation of this Chapter or of the criminal laws of Village, State, or United States.

A licensee shall be given written notice of the cause and term of the suspension and of the right to have such suspension reversed, modified or affirmed following a hearing to be conducted by the Village Manager or his designee (who shall not be a member of the Village Clerk's office) within three (3) business days of receipt of a written request by the licensee. At the hearing, the licensee shall have the right to hear the evidence relied upon by the Clerk and the right to present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf. After the hearing, the Village Manager or his designee shall issue a decision in writing and forward the same to the Clerk and licensee.

32.07 LICENSE REVOCATION

A license may be revoked by the Village Council upon request of the Village Clerk after a hearing at which it is shown that:

(a) A license has provided false information on an application; or

(b) A license has violated the terms of a suspension; or

(c) A license has engaged in conduct in violation of this Chapter or of the criminal laws of the Village, State or United States.

Reasonable written notice of the hearing not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing date shall be given the licensee. The written notice shall be mailed by regular mail to the license holder and shall set forth the alleged violation of the ordinance and also the date, time and place of the hearing before the Village Council. At the hearing, the license holder shall have the right to present evidence and witnesses on his behalf. After the hearing, Village Council shall make its decision as to whether to suspend or revoke the license and shall put its decision and the reasons therefor in writing and forward the same to the license holder.

32.08 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES

The following acts or activities shall be prohibited:

(a) Fixed stands prohibited. No solicitor shall establish a fixed stand and/or store for solicitation upon any street, road, highway, lane, sidewalk, driveway, alley or publicly owned property.

(b) Street and curb solicitation prohibited. No solicitor shall on more than three (3) days per calendar year solicit and/or operate or maintain any place of solicitation on any street, road, highway and/or lane and/or be permitted to use the sidewalks, curbs, road's edge, alleys and/or driveways for soliciting in any manner that requires the person wishing to respond to the solicitor, when engaged in the transaction, to stand within the limits of the streets, roads, highways and/or lanes of the Village. All solicitors soliciting on any street, road, highway and/or lane on the three (3) permitted days per calendar year shall wear a safety vest approved by the Village and shall also obtain a solicitation license as required by this ordinance.

(c) Obstruction prohibited. No solicitor shall obstruct any street, road, highway, lane, alley, sidewalk or driveway.

(d) Prohibition of entry upon private property expressly requesting no solicitation. No solicitor shall enter upon and/or call upon a place of residence or business within the Village after having been expressly notified by the occupant of the place of residence or business or by a sign posted on the door facing the street of the residence or business that no solicitation is desired.

(e) Prohibition of harassment or creation of nuisance. No solicitor shall threaten or harass any resident of the Village in the course of their solicitation or in any way engage in any conduct which is or would tend to create a nuisance.

(f) Sales and/or solicitations may be allowed with a seasonal license issued by the Village of Beverly Hills as defined in the Definitions Section herein. Each person shall be issued only one seasonal license per calendar year. {Ord. 327; 12-1-07}

32.09 HOURS OF OPERATION

Soliciting may take place within the Village only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. {Ord. 327; 12-1-07}

32.10 EXEMPT PERSONS

The following persons shall be exempt from the licensing requirements of this ordinance, but shall be subject to the other provisions herein:

(a) Persons engaged in the occupation of distribution of newspapers.

(b) Persons engaged in soliciting within three (3) miles from their residence for an educational, charitable, religious or youth organization.

32.11 LIST OF PERSONS NOT WANTING TO BE SOLICITED

Any person who owns and/or occupies a residence and/or business in Village of Beverly Hills who does not wish to have solicitors enter upon and/or call upon the residence or business to solicit may inform the Village Clerk's office of the same in writing and the Village Clerk's office shall keep on file a list of the addresses of those persons that do not want solicitors to enter upon and/or call upon their residence and/or place of business. A list of addresses of those persons not wanting solicitors to enter upon and/or call upon their residence and/or place of business shall be given to each person who files an application for a solicitation license in Village of Beverly Hills.

32.12 PENALTY

Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 plus costs of prosecution or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both fine and costs and imprisonment in the discretion of the court.

Chapter 33 - Handbill Distribution
33.01 DEFINITIONS
33.02 DISTRIBUTING HANDBILLS IN PUBLIC PLACES
33.03 PLACING IN VEHICLES
33.04 DISTRIBUTION AT VACANT PREMISES
33.05 DISTRIBUTION WHERE PROPERLY POSTED
33.06 DISTRIBUTION ON INHABITED PRIVATE PREMISES
33.07 IDENTIFICATION OF PRINTER AND DISTRIBUTOR
33.08 OFFENSIVE HANDBILLS
33.09 VIOLATIONS
33.01 DEFINITIONS

Terms used in this chapter have the following meanings:

Commercial handbill: Any printed or written matter, and sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature:

1. Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or thing; or

2. Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interests thereof by sales; or

3. Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertising or distributor.

Newspaper: Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United States, in accordance with federal statute and regulation, and any a newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not let less than four (4) issues per year, and sold to the public.

Non commercial handbill: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a sign, or a commercial handbill, or a newspaper with the exception of political and religious literature.

Private premises: Any dwelling, house, building, or other structure designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building, or other structure.

Public place: Any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys, or other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, plazas, grounds and buildings.

33.02 DISTRIBUTING HANDBILLS IN PUBLIC PLACES

It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial handbill in or upon any public place within this Village; and it shall be also unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public place. It shall not be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof any non-commercial handbill in any public place to any person willing to accept such non-commercial handbill.

33.03 PLACING IN VEHICLES

It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter, or cast any commercial or non commercial handbill in or upon any automobile or other vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handing, transmitting or distributing of any non commercial handbill to the owner or other occupant of any automobile or other vehicle who is willing to accept the same.

33.04 DISTRIBUTION AT VACANT PREMISES

It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or non commercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.

33.05 DISTRIBUTION WHERE PROPERLY POSTED

It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter, or cast any commercial or non-commercial handbill upon any premises if requested by anyone thereon not to do so or if there is placed on said premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisements," "No Handbills," or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of said premises do not desire to be molested or to have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises. It shall be the duty of the owner, landlord or person in control of any premises remaining vacant for a period of more than five (5) days to post in a conspicuous position on the premises such sign as is indicated by this section. The term vacant as used herein shall not be deemed to include temporary absences from the premises by its regular occupants.

33.06 DISTRIBUTUION ON INHABITED PRIVATE PREMISES

No person shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or non commercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant, or any other person then present in or upon such private premises which are not posted as provided in this chapter. The aforesaid person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or elsewhere, except that mailboxes may not be used when so prohibited by federal postal laws or regulations.

33.07 IDENTIFICATION OF PRINTER AND DISTRIBUTOR

It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, scatter, hand out or circulate any commercial or non-commercial handbill in any place, under any circumstances, which does not have printed on the cover, front or back thereof, the name and address of the following:

(a) The person who printed, wrote, compiled or manufactured the same.

(b) The person who caused the same to be distributed; provided, however, that in the case of a fictitious person or club, in addition to such fictitious name, the true name and address of the owners, manager or agents of the person sponsoring said handbill shall also appear thereon.

Exemptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers.

33.08 OFFENSIVE HANDBILLS

It shall be unlawful for any person to post, to handout, distribute or transmit any sign, or any commercial or non commercial handbill:

(a) Which may reasonably tend to incite riot or other public disorder, or which advocates disloyalty to or the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by means of any artifice, scheme, or violence, or which urges any unlawful conduct, or encourages or tends to encourage a breach of the public peace or good order of the community; or

(b) Which is offensive to public morals or decency, or which contains blasphemous, obscene, libelous or scurrilous language.

33.09 VIOLATIONS

Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall subject the violator to the penalties set forth in Section 1.06.

Chapter 35 - Outdoor Gatherings
35.01 DEFINITIONS
35.02 LICENSE REQUIRED
35.03 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE
35.04 DETAILED PLANS
35.05 APPLICATION FILED
35.06 COUNCIL ACTION
35.07 DENIAL OF LICENSE
35.08 LICENSE FORM
35.09 CONDITIONS FOR LICENSE AND REGULATIONS
35.10 REVOCATION OF LICENSE
35.11 VIOLATIONS
35.12 GARAGE SALES
35.01 DEFINITIONS

Terms used in this chapter mean as follows:

Attendant: Any person who obtains admission to an outdoor assembly by the payment of money or by the rendering of services in lieu of the payment of money for admission

Garage sale: A sale of used household effects and personal property, appliances, clothing, china, glassware, tools, toys, garden implements, recreation equipment and other such items by a person from a person's residence by means of display of such items in the yard, garage, patio, parking area or other like place in, around or near such residence. "Garage sale" also means an estate sale and/or auction conducted at or around a residence or in a residential subdivision. "Garage sale" shall not mean the sale of a single automobile by means of a "For Sale" sign in the window of such vehicle parked at or near the residence. {Ord. 340; 7-12-12}

Licensee: Any person to whom a license is issued pursuant to this chapter.

Outdoor Assembly: Hereinafter referred to as "assembly" means any event, attended by more than three hundred (300) persons attendant, all or any part of which includes a theatrical exhibition, public show, display, entertainment, amusement or other exhibition, including, but not limited to musical festivals, rock festivals, peace festivals, or similar gatherings, but does not mean:

1. An event which is conducted or sponsored by a governmental unit or agency or publicly owned land or property; or

2. An event which is conducted or sponsored by any entity qualifying for tax exempt status under Section 501 (c) (3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, being 26 U.S.C. Section 501 (c) (3), as incorporated by reference in Section 201 of the Michigan Income Tax Act of 1967, Act 281 of the Public Acts of 1967, being Section 206.201 of the Compiled Laws of 1948; or

3. An event held entirely within the confines of a permanently enclosed and covered structure.

Salesmens or free samples: Items which were packaged and designed to introduce products to consumers and which were distributed by salesmen or otherwise without charge. {Ord. 340; 7-20-12}

Sponsor: Any person who organizes, promotes, conducts, or causes to be conducted an outdoor assembly.

Wholesale: Sales in bulk or individually to dealers or persons who intend to resell such items. {Ord. 340; 7-20-12}

35.02 LICENSE REQUIRED

A person shall not sponsor, operate, maintain, conduct or promote an outdoor assembly in the Village of Beverly Hills unless he shall have first made application for, and obtained as hereinafter prescribed, a license for each such assembly.

35.03 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE

Application for a license to conduct an outdoor assembly must be made in writing on such forms and in such manner as prescribed by the village Clerk and shall be made at least sixty (60) days prior to date of the proposed assembly. Each application shall be accompanied by a non refundable fee of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) and shall include at least the following:

1. The name, age residence and mailing address of the person making the application. Where the person making the application is a partnership, corporation or other association, this information shall be provided for all partners, officers and directors or members. Where the person is a corporation, a copy of the articles of incorporation shall be filed, and the names and addresses shall be provided of all shareholders having financial interest greater than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).

2. A statement of the kind, character, and type of proposed assembly.

3. The address, legal description and proof of ownership of the site at which the proposed assembly is to be conducted. Where ownership is not vested in the prospective licensee, he shall submit an affidavit from the owner indicating his consent to the use of the site for the proposed assembly.

4. The date or dates and hours during which the proposed assembly is to be conducted.

5. An estimate of the maximum number of persons attendant expected at the assembly for each day it is conducted and a detailed explanation of the evidence of admission which will be used and of the sequential number of other method which will be used for accounting purposes.

35.04 DETAILED PLANS

Each application shall be accompanied by a detailed explanation, including drawings and diagrams where applicable, of the prospective licensee's plans to provide for the following:

1. Police and fire protection.

2. Food and water supply and facilities.

3. Health and sanitation facilities.

4. Medical facilities and services including emergency vehicles and equipment.

5. Vehicle access and parking facilities.

6. Camping and trailer facilities.

7. Illumination facilities.

8. Communications facilities.

9. Noise control and abatement.

10. Facilities for clean-up and waste disposal.

11. Insurance and bonding arrangements.

In addition, the application shall be accompanied by a map or maps of the overall site of the proposed assembly.

35.05 APPLICATION FILED

On receipt by the Clerk, copies of application shall be forwarded to the Director of Public Safety and Health Officer for the Village, the State Fire Marshal, and to such other appropriate public officials as the Clerk deems necessary. Such officials shall review and investigate matters relevant to the application and within twenty (20) days of receipt thereof shall report their findings and recommendations to the Village Council.

35.06 COUNCIL ACTION

Within thirty (30) days of the filing of the application, the Council shall issue, set conditions prerequisite to the issuance of, or deny a license. The Council may require that adequate security or insurance be provided before a license is issued. Where conditions are imposed as prerequisite to the issuance of a license, or where a license is denied, within five (5) days of such action, notice thereof must be mailed to the applicant by certified mail, and in the case of denial, the reasons therefore shall be stated in the notice.

35.07 DENIAL OF LICENSE

A license may be denied if:

1. The applicant fails to comply with any or all requirements of this chapter, or with any or all conditions imposed pursuant hereto, or with any other applicable provision of state or local law; or

2. The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement in the application or in any supporting document.

35.08 LICENSE FORM

A license shall specify the name and address of the licensee, and the kind and location of the assembly, the maximum number of persons attendant permissible, the duration of the license and any other conditions imposed pursuant to this chapter. It shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises of the assembly and shall not be transferred to any other person or location.

35.09 CONDITIONS FOR LICENSE AND REGULATIONS

In processing an application the Council shall, at a minimum, required the following:

(a) Security Personnel. The licensee shall employ at his own expense such security personnel as are necessary and sufficient to provide for the adequate security and protection of the maximum number of persons attendant at the assembly and for the preservation of order and protection of property in and around the site of the assembly. No license shall be issued unless the Director of Public Safety in cooperation with the Direction of State Police is satisfied that such necessary and sufficient security personnel will be provided by the licensee for the duration of the assembly.

(b) Water Facilities. The licensee shall provide potable water sufficient in quantity and pressure to assure proper operation of all water using facilities under conditions of peak demand. Such water shall be supplied from a public water system, if available, and if not available, then from a source constructed, located, and approved in accordance with act 294, Public Acts of 1965, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law, or from a source and delivered and stored in a manner approved by the Village Health Officer.

(c) Rest Room Facilities. The licensee shall provide separate enclosed flush-type water closets as defined in Act 266, Public Acts of 1929, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto and in accordance with any other applicable State or local law. If such flush-type facilities are not available, the Village Health Officer may permit the use of other facilities which are in compliance with Act 273, Public Acts of 1939, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable State or local law.

The licensee shall provide lavatory and drinking water facilities constructed, installed, and maintained in accordance with Act 266 of the Public Acts of 1929, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable State or local law. All lavatories shall be provided with hot and cold water and soap and paper towels.

The number and type of facilities required shall be determined on the basis of the number in attendance, in the following manner:

Facilities Male Female

Toilets 1:300 1:200
Urinals 1:100 
Lavatories 1:200 1:200
Drinking fountains 1:500
Taps or faucets 1:500

Where the assembly is to continue for more than twelve (12) hours, the licensee shall provide shower facilities, on the basis of the number in attendance, in the following manner:

Facilities Male Female

Shower heads 1:100 1:100

All facilities shall be installed, connected, and maintained free from obstructions, leaks and defects and shall at all times be in operable condition as determined by the Village Health Officer.

(d) Food Service. If food service is made available on the premises, it shall be delivered only through concessions licensed and operated in accordance with the provisions of Act 269, Public Acts of 1968, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law.

If the assembly is distant from food service establishments open to the public, the licensee shall make such food services available on the premises as will adequately feed the attendance.

(e) Medical Facilities. If the assembly is not readily and quickly accessible to adequate existing medical facilities, the licensee shall be required to provide such facilities on the premises of the assembly. The kind, location, staff strength, medical and other supplies and equipment of such facilities shall be as prescribed by the Village Health Officer.

(f) Liquid Waste Disposal. The licensee shall provide for liquid waste disposal in accordance with all rules and regulations pertaining thereto established by the Village of Beverly Hills Health Officer. If such rules and regulations are not available or if they are inadequate, then liquid waste disposal shall be in accordance with the United States Public Health Service Publication No. 526, entitle, "Manual of Septic Tank Practice." If liquid waste retention and disposal is dependent upon pumpers and haulers, they shall be licensed in accordance with Act 243, Public Acts of 1951, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law, and, prior to issuance of any licensee, the licensee shall provide the Village Health Officer with a true copy of an executed agreement in force and effect with a licensed pumper or hauler, which agreement will assure proper, effective and frequent removal of liquid waste from the premises so as to neither create nor cause a nuisance or menace to the public health.

(g) Solid Waste Disposal. The licensee shall provide for solid waste storage on, and removal from the premises. Storage shall be in approved, covered, fly-tight and rodent-proof containers, provided in sufficient quantity to accommodate the number of attendants. prior to issuance of any license, the licensee shall provide the Village Health Officer with a true copy of an executed agreement in force and effect with a licensed refuse collector, which agreement will assure proper, effective and frequent removal of solid waste from the premises so as to neither create nor cause a nuisance or menace to the public health.

The licensee shall implement effective control measures to minimize the presence of rodents, flies, roaches and other vermin on the premises, Poisonous materials, such as insecticides or rodenticides shall not be used in any way so as to contaminate food, equipment, or otherwise constitute a hazard to the public health. Solid waste containing food waste shall be stored so as to be inaccessible to vermin. The premises shall be kept in such condition as to prevent the harborage or feed of vermin.

(h) Public Bathing Beaches. The licensee shall provide or make available or accessible public bathing beaches only in accordance with Act 218, Public Acts of 1967, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable provision of state or local law.

(i) Public Swimming Pools. The licensee shall provide or make available public swimming pools only in accordance with Act 230, Public Acts of 1966, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable provision of state or local law.

(j) Access and Traffic Control. The licensee shall provide for ingress to and egress from the premises so as to insure the orderly flow of traffic onto and off of the premises. Access to the premises shall be directly from a highway or road which is a part of the county system of highways or which is a highway maintained by the State of Michigan. Traffic lanes and other space shall be provided, designated and kept open for access by ambulance, fire equipment, helicopter and other emergency vehicles. Prior to the issuance of a license, the Director of Public Safety, the Director of the Department of State Police and the Director of the Department of State Highways must approve the licensee's plan for access and traffic control.

(k) Parking. The licensee shall provide a parking area sufficient to accommodate all motor vehicles, but in no case shall he provide less than one (1) automobile space for every four (4) persons attendant.

(l) Camping and Trailer Parking. A licensee who permits attendants to remain on the premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall provide for camping and trailer parking and facilities in accordance with Act 171, Public Acts of 1970, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable provision by state or local law.

(m) Illumination. The licensee shall provide electrical illumination of all occupied areas sufficient to insure the safety and comfort of all attendants. The licensee's lighting plan shall be approved by the Director of Public Safety.

(n) Insurance. Before the issuance of a license, the licensee shall obtain public liability insurance with limits of not less than $100,000/$300,000 and property damage insurance with a limit of not less than $50,000 from a company or companies approved by the Commissioner of Insurance of the State of Michigan, which insurance shall insure liability for death or injury to persons or damage to property which may result from the conduct of the assembly or conduct incident thereto and which insurance shall remain in full force and effect in the specified amounts for the duration of the license. The evidence of insurance shall include an endorsement to the effect that the insurance company shall notify the Village clerk in writing at least ten (10) days before the expiration or cancellation of said insurance.

(o) Bonding. Before the issuance of a license the licensee shall obtain, from a corporate bonding company authorized to do business in Michigan, a corporate surety bond in the amount of up to Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000), to be approved by the Village Council; the exact amount shall be set by the council, conditioned upon the licensee's faithful compliance with all of the terms and provisions of this chapter and all applicable provisions of state or local law, and which shall indemnify the Village of Beverly Hills, its agents, officers, and employees and the Council against any and all its agents, officers, and employees and the Council against any and all loss, injury or damage whatever arising out of or in any way connected with the assembly site for any costs attributable to cleaning up and/or removing debris, trash, or other waste resultant from the assembly.

(p) Fire Protection. The licensee shall, at his own expense, take adequate steps as determined by the Director of Public Safety, to insure fire protection.

(q) Sound Equipment. Sound producing equipment, including but not limited to public address systems, radios, phonographs, musical instruments and other recording devices, shall not be operated on the premises of the assembly so as to be unreasonably loud or raucous, or so as to be a nuisance or disturbance to the peace and tranquility of the citizens of the Village of Beverly Hills.

(r) Fencing. The licensee shall erect a fence completely enclosing the site, of sufficient height and strength as will preclude persons in excess of the maximum permissible attendance from gaining access and which will have sufficient gates properly located so as to provide ready and safe ingress and egress.

(s) Communications. The licensee shall provide public telephone equipment for general use on the basis of at least one (1) unit for each thousand (1,000) persons attendant.

(t) Miscellaneous. Prior to the issuance of a license, the Council may impose any other conditions reasonably calculated to protect the health, safety, welfare and property of persons attendant or of citizens of the Village of Beverly Hills.

35.10 REVOCATION OF LICENSE

The Council may revoke a license whenever the licensee, his employee or agent fails, neglects or refuses to fully comply with any and all provisions and requirements set forth herein or with any and all provisions, regulations, ordinances, statutes, or other law incorporated herein by reference.

35.11 VIOLATIONS

(a) It shall be unlawful for a licensee, his employee, or agent, to knowingly:

1. Advertise, promote or sell tickets to, conduct, or operate an assembly with first obtaining a license as herein provided.

2. Conduct or operate an assembly in such a manner as to create a public or private nuisance.

3. Conduct or permit, within the assembly, any obscene display exhibition, show, play, entertainment or amusement.

4. Permit any person on the premises to cause or create a disturbance in, around, or near the assembly by obscene or disorderly conduct.

5. Permit any person to unlawfully consume, sell, or possess intoxicating liquor while on the premises.

6. Permit any person to unlawfully use, sell or possess any narcotics, narcotic drugs, drugs or other substances as defined in Act 343, Public Acts of 1952.

(b) Any of the above enumerated violations is a separate offense, is a nuisance per se immediately enjoinable in the Circuit Court and, is punishable by imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than ninety (90) days, or by a fine of not more than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00), or by both such fine and imprisonment together with the costs of the prosecution.

(c) It is further provided that any of the above violations is a sufficient basis for revocation of the license and for the immediate enjoining in the Circuit Court of the assembly.

35.12  GARAGE SALES  {Ord 340; 7-20-12}

(a) Purpose and Intent.It is the intent of this section to regulate, control and limit the holding of garage sales, as they may become nuisances and safety hazards if not so regulated, and so that residential areas do not become commercialized through a proliferation of garage sales and similar commercial activities.

(b) Restriction, Number and Duration

1. There shall be no more than two (2) garage sales at any residence within any one (1) calendar year, not including any village wide garage sales.

2. No garage sale may last more than three consecutive days.

3. Garage sales shall only be conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.

4. Permit Required  A homeowner or occupant shall first obtain a permit from the Village Clerk before conducting any garage sale.  There shall be a nominal fee as stated in the Village Schedule of Fees for the issuance of the permit.

(b) Sales Limitations

1. No wholesale sales shall be made at any garage sale.

2. No salesman shall be permitted to sell and no free samples or similar items shall be sold at any garage sale.

3. Garage sales shall be limited to sales of items which have actually been used during the normal course of residential living at the residence at which the sale is to occur and items shall not be transported to such residence. 

(c) Garage Sale Not To Create Nuisance

1. No garage sale shall be situated so as to obstruct traffic, nor shall any garage sale patrons park their vehicles so as to obstruct traffic.

2. No signs advertising a garage sale regulated by this chapter shall be placed on public property, utility poles or on private property without the express consent of the owner.  Within twenty-four (24) hours after the conclusion of a garage sale all signs shall be removed.

(d) Exemptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to sales and/or charity bazaars held by churches or other houses of worship, schools and/or service organizations that are located in residential zoning districts provided that the sales and/or charity bazaars are held by the church or other house of worship, school or service organization, on their own property and provided that said sales and/or charity bazaars comply with all other requirements of the Village of Beverly Hills Village Code, including, but not limited to, the Village of Beverly Hills Zoning Ordinance.

(e) Penalty. Any person, persons or entity violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction.

Chapter 36 - Amusement Devices, Mechanical and Electrical
36.01 PURPOSE
36.02 DEFINITIONS
36.03 LICENSE
36.04 INSPECTIONS
36.05 PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS
36.06 EXCEPTIONS
36.07 PENALTY
36.01 PURPOSE

Mechanical and electronic amusement devices shall be licensed and regulated for the general welfare of the residents.

36.02 DEFINITIONS

(a) As used herein, mechanical amusement device shall mean any machine or device, mechanical or electronic, containing no automatic payoff device, which may, on insertion of coin, slug or card, operate or be operated or used as a game or contest, and which is so constructed that it may not be converted into an automatic payoff device, for the return or discharge of money, tokens, or coins, or merchandise, or which provides no such payoff by any means whatsoever. The term mechanical amusement device shall also mean any machine or device, mechanical or electronic described in preceding sentence, which is operated without the necessity of inserting a coin or card to make it operate, but for which an admission is charged to use the machine or device or to enter the room(s) where the machine or device is located in order to use the machine or device.

(b) Person includes any natural person, or association of persons, or other legal entity.

36.03 LICENSE

It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain, control or operate within the Village mechanical amusement device, as defined in this chapter, without having procured a license.

(a) Person required to obtain a license. The "person" required to obtain a license is the owner or lessee of the premises who is, or should be, in control and/or supervision of any mechanical amusement devices located on the premises; it is the person who is directly, or should be directly, supervising the day-to-day operation of the establishment. The owner and/or lessee of the premises, and the owner(s) and lessee(s) of each mechanical amusement device shall be construed as establishing, maintaining, controlling or operating any mechanical amusement device if no license has been procured, but the owner(s) and lessee(s) shall be relieved of that responsibility and the effect of this subsection if, and only if, the person in charge and responsible for obtaining a license as defined herein, has actually obtained a license.

(b) Application. Application for a license to operate mechanical amusement devices shall be made to the Village Clerk, in writing, and verified, on a form such as may be determined by the Village Clerk, and shall contain the following information:

1. Name and address of applicant; if applicant is other than a natural person, then the nature of the entity and the names and addresses of all those having an ownership interest in the entity.

2. Address of proposed establishment where licensed activity will be maintained.

3. Number of mechanical amusement devices to be operated in the licensed establishment.

4. Age of applicant or applicants.

5. Length of applicant's residence within this State.

6. Whether applicant has ever been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude.

(c) Proof of Insurance. Before the issuance of a license, the applicant shall secure and file with the Village Clerk Certificates of Proof of Insurance providing the single limits public general of at least Three Hundred Thousand Dollars ($300,000.00) per person and certificates or renewals thereof shall provide that the Village shall be notified upon discontinuance or alteration of any such insurance coverage for any reason.

(d) Check of Any Criminal Record. Each applicant or applicants shall have taken a complete set of fingerprints which shall be placed on file in the noncriminal files of the Village. The Village Clerk shall submit the fingerprints to the appropriate police authorities for a check of any criminal record of any applicant. The Clerk shall report to the Village Council the results of the inquiry. No license shall be granted to any person who has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude.

(e) Restriction. 

1. Age. No license shall be granted to any person under eighteen (18) years of age.

2. Residence. No license shall be granted to any person who has not resided with this State for a period of at least one (1) year prior to application for a license.

3. Restrictions on Licenses. No license shall be issued to establish, maintain, control or operate an amusement device, unless the establishment:

A. Liquor Licence. Has a Class "C" Liquor License issued in good standing, in which case a maximum of five (5) mechanical amusement devices will be allowed.

B. Shopping Mall. Is located in an enclosed shopping mall, does not have any public entrances or exits directly to the outside of the shopping mall, has a full-time adult attendant, and has a uniformed security guard in attendance in the shopping mall at all times the establishment is open, in which case a maximum of five (5) mechanical amusement devices will be allowed.

C. Other Establishment. Is located within a B-1 or B-2 Zone District, in which case a maximum of two (2) mechanical amusement devices will be allowed.

4. Restrictions on Devices. No establishment shall be permitted more than two (2) mechanical amusement devices.

(f) Fee. A license fee as set by the resolution of the Village Council for each mechanical amusement device to be maintained in the establishment of the applicant shall be paid, to cover the cost of inspection, issuance and administration of the license.

(g) Grant of License. The Village Clerk, upon receiving an application and required information and documents in a form in compliance with this chapter, shall submit the same to the Village Council at a meeting within twenty (20) days.

1. Requirements for Approval. The Village Council shall approve a license if it finds that:

A. The applicant has met all of the requirements for a license set forth in this chapter.

B. The proposed operations would be in compliance with the Village Zoning Ordinance.

C. The business establishment, for which a license is requested, would not be a place for loitering.

D. There is not the likelihood, based upon the particular facts and circumstances involved with the application, of the establishment becoming a public nuisance or otherwise being in violation of provisions of this chapter because of hours of operation, the physical location of the mechanical amusement devices in the place of business, the location of the business establishment in the community or the nature of the business.

2. Conditions and Prohibitions. In granting approval, the Village Council may set conditions and prohibitions for the issuance of the license.

3. Duration and Form. Once a license is approved by the Village Council, the Village Clerk shall issue the license for a term of one (1) year in a form to be determined by the Village Clerk. In addition, the following shall pertain to licenses issued by the Clerk.

A. Content. Such license shall contain the name, address, place of business of the licensee and the number of mechanical amusement devices to be maintained at said place of business, and expiration date of such license.

B. Authentication. Each license shall be authenticated by the signature of the Village Clerk.

4. Display. The license and a list of the applicable prohibitions of this chapter and the prohibitions and/or conditions of the issuance of the license, shall be prominently displayed at all times within the establishment.

(h) Renewal. Any license issued in accordance with this section may be renewed upon the same terms and subject to the same requirements provided herein for the original license. If the licensee desires to effect a change of place of business, a new application shall be made by the licensee containing the place of new location. Such application need not contain other information furnished for the license then effective.

(i) Non-transferable. No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be assignable or transferable, nor shall any person, expecting the person to which the license was issued, be permitted to do business there under either directly or indirectly.

(j) Revocation or suspension.

1. Basis for such action. Every license may be revoked for violation of any of the prohibitions of this chapter.

2. Written notice. If there are violations, the Clerk shall forward by first-class mail to the licensee, at the address specified in the application, whether the license has been temporarily revoked and the nature of the violations, along with notice of the date, time and location of a hearing to be held on such violations.

3. Hearing. The hearing shall be held within fourteen (14) days from mailing of such notice. The Village Council may act as the hearing officer, or may appoint some other hearing officer. Following the hearing, the hearing officer shall determine whether or not a violation of this chapter has occurred, and if so, what penalty shall be invoked.

A. Penalty. The hearing officer may revoke or suspend any license issued under this provision for any violation of this chapter or State law.

B. Costs. In the event a violation shall have occurred, the hearing officer may assess costs as administrative expense, fees for the hearing officer and any other expenses incurred in the hearing.

36.04 INSPECTIONS

The establishment of any licensee shall be subject to periodic inspections by the Village for the purpose of determining whether its operation is in compliance with this and other Village Ordinance Code provisions.

36.05 PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS

(a) Gambling or Intoxicating Beverages. It shall be unlawful to permit any gambling or intoxicating beverages in any establishment in which there are maintained any mechanical amusement devices, except intoxicating beverages may be allowed in establishments holding a liquor license issued by the State of Michigan.

(b) Pay-offs. It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain, control or operate any mechanical amusement device or any slot machine or other type of machine containing any automatic or semi-automatic payoff device, or which shall be so constructed that the same may be converted into an automatic payoff device, for the return or discharge of coins, tokens, slugs, merchandise, or checks to operators thereof.

(c) Public Nuisance. It shall be unlawful to operate mechanical amusement devices so as to constitute a public nuisance.

(d) Disorder. It shall be unlawful for the licensee to allow any disorder to occur on the premises.

(e) Overcrowding. It shall be unlawful for the licensee to allow the licensed premises to become overcrowded so as to constitute a hazard to the health or safety of persons therein.

(f) Hours of Operation.

1. Establishments with liquor license. In the case of establishments holding a liquor license issued by the State of Michigan, the hours may be as allowed by said liquor license and the State law.

2. Other Establishments. It shall be unlawful to operate any establishment in which there are operated any mechanical amusement devices, except during the following hours:

Monday Through Thursday: 7:30 A.M. to Midnight

Friday and Saturday 7:30 A.M. to 1:00 A. M.

Sunday: 12 Noon to Midnight

(g) No coin operated amusement device shall display, expose, produce or emit any motion picture, printed matter, advertisement, writing, song, recitation, speech, music or other matter which depict or describe nudity, which means uncovered, or less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, and human female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola or the covered human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. For the purpose of this definition a female breast is considered uncovered if the nipple only or the nipple and areola only are covered; nor, shall such device(s) depict or describe;

1. Sexual intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, flagellation or any other act by a person involving the touching or contacting of the genitals or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law.

2. The touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, pubic region or genitals or the stimulation thereof by any device, tool, implement or object.

3. The actual or simulated displaying or exposure or simulations of the pubic hair, pubic region, anus, vulva or genitals of human, brutes, beasts or animals.

4. The exposure of the post-pubertal female breast. For the purpose of subsection, a female breast is considered exposed if any portion of the breast, below a line immediately above the top of the areola, is exposed.

5. Scenes wherein artificial devices or inanimate objects are employed to depict any of the prohibited activities described.

36.06 EXCEPTIONS

License Requirement. No license is required for the operation of any mechanical amusement device in a private home, public institution, church or clubhouse of any legally incorporated association the use of which is confined to members only of such association, and is incidental to its principal activities.

36.07 PENALTY

All violations of this ordinance shall be misdemeanors and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a sentence of not more than ninety (90) days of confinement to jail or by a fine of not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.0) or both in the discretion of the court, except where otherwise provided in the ordinance itself.

Chapter 37 - Precious Metal and Gem Certificate of Registration
37.01 DEFINITIONS
37.02 ADMINISTRATION OF ORDINANCE
37.03 APPLICATION BY A DEALER
37.04 ALLOCATION OF FEES

37.01 DEFINITIONS:

(a) "Agent or employee" means a person who, for compensation or valuable consideration, is employed either directly or indirectly by a dealer.

(b) "Dealer" means any person, corporation, partnership, or association, which, in whole or in part, engages in the ordinary course of repeated and recurrent transactions of buying or receiving precious items from the public within this state.

(c) "Gold" means elemental gold having an atomic weight of 196.967 and the chemical element symbol of Au, whether found by itself or in combination with its alloys or any other metal.

(d) "Jewelry" means an ornamental item made of a material that includes a precious gem.

(e) "Local police agency" means the Public Safety Department, Village of Beverly Hills.

(f) "Platinum" means elemental platinum having an atomic weight of 195.09 and the chemical element symbol of Pt, whether found by itself or in combination with its alloys or any other metal.

(g) "Precious gem" means a diamond, alexandrite, ruby, sapphire, opal, amethyst, emerald aquamarine, marganite, garnet, hadeite, topaz, tourmaline, or pearl.

(h) "Precious item" means jewelry, a precious gem, or an item containing gold, silver, or platinum. Precious item does not include the following:

(1) Coins, commemorative medals, and tokens struck by, or in behalf of, a government or private mint.

(2) Bullion bars and disc of the type traded by banks and commodity exchanges.

(3) Items at the time they are purchased directly from a dealer registered under this act, a manufacturer, or a wholesaler who purchased them directly from a manufacturer.

(4) Industrial machinery or equipment.

(5) An item being returned to or exchanged at the dealer where the item was purchased and which is accompanied by a valid sales receipt.

(6) An item which is received for alteration, redesign, or repair in a manner that does not substantially change its use and returned directly to the customer.

(7) An item which does not have a jeweler's identifying mark or a serial mark and which the dealer purchases for less than $5.00.

(8) Scrap metal which contains incidental traces of gold, silver, or platinum which are recoverable as a by-product.

(9) Jewelry which a customer trades for other jewelry having a greater value, and which difference in value is paid by the customer.

(i) "Silver" means elemental silver having a atomic weight of 107.869 and the chemical element symbol of Ag, whether found by itself or in combination with its alloys or any other metal.

37.02 ADMINISTRATION OF ORDINANCE

The Director of Public Safety for the Village of Beverly Hills or his designee shall be responsible for reviewing all applications for a certificate of registration and upon approval shall transmit a copy of the application and the certificate of registration to the Clerk of the Village of Beverly Hills.

37.03 APPLICATION BY A DEALER

(a) A dealer who applies for a certificate of registration shall submit the following information on the form provided:

(1) His or her name, home address, phone number, driver's license number, date of birth, and right thumb print (print to be affixed to the application by the Public Safety Department). Applications for more than one establishment shall be made on separate application forms.

(2) The name, address, telephone number, and hours of the dealer's business. If the dealer's business is a corporation, an updated copy of the Articles of Incorporation or a valid certified copy of the assumed name certificate from the Clerk of Oakland County must be provided.

(3) The name, address, date of birth, and right thumb print of each employee or agent of the dealer.

(b) The dealer shall also submit a signed statement indicating that he or she has read and understands the provisions of Act No. 95 of the Public Acts of 1981, as provided to him or her by the Public Safety Department, and further that said dealer has informed his or her agents or employees, and will immediately inform all new agents or employees, as to the provisions of said Public Act 95 of 1981.

(c) The dealer shall submit a signed statement that neither he or she, nor any of his or her agents or employees has been convicted of a felony under Act. No. 95 of the Public Acts of 1981, or under section 535 of act No. 328 of the Public Acts of 1931, as amended, within the five year period preceding the date of the application, or convicted of a misdemeanor under said laws within a one year period preceding the date of this application.

(d) The dealer shall submit proof of proper zoning or other special exception permits as required by the Zoning Board of Appeals or Planning Board of the Village of Beverly Hills.

(e) The dealer shall pay an annual fee of Fifty ($50.00) Dollars or such fee as established by resolution of the Village Council of Beverly Hills from time to time in compliance with Public Act 95, of 1981 for each licensed establishment in the Village of Beverly Hills.

37.04 ALLOCATION OF FEES

The funds collected pursuant to this ordinance shall be credited to the revenue of the Public Safety Department, for the administration of this ordinance.

Chapter 38 - Liquor License
38.01 SHORT TITLE
38.02 APPLICATIONS FOR NEW LICENSE
38.03 STANDARDS FOR RENEWAL AND REVOCATION
38.04 TERM OF LICENSE
38.05 RESERVATION OF AUTHORITY
38.06 LICENSE HEARING
38.07 OBJECTIONS TO RENEWAL AND REQUEST FOR REVOCATION

38.01 SHORT TITLE

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Village of Beverly Hills Liquor License Ordinance".

38.02 APPLICATIONS FOR NEW LICENSE

(a) Application. Applications for a license to sell beer, wine and/or spirits shall be made to the Village Council in writing, signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof, if a partnership or corporation, verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain the following statements and information:

1. The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; or, in the case of a co-partnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; in the case of a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers and directors, and, if a majority interest in the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his nominee, the name and address of such person.

2. The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth, and, if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization.

3. The character of business of the applicant, and in the case of a corporation, the object(s) for which it was organized. This requirement shall be fulfilled by a current certified copy of the Articles of Incorporation.

4. The length of time said applicant has been in business of that character, or, in the case of a corporation, the date when its charter was issued.

5. The location and description of the premises of place of business which is to be operated under such license.

6. A statement whether applicant has made application for a similar or other license on premises other than described in this application, and the disposition of such application.

7. A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in this ordinance or the laws of the State of Michigan.

8. A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the State of Michigan or of the United States or any ordinances of the Village in the conduct of its business.

9. The application shall be accompanied by complete building, site and plat plans as required by the Village Zoning Ordinances showing the entire structure and premises and in particular the specific areas where the license is to be utilized. The plans shall demonstrate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities and where appropriate, adequate plans for screening, and noise control.

(b) Standards for New License Applications. No license shall be issued to an applicant whenever one or more of the following criteria apply:

1. A person who, at the time of application for any license would not be eligible for a license upon a first application.

2. A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof, or a stock owner or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the stock of such corporation would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason.

3. A person whose place of business is conducted by a full time manager or agent unless such manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the licensee and/or the Village Council shall not have been notified within thirty (30) days of a change in manager.

4. A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance.

5. A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought or does not have a lease therefor for the full period for which the license is issued, or to a person, corporation or co-partnership that does not have sufficient financial resources to carry on or maintain the business. Financial resources shall be disclosed to the Village Council and shall be deemed sufficient if the financial resources are shown to support the establishment and operation of the proposed licensed business in proportion to the type and size of the proposed licensed business.

6. Any law enforcing public official or any member of the Village Council.

7. Premises that are not free standing structures.

8. Premises that are within five hundred feet (500') of another establishment selling beer, wine and/or liquor including any premises designated as SDD or SDM. It being the intent of this section to stop the further concentration of establishments selling or serving beer, wine and/or liquor, as a concentration of such uses has been determined to create a blighting effect on the surrounding property.

9. Premises where there exists a violation of the applicable Building, Electrical, Mechanical, Plumbing or Fire Codes, applicable Zoning Regulations, applicable Public Health Regulations, or any other applicable Village Ordinance.

10. Any new license or the transfer of any existing license unless the sale of beer, wine and/or spirits is shown to be incidental and subordinate to other permitted business uses upon the site, limited to food sales, or athletic activities. If food sales are the primary use, those revenues must comprise at least sixty percent (60%) of all gross sales for the premises. Food sales mean a bona fide restaurant operation offering a complete food menu which is served within the confines of the structure. This shall be construed to exclude fast food types of restaurants. Characteristics of fast food restaurants can include but not be limited to the following: drive-thru window, counter only service, no waitress or waiter service. If athletic activities are the primary use, those revenues must comprise at least eighty percent (80%) of all gross operating revenues for the premises. Proof of an establishment complying with this section shall be made each January on a form provided by the Village Clerk.

11. Premises that do not comply with all the requirements of the Village of Beverly Hills Zoning Ordinance, including site plan review. Chapter 22 (22.08.290).

12. Premises which are not within a B-2 Zone District or cannot provide ingress or egress to a major thoroughfare having a right-of-way of 150 feet or greater.

13. Premises that cannot provide separate off-street parking areas, distinct from any parking serving other businesses.

14. Premises that cannot be reached directly from the ingress point without crossing other off-street parking areas.

15. Premises that are used for live entertainment without prior approval of Village Council.

16. Premises where it is determined by a majority of the Village Council that the premises do not or will not reasonably soon after commencement of operations have adquate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities, screening, noise, or nuisance control or where a nuisance does or will exist.

17. Where the Village Council determines, by majority vote, that the proposed location is inappropriate considering the desirability of establishing a location in developed, commercial areas, in preference to isolated, undeveloped areas, the attitutde of adjacent residents and property owners; traffic safety; accessibility to the site from abutting roads; capability of abutting roads to accommodate the commercial activity; distance from public or private schools for minors; proximity of the inconsistent zoning classification, and accessibility from primary roads or state highways.

38.03 STANDARDS FOR RENEWAL AND REVOCATION

(a) No license shall be recommended for renewal and shall be recommended for revocation whenever one or more of the following criteria apply:

1. Any person who, at the time of renewal of any license issued hereunder would not be eligible for a license issued hereunder, or would not be eligible for such license upon first application.

2. A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof, or a stock owner or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the stock of such corporation would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason.

3. A person whose place of business is conducted by a full-time manager or agent unless such manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the licensee and/or the Village Council shall not have been notified within thirty (30) days of a change in manager of same.

4. A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance.

5. A person who does not own the premises for which a renewal is sought or does not have a lease therefor for the full period of the renewal, or to a person, corporation, or co-partnership that does not have sufficient financial resources to carry on or maintain the business. Financial resources shall be disclosed to the Village Clerk on a form in conformity with the Michigan Department of Commerce Annual Report for Profit Corporations. Financial resources shall be deemed sufficient if the financial resources are shown to support the licensed business in proportion to similar licensed businesses.

6. Any law enforcing public official or any member of the Village Council.

7. Premises where there exists a violation of the applicable Building, Electrical, Mechanical, Plumbing, Fire Codes or applicable Public Health Regulations.

8. Any license unless the sale of beer, wine and/or spirits is shown to be incidental and subordinate to other permitted business uses upon the site, limited to food sales, or athletic activities. If food sales are the primary use, those revenues must comprise at least sixty percent (60%) of all gross sales for the premises. Food sales mean a bona fide restaurant operation offering a complete food menu which is served within the confines of the structure. This shall be construed to exclude fast food types of restaurants. Characteristics of fast food restaurants can include but not be limited to the following: drive-thru window, counter only service, no waitress or waiter service. If athletic activities are the primary use, those revenues must comprise at least eighty percent (80%) of all gross operating revenues for the premises. Proof of an establishment complying with this section shall be made each January on a form provided by the Village Clerk.

9. Premises that are used for live entertainment without prior approval of Village Council.

38.04 TERM OF LICENSE

Approval of a license shall be for a period of one (1) year subject to annual renewal by the Village Council upon continued compliance with the regulations of this ordinance. Approval of a license shall be with the understanding that any necessary remodeling or new construction for the use of the license shall be commenced within six (6) months of the action of the Village Council or the Michigan Liquor Control Commission approving such license whichever last occurs. Any unusual delay in the completion of such remodeling or construction may subject the license to revocation.

38.05 RESERVATION OF AUTHORITY

No such applicant for a liquor license has the right to the issuance of such license to him, her or it, and the Village Council reserves the right to exercise reasonable discretion to determine who, if anyone, shall be entitled to the issuance of such license. Additionally, no applicant for a liquor license has the right to have such application processed and the Village Council further reserves the right to take no action with respect to any application filed with the Village Council. The Village Council further reserves the right to maintain a list of all applicants and to review the same when, in its discretion, it determines that the issuance of an additional liquor license is in the best interest of the Village at large and for the needs and convenience of its citizens.

38.06 LICENSE HEARING

The Village Council shall grant a public hearing upon the license application when, in its discretion, the Council determines that the issuance of an additional liquor license is in the best interest of the Village at large and for the needs and convenience of its citizens. Following such hearings, the Council shall submit to the applicant a written statement of its findings and determination. The Council's determination shall be based upon satisfactory compliance with the restrictions set forth in Section 38.02, Paragraphs (b) 1 through 17 above.

38.07 OBJECTIONS TO RENEWAL AND REQUEST FOR REVOCATION

(a) Procedure. Before filing an objection to renewal or request for revocation of license with the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, the Village Council shall serve the license holder, by first class mail, mailed not less than ten (10) days prior to hearing with notice of a hearing, which notice shall contain the following:

1. Notice of proposed action.
2. Reasons for the proposed action.
3. Date, time and place of hearing.
4. A statement that the licensee may present evidence and testimony and confront adverse witnesses.

Following the hearing, the Village Council shall submit to the license holder and the Commission a written statement of its findings and determination.

(b) Criteria for Nonrenewal or Revocation. The Village Council shall recommend nonrenewal or revocation of a license upon a determination by it that based upon a preponderance of the evidence presented at a hearing either of the following exist:

1. Violation of any of the restrictions on licenses set forth in Section 38.03, Paragraphs (a) 1 through 9 above; or

2. Maintenance of a nuisance upon the premises.

Chapter 41 - Traffic
41.01 UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE
41.02 AMENDMENTS TO UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE
41.03 AMENDMENTS TO MICHIGAN VEHICLE CODE
41.04 MINORS WITH LIQUOR IN VEHICLES
41.05 PARKING SCHOOL AREAS
41.06 AVAILABILITY
41.07 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY REGULATIONS
41.08 VIOLATIONS
41.09 ADOPTION OF CODE BY REFERENCE

41.01 UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE

(a) Code and Amendments and Revisions Adopted. The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages as promulgated by the Director of the Michigan Department of State Police, pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969 PA 306, MCL 24.201 to 24.328, and made effective October 30, 2002, and all future amendments and revisions to the Uniform Traffic Code when they are promulgated and effective in this State are incorporated by reference.

(b) References in Code. References in the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages to a "governmental unit" shall mean the Village of Beverly Hills.

(c) Notice to be Published. The Village Clerk shall publish this Ordinance in the manner required by law and shall publish, at the same time, a notice stating the purpose of the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages and the fact that a complete copy of the Code is available to the public at the Office of the Clerk for inspection.

(d) Purpose of Code. The purpose of such Code is to regulate the operation of vehicles, to provide for the regulation and use of streets, highways, and alleys and other public and semi-public places within the Village of Beverly Hills and to provide penalties for the violation of said Code. {Ord. 313; 6-25-03}

41.02 AMENDMENTS TO UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE

The following sections and subsections of the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages are hereby amended as set forth and additional sections and subsections are added as indicated. Section numbers used in this ordinance shall refer to the like numbered sections in the Uniform Traffic Code.

R 28.1001, Section 1.1 WORDS AND PHRASES

Section 1.1 is hereby amended by adding new definitions to read as follows:

"Conviction" means a final conviction, the payment of a fine, a plea of guilty or nolo contendere if accepted by the court, or a finding of guilt or probate court order of disposition for a child found to be within the provisions of Chapter XIIA of Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of 1939, being Sections 712A.1 to 712A.28 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, on a traffic law violation charge, regardless of whether the penalty is rebated or suspended.

"Foreign vehicle" means a vehicle of a type required to be registered under this act and brought into this state from another state, territory, or country other than in the ordinary course of business by or through a manufacturer or dealer, and not registered in this state.

"Former Section 625(1) or (2)" means Section 625(1) or (2) as amended by Act No. 391 of the Public Acts of 1978, Act No. 515 of the Public Acts of 1980, Act No. 309 of the Public Acts of 1982, or Act No. 109 of the Public Acts of 1987.

"Former Section 625b" means Section 625b as amended by Act No. 285 of the Public Acts of 1976, Act No. 515 of the Public Acts of 1980, Act No. 309 of the Public Acts of 1982, or Act No. 109 of the Public Acts of 1987.

"Law of another state" means a law or ordinance enacted by another state or by a local unit of government in another state.

"Prosecuting Attorney" except as the context otherwise requires, means the attorney general, the prosecuting attorney of a county, or the attorney representing a local unit of government.

"Revocation" means that the operator's or chauffeur's license and privilege to operate a motor vehicle on the public highways are terminated and shall not be renewed or restored until later of the following:

(a) The expiration of not less than 1 year after the license was revoked.
(b) The expiration of not less than 5 years after the date of a subsequent revocation occurring within 7 years after the date of a prior revocation.

If a license has been revoked, an application for a new license may be presented and acted upon by the secretary of state as provided in MCL 257.303.

When referring to a dealer license, "revocation" means that a person's authorization to engage in business as a dealer is terminated and shall not be restored or renewed, except that an application for a new license may be considered at the discretion of the secretary of state.

R 28.1105, Section 2.5 IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES

Section 2.5 is hereby amended to read as follows:

(1) A police agency or a governmental agency designated by the police agency may provide for the immediate removal of a vehicle from public or private property to a place of safekeeping at the expense of the registered owner of the vehicle in any of the following circumstances:

(a) If the vehicle is in such a condition that the continued operation of the vehicle upon the highway would constitute an immediate hazard to the public.

(b) If the vehicle is parked or standing upon the highway in such a manner as to create an immediate public hazard or an obstruction of traffic.
(c) If a vehicle is parked in a posted tow away zone.
(d) If there is reasonable cause to believe that the vehicle or any part of the vehicle is stolen.
(e) If the vehicle must be seized to preserve evidence of a crime, or when there is reasonable cause to believe that the vehicle was used in the commission of a crime.
(f) If removal is necessary in the interest of public safety because of fire, flood, storm, snow, natural or man-made disaster, or other emergency.
(g) If the vehicle is hampering the use of private property by the owner or person in charge of that property or is parked in a manner which impedes the movement of another vehicle.

(2) A police agency which authorizes the removal of a vehicle under subsection (1) shall do all of the following:

(a) Check to determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen.
(b) Within twenty-four (24) hours after removing the vehicle, enter the vehicle into the law enforcement information network if the vehicle has not been redeemed. This subdivision does not apply to a vehicle that is removed from the scene of a motor vehicle traffic accident.
(c) If the vehicle has not been redeemed within ten (10) days after moving the vehicle, send to the registered owner and the secured party as shown by the records of the Secretary of State, by first class mail or personal service a notice that the vehicle has been removed; however, if the police agency informs the owner or operator of the vehicle of the removal and the location of the vehicle within twenty-four (24) hours after the removal, and if the vehicle has not been redeemed within thirty (30) days and upon complaint from the towing service, the police agency shall send the notice within thirty (30) days after the removal. The notice shall be by a form furnished by the Secretary of State. The notice form shall contain the following information:

1. The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the vehicle.
2. The location from which the vehicle was taken into custody.
3. The date on which the vehicle was taken into custody.
4. The name and address of the police agency which had the vehicle taken into custody.
5. The location where the vehicle is being held.
6. The procedure to redeem the vehicle.
7. The procedure to contest the fact that the vehicle was properly removed or the reasonableness of the towing and daily storage fees.
8. A form petition which the owner may file in person or by mail with the specified court which requests a hearing on the police agency's action.
9. A warning that the failure to redeem the vehicle or to request a hearing within twenty (20) days after the date of the notice may result in the sale of the vehicle and the termination of all rights of the owner and the secured party to the vehicle or the proceeds of the sale or to both the vehicle and the proceeds.

(3) The registered owner may contest the fact that the vehicle was properly removed or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage fees by requesting a hearing. A request for a hearing shall be made by filing a petition with the court specified in the notice within twenty (20) days after the date of the notice. If the owner requests a hearing, the matter shall be resolved after a hearing conducted pursuant to Sections 2.5(b) and 2.5(c). An owner who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by posting a towing and storage bond with the court in an amount equal to the accrued towing and storage fees. The owner of a vehicle who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by paying the towing and storage fees instead of posting the towing and storage bond. If the court finds that the vehicle was not properly removed, the police agency shall reimburse the owner of the vehicle for the accrued towing and storage fees.

(4) If the owner does not request a hearing, he or she may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the custodian of the vehicle.

(5) If the owner does not redeem the vehicle or request a hearing within twenty (20) days, the secured party may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the custodian of the vehicle prior to the date of the sale.

(6) Not less than twenty (20) days after the disposition of the hearing described in Subsection (3), or if a hearing is not requested, not less than twenty (20) days after the date of the notice described in Subsection (2)(c), the police agency shall offer the vehicle for sale at a public sale unless the vehicle is redeemed. The public sale shall be held pursuant to Section 2.5(d).

(7) If the ownership of a vehicle which has been removed under this section cannot be determined, either because of the condition of the vehicle identification numbers or because a check with the records of the Secretary of State does not reveal ownership, the police agency may sell the vehicle at public sale pursuant to Section 2.5(d), not less than thirty (30) days after public notice of the sale has been published.

R 28.1105a, Section 2.5a ABANDONED VEHICLE

Section 2.5a is hereby amended to read as follows:

(1) As used in this section, "abandoned vehicle" means a vehicle which has remained on public property or private property for a period of forty-eight (48) hours after a police agency or other governmental agency designated by the police agency has affixed a written notice to the vehicle.

(2) If a vehicle has remained on public or private property for a period of time so that it appears to the police agency to be abandoned, the police agency shall do all of the following:

(a) Determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen.
(b) Affix a written notice to the vehicle. The written notice shall contain the following information:

1. The date and time the notice was affixed.
2. The name and address of the police agency taking the action.
3. The name and badge number of the police officer affixing the notice.
4. The date and time the vehicle may be taken into custody and stored at the owner's expense or scrapped if the vehicle is not removed.
5. The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the vehicle, if available.

(3) If the vehicle is not removed within forty-eight (48) hours after the date the notice was affixed, the vehicle is deemed abandoned and the police agency may have the vehicle taken into custody.

(4) A police agency which has a vehicle taken into custody shall do all of the following:

(a) Recheck to determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen.

(b) Within twenty-four (24) hours after taking the vehicle into custody, enter the vehicle as abandoned into the law enforcement information network.

(c) Within seven (7) days after taking the vehicle into custody, send to the registered owner and secured party, as shown by the records of the Secretary of State, by first class mail or personal service, notice that the vehicle has been deemed abandoned. The form for the notice shall be furnished by the Secretary of State. Each notice form shall contain the following information:

1. The year, make, and vehicle identification number of vehicle if available.
2. The location from which the vehicle was taken into custody.
3. The date on which the vehicle was taken into custody.
4. The name and address of the police agency which had the vehicle taken into custody.
5. The business address of the custodian of the vehicle.
6. The procedure to redeem the vehicle.
7. The procedure to contest the fact that the vehicle has been deemed abandoned or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage fees.
8. A form petition which the owner may file in person or by mail with the specified court which requests a hearing on the police agency's action.
9. A warning that the failure to redeem the vehicle or to request a hearing within twenty (20) days after the date of the notice may result in the sale of the vehicle and the termination of all rights of the owner and the secured party to the vehicle or the proceeds of the sale.
(5) The registered owner may contest the fact that the vehicle has been deemed abandoned or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage fees by requesting a hearing. A request for a hearing shall be made by filing a petition with the court specified in the notice within twenty (20) days after the date of the notice. If the owner requests a hearing, the matter shall be resolved after a hearing conducted pursuant to Sections 2.5(b) and 2.5(c). An owner who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by posting a towing and storage bond in an amount equal to the accrued towing and storage fees with the court. The owner of a vehicle who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by paying the towing and storage fees instead of posting the towing and storage bond. If the court finds that the vehicle was not property deemed abandoned, the police agency shall reimburse the owner of the vehicle for the accrued towing and storage fees.
(6) If the owner does not request a hearing, he or she may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the custodian of the vehicle.
(7) If the owner does not redeem the vehicle or request a hearing within twenty (20) days after the date of the notice, the secured party may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the custodian of the vehicle and the police agency for its accrued costs.
(8) Not less than twenty (20) days after the disposition of the hearing described in Subsection (5) or, if a hearing is not requested, not less than twenty (20) days after the date of the notice, the police agency shall offer the vehicle for sale at a public sale, pursuant to Section 2.5(d), not less than thirty (30) days after public notice of the sale has been published.

Section 2.5(b) is hereby added as follows:

(1) The following court shall have jurisdiction to determine if a police agency has acted properly in processing a vehicle under Sections 2.5(a), 2.7(6) through (10), 2.6, or 2.5:

(a) The District Court.

(2) The court specified in the notice prescribed in Sections 2.5(a)(4)(c), 2.7(b), 2.6(4), or 2.5(2)(c) shall be the court which has territorial jurisdiction at the location from where the vehicle was removed or deemed abandoned. Venue in the District Court shall be governed by Section 8312 of Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended, being Section 600.8312 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.

(3) If the owner fails to pay the accrued towing and storage fees, the towing and storage bond posted with the court to secure release of the vehicle under Section 2.5(a), 2.7, 2.6, or 2.5 shall be used to pay the towing and storage fees.

Section 2.5(c) is hereby added to read as follows:

(1) Upon receipt of a petition prescribed in Sections 2.5(a), 2.7, 2.6, or 2.5, signed by the owner of the vehicle which has been taken into custody, the court shall do both of the following:

(a) Schedule a hearing within thirty (30) days for the purpose of determining whether the police agency acted properly.

(b) Notify the owner and the police agency of the time and place of the hearing.

(2) At the hearing specified in Subsection (1) the police agency shall have the burden of showing by a preponderance of the evidence that it has complied with the requirements of this act in processing the abandoned vehicle or vehicle removed pursuant to Section 2.5.

(3) After the hearing the court shall make a decision which shall include 1 or more of the following:

(a) A finding that the police agency complied with the procedures established for the processing of an abandoned vehicle or a vehicle removed under Section 2.5, and an order providing a period of twenty (20) days after the decision for the owner to redeem the vehicle. If the owner does not redeem the vehicle within twenty (20) days, the police agency shall dispose of the vehicle pursuant to Sections 2.7 or 2.5(d).

(b) A finding that the police agency did not comply with the procedures established for the processing of an abandoned vehicle or a vehicle removed pursuant to Section 2.5. After making such a finding, the court shall issue an order directing that the vehicle immediately be released to the owner, and that the police agency is responsible for the accrued towing and storage charges.

(c) A finding that the towing and daily storage fees were reasonable.

(d) A finding that the towing and daily storage fees were unreasonable and issue an order directing an appropriate reduction.

Section 2.5(d) is hereby added to read as follows:

(1) A public sale for a vehicle which has been deemed abandoned under

Sections 2.5(a) or 2.6 or removed under Section 2.5, shall be conducted in the following manner:

(a) It shall be under the control of the police agency or agent of the police agency.

(b) It shall be open to the public and consist of open auction bidding or bidding by sealed bids. If sealed bids are received, the person submitting the bid shall receive a receipt for the bid from the police agency or agent of the police agency.

(c) Except as provided by Sections 2.5(a)(9) and 2.5(7), it shall be held not less than five (5) days after public notice of the sale has been published.

(d) The public notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper having a general circulation within the county in which the vehicle was abandoned. The public notice shall give a description of the vehicle for sale and shall state the time, date, and location of the sale.

(2) The money received from the public sale of the vehicle shall be applied in the following priority:

(a) Towing and storage charges.

(b) Expenses incurred by the police agency.

(c) To the secured party, if any, in the amount of debt outstanding on the vehicle.

(d) Remainder to the owner. A reasonable attempt shall be made to mail the remainder to the registered owner. If delivery of the remainder cannot be accomplished, the remainder shall become the property of the unit of government that the police agency represents.

(3) If there are no bidders on the vehicle, the police agency may do one of the following:

(a) Turn the vehicle over to the towing firm to satisfy charges against the vehicle.

(b) Obtain title to the vehicle for the police agency or the unit of government the police agency represents, by doing the following:

1. Paying the towing and storage charges.

2. Applying for title to the vehicle.

(c) Hold another public sale pursuant to subsection (1).

(4) A person who acquires ownership of a vehicle under subsection (1) or (3), which vehicle has been designated as a distressed vehicle, shall make application for a salvage certificate of title within fifteen (15) days after obtaining the vehicle.

(5) Upon disposition of the vehicle, the police agency shall cancel the entry into the law enforcement information network.

R28.1106, Section 2.6 TOWED VEHICLE

Section 2.6 is hereby amended to read as follows:

(1) When a vehicle is removed from private property at the direction of a person other than the registered owner of the vehicle or a police agency, the custodian of the vehicle immediately shall notify the police agency from whose jurisdiction the vehicle was towed. The custodian shall supply that information which is necessary for the police agency to enter the vehicle into the law enforcement information network.

(2) Upon receipt of the notification described in Subsection (1), the police agency immediately shall do all of the following:

(a) Determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen.

(b) Enter the vehicle into the law enforcement information network.

(3) The owner of the vehicle removed as described in Subsection (1) may obtain release of the vehicle by paying the accrued towing and storage fees to the custodian of the vehicle. Upon release of the vehicle, the custodian shall notify the police agency of the disposition of the vehicle.

(4) If the vehicle described in Subsection (1) is not claimed by the owner within seven (7) days after the police agency has been notified by the custodian that it has been taken into custody, the vehicle is deemed abandoned and the procedures prescribed in Section 2.5(a)(4)(c) to (9) shall apply.

R 28.1107, Section 2.7 REGISTERED ABANDONED SCRAP VEHICLES

Section 2.7 is hereby amended to read as follows:

(1) As used in this Section:

(a) "Registered abandoned scrap vehicles" means a vehicle which meets all of the following requirements:

1. Is on public or private property.

2. Is seven (7) or more years old.

3. Is apparently inoperable or is extensively damaged, to the extent that the cost of repairing the vehicle so that it is operational and safe as required by Section 683 would exceed the fair market value of that vehicle.

4. Is not currently registered in this state and does not display current year registration plates from another state.

5. Is not removed within forty-eight (48) hours after a written notice as described in Section 2.5a(2)(b) is affixed to the vehicle.

(b) "Unregistered abandoned scrap vehicles" means a vehicle which meets all of the following requirements:

1. Is on public or private property.
2. Is seven (7) or more years old.
3. Is apparently inoperable or is extensively damaged, to the extent that the cost of repairing the vehicle so that it is operational and safe as required by Section 683, would exceed the fair market value of that vehicle.

4. Is not currently registered in this state and does not display current year registration plates from another state.
5. Is not removed within forty-eight (48) hours after a written notice as described in Section 2.5a(2)(b) is affixed to the vehicle.

(2) A police agency may have an unregistered abandoned scrap vehicle taken into custody, in which case the police agency shall do all of the following:

(a) Determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen.
(b) Take two (2) photographs of the vehicle.
(c) Make a report to substantiate the vehicle as an unregistered abandoned scrap vehicle. The report shall contain the following information:

1. The year, make, and vehicle identification number, if available.
2. The date of abandonment.
3. The location of abandonment.
4. A detailed listing of the damage or the missing equipment.
5. The reporting officer's name and title.
6. The location where the vehicle is being held.

(d) Within twenty-four (24) hours after taking the vehicle into custody, enter the vehicle into the law enforcement information network.

(3) Within twenty-four (24) hours, excluding Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays, after taking the vehicle into custody, the police agency shall complete a release form and release the vehicle to the towing service or a used vehicle parts dealer or vehicle scrap metal processor, who shall then transmit that release form to the Secretary of State and apply for a Certificate of Title or a Certificate of Scrapping. Upon receipt of the release form and application, the Secretary of State shall issue a Certificate of Title or a Certificate of Scrapping.

(4) The release form described in Subsection (3) shall be furnished by the Secretary of State and shall include a certification executed by the applicable police agency when the abandoned scrap vehicle is released. The certification shall state that the police agency has complied with all the requirements of Subsection (2)(b) and (c).

(5) The Secretary of State shall retain the records relating to an abandoned scrap vehicle for not less than two (2) years. The two (2) photographs taken pursuant to Subsection (2)(b) shall be retained by the police agency for not less than two (2) years. After the Certificate of Scrapping has been issued, a Certificate of Title for the vehicle shall not be issued again.

(6) A police agency may have a registered abandoned scrap vehicle taken into custody, in which case the police agency shall do all of the following:

(a) Determine if the vehicle has been stolen.

(b) Take two (2) photographs of the vehicle.

(c) Make a report to substantiate the vehicle as a registered abandoned scrap vehicle. The report shall contain the following information:

1. The year, make, and vehicle identification number, if available.
2. The date of abandonment.
3. The location of abandonment.
4. A detailed listing of the damage or the missing equipment.

5. The reporting officer's name and title.
6. The location where the vehicle is being held.

(d) Within twenty-four (24) hours after taking the vehicle into custody, enter the vehicle into the law enforcement information network.

(e) Within seven (7) days after taking the vehicle into custody, send to the registered owner and secured party, as shown by the records of the Secretary of State, by first class mail or personal service, notice that the vehicle has been deemed abandoned. The form for the notice shall be furnished by the Secretary of State. Each notice form shall contain the following information:

1. The year, make, and vehicle identification number, if available.
2. The location from which the vehicle was taken into custody.
3. The date on which the vehicle was taken into custody.
4. The name and address of the police agency which had the vehicle taken into custody.
5. The business address of the custodian of the vehicle.
6. The procedure to redeem the vehicle.
7. The procedure to contest the fact that the vehicle has been deemed abandoned or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage fees.
8. A form petition which the owner may file in person or by mail with the specified court which requests a hearing on the police agency's action.

9. A warning that the failure to redeem the vehicle or to request a hearing within twenty (20) days after the date of the notice may result in the termination of all rights of the owner and the secured party to the vehicle.

(7) The registered owner of a registered abandoned scrap vehicle may contest the fact that the vehicle has been deemed abandoned or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage fees by requesting a hearing. A request for a hearing shall be made by filing a petition with the court specified in the notice within twenty (20) days after the date of the notice. If the owner requests a hearing, the matter shall be resolved after a hearing conducted pursuant to Sections 2.5(b) and 2.5(c). An owner who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by posting a towing and storage bond with the court in an amount as determined by the court. The owner of a vehicle who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by paying the towing and storage fees instead of posting the towing and storage bond. If the court finds that the vehicle was not properly deemed abandoned, the police agency shall reimburse the owner of the vehicle for the accrued towing and storage fees.

(8) If the owner does not request a hearing, he or she may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the custodian of the vehicle.

(9) If the owner does not redeem the vehicle or request a hearing within twenty (20) days after the date of the notice the secured party may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the custodian of the vehicle.

(10) Not less than twenty (20) days after the disposition of the hearing described in Subsection (7), or if a hearing is not requested, not less than twenty (20) days after the date of the notice described in Subsection (6)(e), the police agency shall follow the procedures established in Subsections (3) to (5).

R 28.1110b, Section 2.10b CIVIL INFRACTION; TEMPORARY DETENTION; ACCIDENT CITATION; CITATION FORM AND PROCEDURE

Section 2.10b is hereby amended to read as follows:

(1) A police officer who witnesses a person violating this local ordinance, which violation is a civil infraction, may stop the person, detain the person temporarily for purposes of making a record of vehicle check, and prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and as completely as possible, and original and three (3) copies of a written citation, which shall be a notice to appear in court for one or more civil infractions. If the police officer of the Village witnesses a person violating this local ordinance within that Village, City, Township, or County and that violation is a civil infraction, that police officer may pursue, stop, and detain the person outside the Village where the violation occurred for the purpose of exercising the authority and performing the duties prescribed in this section and Section 2.10, as applicable.

(2) A police officer may issue a citation to a person who is a driver of a motor vehicle involved in an accident when, based upon personal investigation, the officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a civil infraction in connection with the accident. A police officer may issue a citation to a person who is a driver of a motor vehicle when, based upon personal investigation by the police officer of a complaint by someone who witnessed the person violating this local ordinance, which violation is a civil infraction, the officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a civil infraction and if the prosecuting attorney or attorney for the political subdivision approves in writing the issuance of the citation.

(3) The form of a citation issued under Subsections (1) or (2) shall be as prescribed in Sections 727(c) and 743.

(4) The officer shall inform the person of the alleged civil infraction or infractions and shall deliver the third copy of the citation to the alleged offender.

(5) In a civil infraction action involving the parking or standing of a motor vehicle, a copy of the citation need not be served personally upon the defendant but may be served upon the registered owner by attaching the copy to the vehicle. A city may also authorize personnel other than a police officer to issue and serve a citation for a violation of its ordinance involving the parking or standing of a motor vehicle. State security personnel receiving authorization under Section 6c of Act No. 59 of the Public Acts of 1935, being Section 28.6c of the Michigan Compiled Law, may issue and serve citations for a violation involving the parking or standing of vehicles on land owned by the state or land of which the state is the lessee when authorized to do so by the directors of the Department of State Police.

(6) If a parking violation notice other than a citation is attached to a motor vehicle, and if an admission of responsibility is not made and the civil fine and costs, if any, prescribed by ordinance for the violation are not paid at the parking violations bureau, a citation may be filed with the court in compliance with Section 741(4) and a copy of the citation may be served by first class mail upon the registered owner of the vehicle at the owner's last known address. A parking violation notice may be issued by a police officer, including a limited duty officer, or other personnel duly authorized by the Village to issue such a notice under its ordinance. The citation filed with the court pursuant to this subsection need not comply in all particulars with Sections 727c and 743 but shall consist of a sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the parking violation notice and shall fairly inform the defendant how to respond to the citation.

(7) A citation issued under subsections (5) or (6) for a parking or standing violation shall be processed in the same manner as a citation issued personally to a defendant pursuant to subsections (1) or (2).

(8) As used in subsection (6):

(a) "Parking violation notice" means a notice, other than a citation, directing a person to appear at a parking violations bureau in the city, village or township in which, or the college, or university for which the notice is issued and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed by ordinance for the parking or standing of a motor vehicle in violation of the ordinance.

(b) "Parking Violations Bureau" means a parking violations bureau established pursuant to section 8395 of Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended, being Section 600.8395 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, the violations bureau established within the traffic and ordinance division of the recorder's court of the City of Detroit, or a comparable parking violations bureau established in a city or village served by a municipal court or established pursuant to law by the governing board of a state university or college.

R 28.1110f, Section 2.10f CIVIL INFRACTIONS, INFORMAL HEARINGS; PROCEDURE; WITNESSES; APPEAL

Section 2.10f is hereby amended to read as follows:

(1) An informal hearing shall be conducted by a District Court Magistrate when authorized by the Judge or Judges of the District Court district, by a Referee of the Recorder's Court of the City of Detroit - Traffic and Ordinance Division, or by a Judge of a court listed in Section 741(2). A Referee or District Court Magistrate may administer oaths, examine witnesses, and make findings of fact and conclusions of law at an informal hearing. The Judge, Referee, or District Court Magistrate shall conduct the informal hearing in an informal manner so as to do substantial justice according to the rules of substantive law but shall not be bound by the statutory provisions or rules of practice, procedure, pleading or evidence, except provisions relating to privileged communications. There shall not be a jury at an informal hearing. A verbatim record of an informal hearing shall not be required.

(2) At an informal hearing the person cited may not be represented by an attorney nor may the plaintiff be represented by the Prosecuting Attorney or attorney for a political subdivision.

(3) Notice of a scheduled informal hearing shall be given to the citing police agency, which agency may subpoena witnesses for the plaintiff. The defendant may also subpoena witnesses. Witness fees need not be paid in advance to a witness. Witness fees for a witness on behalf of the plaintiff are payable by the district control unit of the District Court for the place where the hearing occurs, by the city or Village when the hearing involves an ordinance violation in a district where the District Court is not functioning, or by the County when the hearing involves a violation of this act in a district where the District Court is not functioning.

R 28.1110g, Section 2.10g CIVIL INFRACTION; FORMAL HEARINGS; PROCEDURE; FEES; COUNSEL; JUDGMENT

Section 2.10g is hereby amended to read as follows;

(1) A formal hearing shall be conducted only by a Judge of a court having jurisdiction over civil infraction actions under Section 741(2).

(2) In a formal hearing the person cited may be represented by an attorney, but is not entitled to appointed counsel at public expense.

(3) Notice of a formal hearing shall be given to the Prosecuting Attorney or attorney for the political subdivision who represents the plaintiff. That attorney shall appear in court for a formal hearing and that attorney shall be responsible for the issuance of a subpoena to each witness for the plaintiff. The defendant may also subpoena witnesses. Witness fees need not be paid in advance to a witness. Witness fees for a witness on behalf of the plaintiff are payable by the district control unit of the District Court for the place where the hearing occurs, by the city or village when the hearing involves an ordinance violation in a district where the District Court is not functioning, or by the county when the hearing involves a violation of this act in a district where the District Court is not functioning.

(4) There shall not be a jury trial in a formal hearing.

(5) If the Judge determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the person cited is responsible for a civil infraction, the Judge shall enter an order against the person as provided in Section 907. Otherwise, a judgement shall be entered for the defendant, but the defendant shall not be entitled to costs of the action.

UTC SEC. 5.15 OPERATING A MOTOR VEHICLE WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR OR CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE; OPERATING A MOTOR VEHICLE WHEN VISIBLY IMPAIRED; OPERATION OF A MOTOR VEHICLE BY PERSON LESS THAN 21 YEARS OF AGE; SANCTIONS; COSTS; ENHANCED SENTENCE; GUILTY PLEA OR NOLO CONTENDERE; ESTABLISHMENT OF PRIOR CONVICTION; SPECIAL VERDICT; PUBLIC RECORD; BURDEN OF PROVING RELIGIOUS SERVICE OR CEREMONY.

(1) A person, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, within this Village if either of the following applies:

(a) The person is under the influence of intoxicating liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance.

(b) The person has an alcohol content of 0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.

(2) The owner of a vehicle or a person in charge or in control of a vehicle shall not authorize or knowingly permit the vehicle to be operated upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of motor vehicles, within this Village by a person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor, a controlled substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance, who has an alcohol content of 0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine, or whose ability to operate the motor vehicle is visibly impaired due to the consumption of intoxicating liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance.

(3) A person, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, within this Village when, due to the consumption of intoxicating liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance, the person=s ability to operate the vehicle is visibly impaired. If a person is charged with violating Subsection (1), a finding of guilty under this subsection may be rendered.

(4) A person who is less than 21 years of age, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, within this Village if the person has any bodily alcohol content. As used in this subsection Aany bodily alcohol content@ means either of the following:

( a ) An alcohol content of not less than 0.02 grams or more than 0.07 grams per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.

( b ) Any presence of alcohol within a person=s body resulting from the consumption of intoxicating liquor, other than consumption of intoxicating liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony.

(5) A person, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a vehicle in violation of Subsection (4) while another person who is less than 16 years of age is occupying the vehicle. A person who violates this subdivision is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as follows:

( a ) Community service for not more than 60 days.

( b ) A fine of not more than $500.

( c ) Imprisonment for not more than 93 days.

In the judgment of sentence under this section, the court may, unless the vehicle is ordered forfeited under section [MCL 257.625b] order vehicle immobilization as provided in section [MCL 257.904d].

(6) If a person is convicted for violating Subsection (1) the person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by one or more of the following:

( a ) Community service for not more than 45 days.

( b ) Imprisonment for not more than 93 days.

( c ) A fine of not less than $100 or more than $500.

(7) A person who is convicted of violating Subsection (2) is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not less than $100 or more than $500, or both.

(8) A person who is convicted of violating Subsection (3) is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by one or more of the following:

( a ) Community service for not more than 45 days.

( b ) Imprisonment of not more than 93 days.

( c ) A fine of not more than $300.

(9) If a person is convicted of violating Subsection (4), all of the following apply:

( a ) Except as otherwise provided in subdivision (b), the person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by one or more of the following:

( i ) Community Service for not more than 45 days.

( ii ) A fine of not more than $250.

( b ) If the violation occurs within seven years of one or more prior convictions, the person may be sentenced to one or more of the following:

(i) Community service for not more than 60 days.

(ii) A fine of not more than $500.

(iii) Imprisonment of not more than 93 days.

(10) In addition to imposing the sanctions prescribed under this section, the court may order the person to pay the costs of the prosecution under the code of criminal procedure, 1927 PA 175, MCL 760.1 to 776.22.

(11) A person sentenced to perform community service under this section shall not receive compensation and shall reimburse the state or appropriate local unit of government for the cost of supervision incurred by the state or local unit of government as a result of the person=s activities in that service.

(12) If a person is charged with a violation of Subsection (1), (3), or (5), or section [MCL 275.625m], the court shall not permit the defendant to enter a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a charge of violating Subsection (4) in exchange for dismissal of the original charge. This subsection does not prohibit the court from dismissing the charge upon the prosecuting attorney=s motion.

(13) Except as otherwise provided in Subsection (15), if a person is charged with operating a vehicle while under the influence of a controlled substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance in violation of Subsection (1), the court shall require the jury to return a special verdict in the form of a written finding or, if the court convicts the person with a jury or accepts a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, the court shall make a finding as to whether the person was under the influence of a controlled substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance at the time of the violation.

(14) Except as otherwise provided in Subsection (15), if a person is charged with operating a vehicle while his or her ability to operate the vehicle was visibly impaired due to his or her consumption of a controlled substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance in violation of Subsection (3), the court shall require the jury to return a special verdict in the form of a written finding or, if the court convicts the person without a jury or accepts a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, the court shall make a finding as to whether, due to the consumption of a controlled substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance, the person=s ability to operate a motor vehicle was visibly impaired at the time of the violation.

(15) A special verdict described in Subsections (13) and (14) is not required if a jury is instructed to make a finding solely as to either of the following:

( a ) Whether the defendant was under the influence of a controlled substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance at the time of the violation.

( b ) Whether the defendant was visibly impaired due to his or her consumption of a controlled substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance at the time of the violation.

(16) If a jury or court finds under Subsection (13), (14), or (15) that the defendant operated a motor vehicle under the influence of or while impaired due to the consumption of a controlled substance or a combination of a controlled substance and an intoxicating liquor, the court shall do both of the following:

( a ) Report the finding to the Secretary of State.

( b ) On a form or forms prescribed by the state court administrator, forward to the Department of State Police a record that specifies the penalties imposed by the court, including any term of imprisonment, and any sanction imposed under sections [MCL 257.625n] or [MCL 257.904d].

(17) Except as otherwise provided by law, a record described in Subsection (16) (b) is a public record and the Department of State Police shall retain the information contained on that record for not less than seven years.

(18) In a prosecution for a violation of Subsection (4), the defendant bears the burden of proving that the consumption of intoxicating liquor was a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony by a preponderance of the evidence.

 

UTC SEC. 5.15a ARRESTS; PRELIMINARY CHEMICAL BREATH ANALYSIS; CHEMICAL TESTS AND ANALYSIS OF BLOOD, URINE OR BREATH -- RIGHTS AND CONSEQUENCES OF REFUSAL; USE OF CHEMICAL TEST RESULTS IN CIVIL OR CRIMINAL PROCEEDING; UNIFORM RULES FOR ADMINISTRATION OF CHEMICAL TESTS.

(1) A peace officer may arrest a person without a warrant when the peace officer has reasonable cause to believe the person was, at the time of an accident in this Village, the operator of a vehicle involved in the accident and was operating the vehicle in violation of MCL 257.625 (1), (3) or (6) or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to MCL 257.625 (1), (3) or (6), being UTC Sec. 5.15 (1), (3) or (4).

(2) A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe that a person was operating a vehicle upon a public highway or other place open to the public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, within this Village, and that the person by the consumption of intoxicating liquor may have affected his or her ability to operate a vehicle, or reasonable cause to believe that a person was operating a commercial motor vehicle within the Village while the person's blood, breath, or urine contained any measurable amount of alcohol or while the person had any detectable presence of intoxicating liquor, or reasonable cause to believe that a person who is less than 21 years of age was operating a vehicle upon a public highway or other place open to the public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, within this Village, while the person had any bodily alcohol content as that term is defined in MCL 257.625(6) or UTC Sec. 5.15(4), may require the person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. The following provisions apply with respect to a preliminary chemical breath analysis administered pursuant to this subsection:

( a ) A peace officer may arrest a person based in whole or in part upon the results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis.

( b ) The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis are admissible in a criminal prosecution for a crime enumerated in MCL 257.625c(1), UTC Sec. 5.15c, or in an administrative hearing for one or more of the following purposes:

( i ) To assist the court or hearing officer in determining a challenge to the validity of an arrest. This subparagraph does not limit the introduction of other competent evidence offered to establish the validity of an arrest.

( ii) As evidence of the defendant's breath alcohol content, if offered by the defendant.

( iii ) As evidence of the defendant's breath alcohol content, if offered by the prosecution to rebut testimony or other evidence, including but not limited to testimony elicited on cross-examination of a prosecution witness, that is offered or elicited to prove that the defendant's breath alcohol content was lower at the time of the charged offense than when a chemical test was administered pursuant to Subsection (6).

( c ) A person who submits to a preliminary chemical breath analysis remains subject to the requirements of MCL 257.625c, 625d, 625e and 625f or UTC Sec. 5.15c, 5.15d, 5.15e and 5.15f, for the purposes of chemical tests described in those sections.

( d ) Except as provided in Subsection (5) , a person who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis upon a lawful request by a peace officer is responsible for a civil infraction.

(3) A peace officer shall use the results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis conducted pursuant to this section to determine whether to order a person out-of-service under MCL 257.319d. A peace officer shall order out-of-service as required under MCL 257.319d a person who was operating a commercial motor vehicle and who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis as provided in this section. This section does not limit the use of other competent evidence by the peace officer to determine whether to order a person out-of-service under MCL 257.319d.

(4) A person who was operating a commercial motor vehicle and who is requested to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis under this section be advised that refusal of a peace officer's request to take a test described in this section is a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $100.00, or both, and will result in the issuance of a 24-hour out-of-service order.

(5) A person who was operating a commercial motor vehicle and who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis upon a peace officer's lawful request is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $100.00, or both.

(6) The following provisions apply with respect to chemical tests and analysis if a persons' blood, urine, or breath, other than preliminary chemical breath analysis:

( a ) The amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled substance or both in a driver's blood or urine or the amount of alcohol in a person's breath at the time alleged as shown by chemical analysis of the person's blood, urine, or breath, is admissible into evidence in any civil or criminal proceeding.

( b ) A person arrested for a crime described in MCL 257.625c(1) or UTC Sec. 5.15c(1) shall be advised of all of the following:

( i ) If he or she takes a chemical test of his or her blood urine, or breath administered at the request of a peace officer, he or she has the right to demand that a person of his or her own choosing administer one of the chemical tests.

( ii ) The results of the test are admissible in a judicial proceeding as provided under this act and will be considered with other competent evidence in determining the defendant's innocence or guilt.

( iii )He or she is responsible for obtaining a chemical analysis of a test sample obtained pursuant to his or her own request.

( iv ) If he or she refuses the request of a peace officer to take a test described in subparagraph ( I ), a test shall not be given without a court order, but the peace officer may seek to obtain such a court order.

( v ) Refusing a peace officer's request to take a test described in subparagraph ( i ) will result in the suspension of his or her operator's or chauffeur's license and vehicle group designation or operating privilege, and in the addition of six points to his or her driver record.

( c ) A sample or specimen of urine or breath shall be taken and collected in a reasonable manner. Only a licensed physician, or an individual operating under the delegation of a licensed physician under Section 16215 of the Public Health Code, Act. No. 368 of the Public Acts of 1978, being Section 333.16215 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, qualified to withdraw blood and acting in a medical environment, may withdraw blood at a peace officer's request to determine the amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled substance or both in the person's blood, as provided in this subsection. Liability for a crime or civil damages predicated on the act of withdrawing or analyzing blood and related procedures does not attach to a licensed physician or individual operating under the delegation of a licensed physician who withdraws or analyzes blood or assists in the withdrawal or analysis in accordance with this act unless the withdrawal or analysis is performed in a negligent manner.

( d ) A chemical test described in this subsection shall be administered at the request of a peace officer having reasonable grounds to believe the person has committed a crime described in MCL 257.625c(1) or UTC Sec. 5.15c(1). A person who takes a chemical test administered at a peace officer's request as provided in this section shall be given a reasonable opportunity to have a person of his or her own choosing administer one of the chemical tests described in this subsection within a reasonable time after his or her detention. The test results are admissible and shall be considered with other competent evidence in determining the defendant's innocence or guilt. If the person charged is administered a chemical test by a person of his or her own choosing, the person charged is responsible for obtaining a chemical analysis of the test sample.

( e ) If, after an accident, the driver of a vehicle involved in the accident is transported to a medical facility and a sample of the driver's blood is withdrawn at that time for the purpose of medical treatment, the results of a chemical analysis of that sample are admissible in any civil or criminal proceeding to show the amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled substance or both in the person's blood at the time alleged, regardless of whether the person had been offered or had refused a chemical test. The medical facility or person performing the chemical analysis shall disclose the results of the analysis to a prosecuting attorney who requests the results for use in a criminal prosecution as provided in this subsection. A medical facility or person disclosing information in compliance with this subsection is not civilly or criminally liable for making the disclosure.

( f ) If, after an accident, the driver of a vehicle involved in the accident is deceased, a sample of the decedent's blood shall be withdrawn in a manner directed by the medical examiner to determine the amount of alcohol or the presence of a controlled substance, or both, in the decedent's blood. The medical examiner shall give the results of the chemical analysis of the sample to the law enforcement agency investigating the accident, and that agency shall forward the results to the Department of State Police.

( g ) The Department of State Police shall promulgate uniform rules under the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, Act No. 306 of the Public Acts of 1969, being Sections 24.201 to 24.328 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, for the administration of chemical tests for the purposes of this section. An instrument used for preliminary chemical test described in this subsection if approved pursuant to rules promulgated by the Department of State Police.

(7) The provisions of Subsection (6) relating to chemical testing do not limit the introduction of any other competent evidence bearing upon the question of whether or not a person was impaired by, or under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance, or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance, or whether the person had an alcohol content of 0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine, or if the person is less than 21 years of age, whether the person had any bodily alcohol content within his or her body. As used in this section, Aany bodily alcohol content@ means either of the following:

( a ) An alcohol content of not less than 0.02 grams or more than 0.07 grams per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.

( b ) Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from the consumption of intoxicating liquor, other than consumption of intoxicating liquor as part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony.

(8) If a chemical test described in Subsection (6) is administered, the test results shall be made available to the person charged or the person's attorney upon written request to the prosecution, with a copy of the request filed with the court. The prosecution shall furnish the results at least two days before the day of the trial. The prosecution shall offer the test results as evidence in that trial. Failure to fully comply with the request bars the admission of the results into evidence by the prosecution.

(9) Except in a prosecution relating solely to a violation of MCL 257.625(1)(b) or (6), or UTC Sec. 5.15(1)(b) or (4), the amount of alcohol in the driver's blood, breath, or urine at the time alleged as shown by chemical analysis of the person's blood, breath, or urine gives rise to the following presumptions:

( a ) If there were at the time 0.07 grams or less of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the defendant's blood, per 210 liters of the defendant's breath, per 67 milliliters of the defendant's urine, it is presumed that the defendant's ability to operate a motor vehicle was not impaired due to the consumption of intoxicating liquor, and that the defendant was not under the influence of intoxicating liquor.

( b ) If there were at the time more than 0.07 grams but less than 0.10 grams of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the defendant's blood, per 210 liters of the defendant's breath, or per 67 milliliters of the defendant's urine, it is presumed that the defendant's ability to operate a vehicle was impaired within the provisions of MCL 257.625(3) or UTC Sec. 5.15(3) due to the consumption of intoxicating liquor.

( c ) If there were at the time 0.10 grams or more of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the defendant's blood, per 210 liters of the defendant's breath, or per 67 milliliters of the defendant's urine, it is presumed that the defendant was under the influence of intoxicating liquor.

(10) A person's refusal to submit to a chemical test as provided in Subsection (6) is admissible in a criminal prosecution for a crime described in MCL 257.625c(1), UTC Sec. 5.15c(1), only to show that a test was offered to the defendant, but not as evidence in determining the defendant's innocence or guilt. The jury shall be instructed accordingly.

UTC SEC. 515b: ARRAIGNMENT OF PERSON ARRESTED FOR MISDEMEANOR VIOLATION; PRETRIAL CONFERENCE; ADVISING ACCUSED OF MAXIMUM PENALTY BEFORE ACCEPTANCE OF PLEA; SCREENING, ASSESSMENT, AND REHABILITATIVE SERVICES; ACTION BY SECRETARY OF STATE PENDING APPEAL.

(1) A person arrested for a misdemeanor violation of Section MCL 257.625(1), (3), (6), or (7) or Section MCL 257.625m or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to Section MCL 257.625(1), (3), or (6) or Section MCL 257.625m shall be arraigned on the citation, complaint, or warrant not more than 14 days after the arrest for the violation or, if an arrest warrant is issued or reissued, not more than 14 days after the issued or reissued arrest warrant is served, whichever is later. The court shall not dismiss a case or impose any other sanction for a failure to comply with this time limit. The time limit does not apply to a violation of Section MCL 257.625(1) or (3) or Section MCL 257.625m punishable as a felony or a violation of Section MCL 257.625(1), (3), (6), or (7) or Section MCL 257.625m joined with a felony charge.

(2) The court shall schedule a pretrial conference between the prosecuting attorney, the defendant, and the defendant's attorney in each case in which the defendant is charged with a misdemeanor violation of Section MCL 257.625(1), (3), (6), or (7) or Section MCL 257.625m or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to Section MCL 257.625(1), (3), or (6) or Section MCL 257.625m. The pretrial conference shall be held not more than 35 days after the person's arrest for the violation or, if an arrest warrant is issued or reissued, not more than 35 days after the issued or reissued arrest warrant is served, whichever is later. If the court has only one judge who sits in more than one location in that district, the pretrial conference shall be held not more than 42 days after the person's arrest for the violation or, if an arrest warrant is issued or reissued, not more than 42 days after the date the issued or reissued arrest warrant is served, whichever is later. The court shall not dismiss a case or impose any other sanction for a failure to comply with the applicable time limit. The 35- and 42-day time limits do not apply to a violation of Section MCL 257.625(1) or (3) or Section MCL 257.625m joined with a felony charge. The court shall order the defendant to attend the pretrial conference and may accept a plea by the defendant at the conclusion of the pretrial conference. The court may adjourn the pretrial conference upon the motion of a party for good cause shown. Not more than one adjournment shall be granted to a party, and the length of an adjournment shall not exceed 14 days.

(3) Except for delay attributable to the unavailability of the defendant, a witness, or material evidence or due to an interlocutory appeal or exceptional circumstances, but not a delay caused by docket congestion, the court shall finally adjudicate, by a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, entry of a verdict, or other final disposition, a case in which the defendant is charged with a misdemeanor violation of Section MCL 257.625(1), (3), (6), or (7) or Section MCL 257.625m or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to Section MCL 257.625(1), (3), or (6) or Section MCL 257.625m, within 77 days after the person is arrested for the violation or, if an arrest warrant is issued or reissued, not more than 77 days after the date the issued or reissued arrest warrant is served, whichever is later. The court shall not dismiss a case or impose any other sanction for a failure to comply with this time limit. The 77-day time limit does not apply to a violation of Section MCL 257.625(1) or (3) or Section MCL 257.625m punishable as a felony or a violation of Section MCL 257.625(1), (3), (6), or (7) or Section MCL 257.625m joined with a felony charge.

(4) Before accepting a plea of guilty or nolo contendere under Section MCL 257.625 or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to Section MCL 257.625(1), (2), (3),or (6), the court shall advise the accused of the maximum possible term of imprisonment and the maximum possible fine that may be imposed for the violation and shall advise the defendant that the maximum possible license sanctions that may be imposed will be based upon the master driving record maintained by the Secretary of State under Section 204a.

(5) Before imposing sentence for a violation of Section MCL 257.625(1), (3), (4), (5), (6), or (7) or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to Section MCL 257.625(1), (3), or (6), the court shall order the person to undergo screening and assessment by a person or agency designated by the office of substance abuse services to determine whether the person is likely to benefit from rehabilitative services, including alcohol or drug education and alcohol or drug treatment programs. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the court may order the person to participate in and successfully complete one or more appropriate rehabilitative programs as part of the sentence. If the person has one or more prior convictions, the court shall order the person to participate in and successfully complete one or more appropriate rehabilitative programs as part of the sentence. The person shall pay for the costs of the screening, assessment, and rehabilitative services.

(6) If the judgment and sentence are appealed to circuit court, the court may ex parte order the Secretary of State to stay the suspension, revocation, or restricted license issued by the Secretary of State pending the outcome of the appeal.

UTC SEC. 5.15c: CONSENT TO CHEMICAL TESTS; PERSONS NOT CONSIDERED TO HAVE GIVEN CONSENT TO WITHDRAWAL OF BLOOD; ADMINISTRATION OF TESTS.

(1) A person who operates a vehicle upon a public highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, within this state is considered to have given consent to chemical tests of his or her blood, breath or urine for the purpose of determining the amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled substance or both in his or her blood or urine or the amount of alcohol in his or her breath in all of the following circumstances:

( a ) If the person is arrested for a violation of Section MCL 257.625(1), (3), (4), (5), (6), or (7), Section MCL 257.625a(5), or Section MCL 257.625m or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to Section MCL 257.625(1), (3), or (6), Section MCL 257.625a(5), or Section MCL 257.625m.

( b ) If the person is arrested for felonious driving, negligent homicide, manslaughter, or murder resulting from the operation of a motor vehicle, and the peace officer had reasonable grounds to believe the person was operating the vehicle while impaired by or under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance, or while having an alcohol content of 0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine, or if the person is less than 21 years of age while having a bodily alcohol content. As used in this subdivision, "any bodily alcohol content" means either of the following:

( i ) An alcohol content of not less than 0.02 grams or more than 0.07 grams per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.

( ii ) Any presence of alcohol within a person=s body resulting from the consumption of intoxicating liquor, other than consumption of intoxicating liquor as part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony.

(2) A person who is afflicted with hemophilia, diabetes, or a condition requiring the use of anticoagulant under the direction of a physician is not considered to have given consent to the withdrawal of blood.

(3) The tests shall be administered as provided in Section MCL 257.625a(6).

UTC SEC. 5.15d: REFUSAL OF CHEMICAL TEST -- RIGHT OF DRIVER; REPORT TO SECRETARY OF STATE.

(1) If a person refuses a peace officer's request to submit to a chemical test offered pursuant to MCL 257.625a(6) or UTC Sec. 5.15a(6), a test shall not be given without a court order, but the officer may seek to obtain the court order.

(2) A written report shall immediately be forwarded to the Secretary of State by the peace officer. The report shall state that the officer had reasonable grounds to believe that the person had committed a crime described in MCL 257.625c(1) or UTC Sec. 5.15c(1), and that the person had refused to submit to the test upon the request of the peace officer and had been advised of the consequences of the refusal. The form of the report shall be prescribed and furnished by the Secretary of State.

UTC SEC. 5.15e: REFUSAL TO SUBMIT TO CHEMICAL TESTS; NOTICE OF REPORT; REQUEST FOR HEARING; COUNSEL.

(1) If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test pursuant to MCL 257.625d or UTC Sec. 5.15d, the peace officer shall immediately notify the person in writing that within 14 days of the date of the notice the person may request a hearing as provided in MCL 257.625f or UTC Sec. 5.15f. The form of the notice shall be prescribed and furnished by the Secretary of State.

(2) The notice shall specifically state that failure to request a hearing within 14 days will result in the suspension of the person's license or permit to drive. The notice shall also state that there is not a requirement that the person retain counsel for the hearing, though counsel would be permitted to represent the person at the hearing.

UTC SEC. 5.15f: EFFECT OF FAILURE TO REQUEST HEARING; HEARING PROCEDURE; NOTICE, APPEAL, NOTICE TO MOTOR VEHICLE ADMINISTRATOR OF ANOTHER STATE.

(1) If a person who refuses to submit to a chemical test pursuant to MCL 257.625d or UTC Sec. 5.15d does not request a hearing within 14 days after the date of notice pursuant to MCL 257.625e or UTC 5.15e, the Secretary of State shall impose the following license sanctions:

( a ) If the person was operating a vehicle other than a commercial motor vehicle, suspend or deny the person's operator's or chauffeur's license or permit to drive, or nonresident operating privilege, for six months, or for a second or subsequent refusal within a period of seven years, for one year. If the person is a resident without a license or permit to operate a vehicle in the state, the Secretary of State shall not issue the person a license or permit for six months, or for a second or subsequent refusal within a period of seven years, for one year.

( b ) If the person was operating a commercial motor vehicle, for the first refusal, suspend all vehicle group designations on the person's operator's or chauffeur's license or permit, or nonresident privilege to operate a commercial motor vehicle, or if the person is a resident without a license or permit to operate a commercial motor vehicle in the state, not issue the person an operator's or chauffeur's license with vehicle group designations, for one year.

( c ) If the person was operating a commercial motor vehicle, for the second or subsequent refusal that occurred in a separate incident from, and within 10 years of a prior refusal, revoke all vehicle group designations on the person's operator's or chauffeur's license or permit, or nonresident privilege to operate a commercial motor vehicle, or if the person is a resident without a license or permit to operate a commercial motor vehicle in the state, not issue the person an operator's or chauffeur's license with vehicle group designations, for not less than 10 years and until the person is approved for the issuance of a vehicle group designation.


( d ) If the person was operating a commercial motor vehicle and was arrested for an offense enumerated in MCL 257.625c or UTC Sec. 5.15c, other than a violation of MCL 257.625a(5) or UTC Sec. 5.15a(5), or MCL 257.625m or UTC Sec. 5.15h, impose the license sanction described in subdivision (a) and the license sanction described in subdivision (b) or ( c ), as applicable.

(2) If a hearing is requested, the Secretary of State shall hold the hearing in the same manner and under the same conditions as provided in MCL 257.322. Not less than five days notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the person requesting the hearing, to the peace officer who filed the report under MCL 257.625d or UTC Sec. 5.15d, and if the prosecuting attorney requests receipt of the notice, to the prosecuting attorney of the county where the arrest was made. The hearing officer may administer oaths, issue subpoenas for the attendance of necessary witnesses, and grant a reasonable request for an adjournment. Not more than one adjournment shall be granted to a party and the length of an adjournment shall not exceed 14 days. A hearing under this subsection shall be scheduled to be held within 45 days after the date of arrest for the violation. The hearing officer shall not impose any sanctions for a failure to comply with this time limit.

(3) Except for delay attributable to the unavailability of the defendant, a witness, or material evidence, or due to an interlocutory appeal or exceptional circumstances, but not a delay caused by docket congestion, a hearing shall be finally adjudicated within 77 days after the date of arrest. The hearing officer shall not impose any sanctions for a failure to comply with this time limit.

(4) The hearing shall cover only the following issues:

( a ) Whether the peace officer had reasonable grounds to believe that the person had committed a crime described in MCL 257.625c(1) or UTC Sec. 5.15c(1).

( b ) Whether the person was placed under arrest for a crime described in MCL 257.625c(1) or UTC Sec. 5.15c(1).

( c ) If the person refused to submit to the test upon the request of the officer, whether the refusal was reasonable.

( d ) Whether the person was advised of the rights under MCL 257.625a(6) or UTC Sec. 5.15a(6).

(5) A person shall not order a hearing officer to make a particular finding on any issue enumerated in Subsections (4) (a) to (d).

(6) The hearing officer shall make a record of a hearing held pursuant to this section. The record shall be prepared and transcribed in accordance with Section 86 of the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, Act No. 306 of the Public Acts of 1969, being Section 24.286 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. Upon notification of the filing of a petition for judicia review pursuant to MCL 257.323 and not less than 10 days before the matter is set for review, the hearing officer shall transmit to the court in which the petition was filed the original or a certified copy of the official record of the proceedings. Proceedings at which evidence was presented need not be transcribed and transmitted if the sole reason for review is to determine whether the court will order the issuance of a restricted license. The parties to the proceedings for judicial review may stipulate that the record be shortened. A party unreasonably refusing to stipulate to a shortened record may be taxed by the court in which the petition is filed for the additional costs. The court may permit subsequent corrections to the record.

(7) If the person who requested a hearing does not prevail, the Secretary of State shall impose the following license sanctions after the hearing:

( a ) If the person was operating a vehicle other than a commercial motor vehicle, suspend or deny issuance of a license or driving permit or nonresident operating privilege of the person for six months, or for a second or subsequent refusal within seven years, for one year. If the person is a resident without a license or permit to operate a vehicle in the state, the Secretary of State shall not issue the person a license or permit for six months, or for a second or subsequent refusal within seven years, for one year. The person may file a petition in the circuit court of the county in which the arrest was made to review the suspension or denial as provided in MCL 257.323.

( b ) If the person was operating a commercial motor vehicle, impose the sanction prescribed under Subsection (1) (b) or (1) ( c ), as applicable. The person may file a petition in the circuit court of the county in which the arrest was made to review the suspension or denial as provided in MCL 257.323.

( c ) If the person was operating a commercial motor vehicle and was arrested for an offense enumerated in MCL 257.625c or UTC Sec. 5.15c, other than a violation of MCL 257.625a(5) or UTC Sec. 5.15a(5), or MCL 257.625m or UTC Sec. 5.15h, impose the license sanctions described in subdivisions (a) and (b).

(8) If the person who requested the hearing prevails, the peace officer who filed the report under MCL 257.625d or UTC Sec. 5.15d may, with the consent of the prosecuting attorney, file a petition in the circuit court of the county in which the arrest was made to review the determination of the hearing officer as provided in MCL 257.323.

(9) When it has been finally determined that a nonresident's privilege to operate a vehicle in the state has been suspended or denied, the department shall give notice in writing of the action taken to the motor vehicle administrator of the state of the person's residence and of each state in which he or she has a license to operate a motor vehicle.

UTC SEC. 5.15g: DUTIES OF PEACE OFFICER IF PERSON REFUSES CHEMICAL TEST OR IF TEST REVEALS UNLAWFUL ALCOHOL CONTENT.

(1) If a person refuses a chemical test offered pursuant to section [MCL 257.625a(6)] or submits to a chemical test or a chemical test is performed pursuant to a court order and the test reveals an unlawful alcohol content, the peace officer who requested the person to submit to the test shall do all of the following:

( a ) On behalf of the Secretary of State, immediately confiscate the person's license or permit to operate a motor vehicle and, if the person is otherwise eligible for a license or permit, issue a temporary license or permit to the person. The temporary license or permit shall be on a form provided by the Secretary of State.

( b ) Except as provided in Subsection (2), immediately do all of the following:

(i) Forward a copy of the written report of the person's refusal to submit to a chemical test required under section [MCL 257.625d] to the Secretary of State.

(ii) Notify the Secretary of State by means of the law enforcement information network that a temporary license or permit was issued to the person.

(iii) Destroy the person's driver license or permit.

(2) If a person submits to a chemical test offered pursuant to section [MCL 257.625a(6)] that requires an analysis of blood or urine and a report of the results of that chemical test is not immediately available, the peace officer who requested the person to the test shall comply with Subsection (1) (a) pending receipt of the test report. If the report reveals an unlawful alcohol content, the peace officer who requested the person to submit to the test shall immediately comply with Subsection (1) (b). If the report does not reveal an unlawful alcohol content, the peace officer who requested the person to submit to the test shall immediately notify the person of the test results and immediately return the person's license or permit by first-class mail to the address given at the time of arrest.

(3) A temporary license or permit issued under this section is valid for one of the following time periods:

(a) If the case is not prosecuted, for 90 days after issuance or until the person=s license or permit is suspended pursuant to section [MCL 257.625f], whichever occurs earlier. The prosecuting attorney shall notify the Secretary of State if a case referred to the prosecuting attorney is not prosecuted. The arresting law enforcement agency shall notify the Secretary of State if a case is not referred to the prosecuting attorney for prosecution.

(b) If the case is prosecuted, until the criminal charges against the person are dismissed, the person is acquitted of those charges, or the person=s license or permit is suspended, restricted, or revoked.

(4) As used in this section, "unlawful alcohol content" means any of the following, as applicable:

(a) If the person tested is less than 21 years of age, 0.02 grams or more of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.

(b) If the person tested was operating a commercial motor vehicle within this state, 0.04 grams or more of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.

(c) If the person tested is not a person described in Subsection (a) or (b), 0.10 grams or more of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.

UTC SEC. 5.15h: OPERATION OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLE BY PERSON WITH AN ALCOHOL CONTENT OF 0.04 GRAMS OR MORE BUT NOT MORE THAN 0.07 GRAMS PER 100 MILLILITERS OF BLOOD, PER 210 LITERS OF BREATH, OR PER 67 MILLILITERS OF URINE; ARREST AT TIME OF ACCIDENT; VIOLATION AS MISDEMEANOR; SENTENCE; PRIOR CONVICTION DEFINED.

(1) A person, whether licensed or not, who has an alcohol content of 0.04 grams or more but not more than 0.07 grams per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine shall not operate a commercial motor vehicle within this state.

(2) A peace officer may arrest a person without a warrant if the peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person was, at the time of an accident, the driver of a commercial motor vehicle involved in the accident and was operating the vehicle in violation of MCL 257.725m or this section.

(3) A person who is convicted of a violation of MCL 257.625m or this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $300.00, or both, together with costs of the prosecution. As part of the sentence, the court shall order the Secretary of State to suspend the vehicle group designations on the person's operator's or chauffeur's license pursuant to MCL 257.319b(1)(C) or, if the vehicle was carrying hazardous material required to have a placard pursuant to 49 C.F.R. parts 100 to 199 in accordance with MCL 57.319b(1)(d). The court shall not order the Secretary of State to issue a restricted license that would permit the person to operate a commercial motor vehicle.

(4) A person who violates MCL 257.625m or this section within 10 years of a prior conviction may be sentenced to imprisonment for not more than one year or a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or both. As part of the sentence, the court shall order the Secretary of State to revoke the vehicle group designations on the person's operator's or chauffeur's license pursuant to MCL 257.319b(1)(e). The court shall not order the Secretary of State to issue a restricted license that would permit the person to operate a commercial motor vehicle. As used in this subsection, "prior conviction" means a conviction for a violation of this section, MCL 257.625m and MCL 257.625(1), (3), (4) or (5), former MCL 257.625(1) or (2), or former MCL 257.625(1) or (3), former MCL 257.625(1) or (2), or former MCL 257.625b, or a law of another state substantially corresponding to this section, MCL 257.625(1), (3), (4), or (5), former MCL 257.625(1) or (2), or former MCL 257.625b, while operating a commercial motor vehicle.

(5) When assessing points and taking license actions under this ordinance, the Secretary of State and the court shall treat a conviction for an attempted violation of Subsection (1) or MCL 257.625m(1), or a law of another state substantially corresponding to Subsection (1) or MCL 257.625m(1) the same as if the offense had been committed.

R28.1416b SECTION 5.16b TRANSPORTING OR POSSESSING LIQUOR WITHIN PASSENGER COMPARTMENT OF VEHICLE; VIOLATION PUNISHABLE AS MISDEMEANOR

Section 5.16b is hereby added to read as follows:

(1) Except as provided in Subsection (2), a person shall not transport or possess alcoholic liquor in a container that is open or uncapped or upon which the seal is broken within the passenger compartment of a vehicle upon a highway, or within the passenger compartment of a moving vehicle in any place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, in this Village.

(2) A person may transport or possess alcoholic liquor in a container that is open or uncapped or upon which the seal is broken within the passenger compartment of a vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles in this village, if the vehicle does not have a truck or compartment separate from the passenger compartment, the container is enclosed or encased, and the container is not readily accessible to the occupants of the vehicle.

(3) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.

(4) This section does not apply to passengers in a chartered vehicle authorized to operate by the Michigan Department of Transportation.

SECTION 5.62(a) is amended to read as follows:

(1) A person whose operator's or chauffeur's license or registration certificate has been suspended or revoked and who has been notified as provided in section [MCL 257.212] of that suspension or revocation, whose application for license has been denied, or who has never applied for a license, shall not operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of motor vehicles, within this Village.

(2) A person shall not knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by the person to be operated upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, within this state by a person whose license or registration certificate is suspended or revoked, whose application for license has been denied, or who has never applied for a license, except as permitted under this act.

(3) Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person who violates Subsection (1) or (2) is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as follows: For a first violation, by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both. Unless the vehicle was stolen or used with the permission of a person who did not knowingly permit an unlicensed driver to operate the vehicle, the registration plates of the vehicle shall be canceled by the Secretary of State upon notification by a peace officer.

(4) Before a person is arraigned before a district court magistrate or judge on a charge of violating this section, the arresting officer shall obtain the person's driving record from the Secretary of State and shall furnish the record to the court. The driving record of the person may be obtained from the Secretary of State's computer information network.

(5) This section does not apply to a person who operates a vehicle solely for the purpose of protecting human life or property if the life or property is endangered and summoning prompt aid is essential.

(6) A person whose vehicle group designation is suspended or revoked and who has been notified as provided in section [MCL 257.212] of that suspension or revocation, or whose application for a vehicle group designation has been denied as provided in this act, or who has never applied for a vehicle group designation and who operates a commercial motor vehicle within this state, except as permitted under this act, while any of those conditions existing is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable, except as otherwise provided in this section, by imprisonment for not more than three days or more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100.00 or both.

(7) For purposes of this section, a person who never applied for a license includes a person who applied for a license, was denied, and never applied again.

R28.1462b, SECTION 5.62b IMPOUNDMENT

Section 5.62b is hereby amended to read as follows:

(1) When a person is convicted under Section 5.62(a)(1) of operating a motor vehicle while his or her license to operate a motor vehicle is suspended, revoked or denied, the motor vehicle, if it is owned in whole or in part by that person, shall be ordered impounded for not less than 30 days or more than 120 days from the date of judgment.

(2) An order of impoundment issued pursuant to Subsection (1) is valid throughout the state. Any peace officer may execute the impoundment order. The order shall include the implied consent of the owner of the vehicle to the storage for insurance coverage purposes.

(3) The owner of a motor vehicle impounded pursuant to this section is liable for expenses incurred in the removal and storage of the vehicle whether or not the vehicle is returned to him or her. The vehicle shall be returned to the owner only if the owner pays the expenses for removal and storage. If redemption is not made or the vehicle is not returned as provided in this section within 30 days after the time set in the impoundment order for return of the vehicle, the vehicle shall be considered an abandoned vehicle and disposed of as provided in Section 252.

(4) Nothing in this section affects the rights of a conditional vendor, chattel mortgagee or lessor of a motor vehicle registered in the name of another person as owner who becomes subject to this act.

SECTION 5.62( c ) is amended to read as follows:

(1) When a peace officer detains the driver of a motor vehicle for a violation of a law of this state or local ordinance for which vehicle immobilization is required, the peace officer shall do all of the following:

(a) Immediately confiscate the vehicle's registration plate and destroy it.

(b) Issue a temporary vehicle registration plate for the vehicle in the same form prescribed by the Secretary of State for temporary registration plates issued under section [MCL 257.226a or .226b].

(c) Place the temporary vehicle registration plate on the vehicle in the manner required by the Secretary of State.

(2) A temporary vehicle registration plate issued under this section is valid until the charges against the person are dismissed, the person pleads guilty or nolo contendere to those charges, or the person is found guilty of or is acquitted of those charges.

SECTION 5.62(e) is amended to read as follows:

(1) A court shall order a vehicle immobilized under section [MCL 257.904d] by the use of any available technology approved by the court that locks the ignition, wheels, or steering of the vehicle or otherwise prevents any person from operating the vehicle or that prevents the defendant from operating the vehicle. If a vehicle is immobilized under this section, the court may order the vehicle stored at a location and in a manner considered appropriate by the court. The court may order the person convicted of violating section [MCL 257.625] or a suspension, revocation, or denial under section [MCL 257.904] to pay the cost of immobilizing and storing the vehicle.

(2) A vehicle subject to immobilization under this section may be sold during the period of immobilization, but shall not be sold to a person who is exempt from paying a use tax under Section 3(3)(a) of the use tax act, 1937 PA 94, MCL 205.93 without a court order.

(3) A defendant who is prohibited from operating a motor vehicle by vehicle immobilization shall not purchase, lease, or otherwise obtain a motor vehicle during this immobilization period.

(4) A person shall not remove, tamper with, or bypass or attempt to remove, tamper with, or bypass a device that he or she knows or has reason to know has been installed on a vehicle by court order by vehicle immobilization or operate or attempt to operate a vehicle that he or she knows or has reason to know has been ordered immobilized.

(5) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100.00 or both.

(6) To the extent that a local ordinance regarding the storage or removal of vehicles conflicts with an order of immobilization issued by the court, the local ordinance is preempted.

(7) If a peace officer stops a vehicle that is being operated in violation of an immobilization order, the vehicle shall be impounded pending an order of a court of competent jurisdiction.

(8) The court shall require the defendant or a person who provides immobilization services to the court under this section to certify that a vehicle ordered immobilized by the court is immobilized as required. {Ord. 297, 10-30-99}

R 28.1805, Section 8.5 PARKING IN A MANNER THAT OBSTRUCTS TRAFFIC

Section 8.5 is hereby amended to read as follows:

(1) A person shall not park any vehicle on a street in a manner that leaves an insufficient width of the roadway available for free movement of vehicular traffic.

(2) A vehicle shall not be parked in an area purchased, acquired or used as a clear vision area adjacent to or on a highway right-of-way. A person shall not conduct vending or other commercial enterprises in a clear vision area.

(3) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.

R28.1823a, Section 8.23a UNLAWFUL STANDING OR PARKING OF VEHICLE: WARRANT FOR ARREST: PROOF ESTABLISHING PROBABLE CAUSE; EVIDENTIARY PRESUMPTION

Section 8.23a is hereby amended to read as follows:

(1) Except as provided in Section 8.23a of this Code involving leased vehicles, in a prosecution of the violation of a local ordinance or State Statute relating to the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of the ordinance or State Statute, together with proof, by verifying ownership of the vehicle with the Secretary of State, that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of the violation the registered owner of the vehicle creates in evidence a presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, the violation occurred.

(2) This subsection does not apply to a violation which is a civil infraction.

R 28.1823b, Section 8.23b UNLAWFUL STANDING OR PARKING OF LEASED VEHICLES: EVIDENTIARY PRESUMPTION

Section 8.23b is hereby amended to read as follows:

(1) In a prosecution for a violation of section 8.23a of this Code involving a leased motor vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the citation, complaint or warrant was used in the violation, together with proof that the defendant named in the citation, complaint or warrant, was the lessee of the vehicle at the time of the violation, constitutes in evidence a presumption that the lessee of the vehicle, not the registered owner, was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point and for the time during which the violation occurred.

(2) This section does not apply to a violation which is a civil infraction.

R 28.1903, Section 9.3 PENALTIES; CIVIL INFRACTION AND MISDEMEANOR

Section 9.3, subsection (2) is hereby amended to read as follows:

(2) Misdemeanor: Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the ordinances of this governmental unit, every person who is convicted of a misdemeanor violation of this code shall be punished by a fine of not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not more than ninety days, or both, plus court costs.

R 28.2034, Section 10.34 OPERATING SNOWMOBILE UNDER INFLUENCE OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR OR A CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE

Section 10.34 is hereby amended to read as follows:

(1) A person shall not operate a snowmobile on public property or private property open to the public while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, a controlled substance as defined in Section 7104 of Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of 1978, as amended, being Section 3337104 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance.

(2) The owner or person in charge or in control of the snowmobile shall not authorize or knowingly permit the snowmobile to be driven or operated by a person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor, a controlled substance as defined in Section 7104 of Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of 1978, as amended, or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance.

(3) If a peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person was, at the time of an accident, the driver of a snowmobile involved in the accident and was driving the snowmobile while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, a controlled substance as defined in Section 7104 of Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of 1978, as amended, or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance, the peace officer may arrest the alleged driver of the snowmobile without a warrant.

41.03 AMENDMENTS TO MICHIGAN VEHICLE CODE

The following sections and subsections of the Michigan Vehicle Code for Cities, Townships and Villages are hereby amended as set forth and additional sections and subsections are added as indicated. Section numbers used in this ordinance shall refer to the like numbered sections in the Michigan Vehicle Code.

MCL 257.727 Section 727 PROCEDURE UPON ARREST

Section 727 is added to read as follows:

(1) If a person is arrested without a warrant in any of the following cases, the arrested person shall, without unreasonable delay, be taken before the magistrate who is nearest or most accessible within the judicial district as provided in Section 13 of Chapter IV of the Code of Criminal Procedure, Act No. 175 of the Public Acts of 1927, being Section 764.13 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, or, if a minor, before the probate court within the county in which the offense charged is alleged to have been committed:

(a) If the person is arrested upon a charge of negligent homicide.

(b) If the person is arrested under Section 5.15(1) or (3), or an ordinance substantially corresponding to Section 625(1) or (3).

(c) If a person is arrested under MCL 257.626 or an ordinance substantially corresponding to that section. If under the existing circumstances it does not appear that releasing the person pending the issuance of a warrant will constitute a public menace, the arresting officer may proceed as provided by MCL 257.728.

(d) If a person arrested does not have in his or her immediate possession a valid operator's or chauffeur's license or the receipt described in MCL 257.311a. If the arresting officer otherwise satisfactorily determines the identity of the person and the practicability of subsequent apprehension in the event of the person's failure to voluntarily appear before a designated magistrate or probate court as directed, the officer may release the person from custody with instructions to appear in court, given in the form of a citation as prescribed by Section 728.

MCL 257.732, Section 732 COURT RECORDS

Section 732 is hereby amended to read as follows:

(1) Each municipal judge and each clerk of a court of record shall keep a full record of every case in which a person is charged with or cited for a violation of this act or of a law corresponding to this act regulating the operation of vehicles on highways.

(2) Within 14 days after the conviction or forfeiture of bail of a person, or entry of a civil infraction determination, default judgment, or probate court order of disposition for a child found to be within the provisions of Chapter XIIA of Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of 1939, being Sections 712A.1 to 712A.28 of the Michigan Compiled Law, upon a charge of, or citation for, violating this act or local ordinance corresponding to this act regulating the operation of vehicles on highways, and, for each case charging a violation of Section 5.15(1) or (3) in which the charge is dismissed or the defendant is acquitted, except as provided in Subsection (15), the municipal judge or clerk of the court of record shall prepare and immediately forward to the secretary of state an abstract of the record of the case for the court. The abstract shall be certified by signature, stamp, or facsimile signature by the person required to prepare the abstract to be true and correct. If a city or village department, bureau, or person is authorized to accept a payment of money as a settlement for a violation of a local ordinance corresponding to this act, the city, village department, bureau, or person shall send a full report of each case in which a person pays any amount of money to the city, village department, bureau, or person to the secretary of state upon form prescribed by the secretary of state.

(3) The abstract or report required under this section shall be made upon a form furnished by the secretary of state and shall include the name, address, and date of birth of the person charged or cited; the number of the person's operator's or chauffeur's license, if any; the date and nature of the violation; the type of vehicle driven at the time of the violation and if the vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle, that vehicle's group designation and endorsement classification; the date of the conviction, finding, forfeiture, judgment, or determination; whether bail was forfeited; any license revocation, restriction, suspension, or denial ordered by the court pursuant to this act; and other information considered necessary to the secretary of state.

(4) The clerk of the court also shall forward an abstract of the record of the court to the secretary is state upon the conviction of a person or entry of a probate court order of disposition for a child found to be within the provisions of Chapter XIIA of Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of 1939, being Sections 712A.1 to 712A.28 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, involving a violation of Section 324, 413, 414, or 479a of the Michigan Penal Code, Act No. 328 of the Public Acts of 1931, being Sections 750.324, 750.413, 750.414, and 750.479a of the Michigan Compiled Laws; a violation of Section 1 of Act No. 214 of the Public Acts of 1931, being Section 752.191 of the Michigan Compiled Laws; or an attempt to commit any of these offenses.

(5) Every person required to forward abstracts to the secretary of state under this section shall certify for the period from January 1 through June 30 and for the period from July 1 through December 31 that all abstracts required to be forwarded during the period have been forwarded. The certification shall be filed with the secretary of state not later than 28 days after the end of the period covered by the certification. The certification shall be made upon a form furnished by the secretary of state and shall include all of the following:

(a) The name and title of the person required to forward abstracts.

(b) The court for which the certification is filed.

(c) The time period covered by the certification.

(d) The following statement:

"I certify that all abstracts required by Section 732 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, MCL 257.732; MSA 9.2432, for the period through have been forwarded to the secretary of state."

(e) Other information the secretary of state considers necessary.

(f) The signature of the person required to forward abstracts.

(6) The failure, refusal, or neglect of a person to comply with this section shall constitute misconduct in office and shall be grounds for removal from office. 
(7) Excepts provided in Subsection (8), the secretary of state shall keep all abstracts received under this section at the secretary of state's main office and the abstracts shall be open for public inspection during the office's usual business hours. Each abstract shall be entered upon the master driving record of the person to whom it pertains.

(8) The court shall not submit, and the secretary of state shall discard and not enter on the master driving record, and abstract for a conviction, civil infraction determination, or probate court order of disposition for any of the following offenses:

(a) The parking or standing of a vehicle.

(b) The non-moving violation which is not the basis for the secretary of state's suspension revocation, or denial of an operator's or chauffeur's license.

(c) A violation of Chapter II which is not the basis for the secretary of state's suspension, revocation or denial of an operator's or chauffeur's license.

(d) A pedestrian, passenger, or bicycle violation.

(e) A violation of Section 710e.

(9) The secretary of state shall discard and not enter on the master driving record an abstract for a bond forfeiture which occurred outside this state. However, the secretary of state shall retain and enter on the master driving record an abstract of an out-of-state bond forfeiture for an offense which occurred after October 1, 1989, in connection with the operation of a commercial motor vehicle.

(10) The secretary of state shall inform the courts of this state of the non-moving violations and violations of Chapter II which are used by the secretary of state as the basis for the suspension, restriction, revocation or denial of an operator's or chauffeur's license.

(11) If a conviction, civil infraction determination, or probate court order of disposition is reversed upon appeal, the person whose conviction, determination, or order of disposition has been reversed may serve on the secretary of state a certified copy of the order of reversal, and the secretary of state shall enter the order in the proper book or index in connection with the record of the conviction, civil infraction determination, or probate court order of disposition.

(12) The secretary of state may permit a city or village department, bureau, person, or court to modify the requirement as to the time and manner of reporting a conviction, civil infraction determination, settlement, or probate court order of disposition to the secretary of state when the modification will increase the economy and efficiency of collecting and utilizing the records. If the permitted abstract of court record reporting a conviction, civil infraction determination, settlement, or probate court order of disposition originates as a part of the written notice to appear, authorized in Section 728(1) or 742(1), the form of the written notice and report shall be as prescribed by the secretary of state.

MCL 257.910 Section 910 CONVICTION

Section 910 is added to read as follows:

A conviction based on a plea of nolo contendere shall be treated in the same manner as a conviction based on a plea of guilty or a finding of guilt for all purposes under this act, except that neither the plea nor the conviction shall be admissible as substantive evidence of conduct at issued in a civil case arising out of the same occurrence.

41.04 MINOR WITH LIQUOR IN VEHICLES

(a) No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall purchase or knowingly possess, transport or have under his control in any motor vehicle any alcoholic liquor unless said person is employed by a licensee under the Michigan Liquor Control Act, and is possessing, transporting or having such alcoholic liquor in a motor vehicle under his control during regular working hours and in the course of his employment.

(b) At any time within thirty (30) days following the conviction of any such person for the violation of the provisions of this section, which conviction has become final, complaint may be made by the arresting officer or his superior before the court from which was issued the warrant, which complaint shall be under oath and shall contain a description of the motor vehicle in which such alcoholic liquor was possessed or transported by the minor committing such offense and praying that the motor vehicle be impounded as provided in this section. 

(c) If the court determines upon hearing, from competent and relevant evidence, that at the time of commission of the offense the motor vehicle was being driven by the minor with the express or implied consent or knowledge of the owner, and that the use of the vehicle is not needed by the owner in the direct pursuit of his employment or the actual operation of his business, the court may authorize the impounding of the vehicle for a period to be determined by the court, of not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days. The court's order authorizing the impounding of the vehicle may authorize any peace officer to take possession without process of the vehicle wherever located and to store the same in a public or private garage at the expense and risk of the owner of the vehicle.

No person shall knowingly transfer title to any motor vehicle for the purpose of avoiding the provisions of this section

41.05 PARKING, SCHOOL AREAS

No person shall stop, stand or park upon a parking lot or area owned by the School District of the City of Birmingham located within the Village of Beverly Hills except as the same may be permitted or licensed by the school district, provided that where limitations are imposed upon the use of any lot or area by said school district, such limitations shall be clearly posted so as to be visible to persons using such lot or area.

The provisions of this section shall be enforced by Public Safety Department or by such person or persons as shall be designated by Public Safety Director of Village of Beverly Hills.

41.06 AVAILABILITY

(a) A complete copy of the Uniform Traffic Code is available at the office of the Village Clerk for inspection by the public at all times.

(b) No further or additional publication of the Uniform Traffic Code is required or contemplated.

41.07 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY REGULATIONS

(a) Motor Vehicle Carrier Safety Regulations Adoption by Reference with Indicated Changes. The Village of Beverly Hills Code of Ordinances is amended by adding Section 41.07 (A) entitled "Motor Carrier Safety Regulations" which shall adopt by reference Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations as of February 29, 1990, and as amended continuously, as adopted by the State of Michigan under Public Act No. 339 of 1990; Public Act 181; and Public Act No. 265 of 1995.

The Village of Beverly Hills does amend the above stated Act 339 to state that any Public Safety Officer of the Village of Beverly Hills, County of Oakland, State of Michigan can conduct a safety inspection and remove any vehicle from service that poses a safety hazard should operation of that vehicle continue.

The Village of Beverly Hills does further adopt any motor vehicle statutes under MCL 257 of the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code and MCL 480 of the Motor Carrier Safety Act pursuant to Motor Carrier Enforcement as well as any applicable statutes under Act 300 of the State of Michigan.

This governmental agency will recognize violations as misdemeanors under these previously stated statutes.

(b) Copy of the Code. A copy of Title 49 of the Code of Regulations as adopted by the State of Michigan in Public Act 339 of 1990 and any future amendements to Title 49 applicable to this Ordinance shall be on file with the Village Clerk for review by the general public.

41.08 VIOLATIONS

(a) Civil Infraction: A violation of this code or rules substantially corresponding to the act that is designated a civil infraction is not a crime and shall not be punishable by imprisonment or a penal fine. A civil infraction shall not be considered a lesser included offense of any criminal offense.

(b) Misdemeanor: The penalties provided by the Michigan Vehicle Code are adopted by reference.  The Village of Beverly Hills may not enforce any provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code for which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days; provided, however, that a violation of MCL 625(1)(C) is punishable by one or more of the following:
(i)         Community service of not more than 350 hours.
(ii)        Imprisonment for not more than 180 days.
(iii)       A fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $700.00.

41.09 ADOPTION OF CODE BY REFERENCE

The Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.1 to 257.923, as amended, is hereby adopted by reference.  MCL 257.625(1)(C) of the Vehicle Code is specifically adopted by reference, pursuant to Public Act 7 of 2012. {Ord. 308; 6-1-02; Ord. 370; 10-1-19}

Chapter 42 - Offenses Against Public Peace, Safety and Morals
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE, SAFETY AND MORALS

42.01 WEAPONS
42.02 BONFIRES
42.03 HITCHHIKING
42.04 EXPECTORATING
42.05 INJURING PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY
42.06 TAMPERING WITH PUBLIC PROPERTY
42.07 OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS
42.08 GAMBLING
42.09 PROSTITUTION
42.10 CONSUMPTION OF LIQUOR IN PUBLIC PLACES
42.10.10 PURCHASE, CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR BY MINORS
42.11 CURFEW AND PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
42.12 GAMES IN STREETS
42.13 MARIJUANA AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
42.14 TOXIC CHEMICALS
42.15 DISTURBANCES AT SCHOOLS
42.16 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
42.17 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY
42.18 DEPOSITING OF SNOW, ICE OR SLUSH
42.19 LARCENY
42.20 NOISE CONTROL
42.21 REGULATING THE USE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND DRUGS AT OPEN HOUSE PARTIES
42.22 RETAIL FRAUD
42.23 PROHIBITING THE USE OF A TOBACCO PRODUCT ON SCHOOL PROPERTY

42.01 WEAPONS.

(a) Carrying Concealed Weapons. No person shall wear under his clothes or conceal about his person, or display in a threatening manner, any dangerous or deadly weapon including, but not by way of limitations, any pistol, revolver, slingshot, cross-knuckles, or knuckles of lead, brass, or other metal, or any bowie knife, or any knife with a switch-blade or device whereby the blade or blades can be opened by a flick of a button, pressure on the handle, or other mechanical contrivance.

(b) Possession of Dangerous or Deadly Weapons. No person shall have in his possession, except within his own domicile, or carry or use, a revolver or pistol of any description, shotgun, or rifle which may be used for the explosion of cartridges, or any air-gun, "B-B gun," gas-operated gun or spring gun, or any instrument, toy or weapon commonly known as a "pea-shooter," slingshot, or "beany," or any bow made for the purpose of throwing or projecting missiles of any kind by any means whatsoever, whether such instrument is called by any name set forth above or by any other name.

The prohibition of this subsection (b) above shall not apply to licensed shooting galleries or in private grounds or premises under circumstances when such instrument can be fired, discharged or operated in such a manner as not to endanger persons or property, and also in such manner as to prevent the projectile from traversing any grounds or space outside the limits of such gallery, grounds or residence; and further provided, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the concealed carrying of any type of gun whatsoever when unloaded and properly cased, to or from any range or gallery or to or from an area where hunting is allowed by law.

The prohibition of this subsection (b) shall not be construed to forbid United States marshals, sheriffs, constables, and their deputies, and any regular, special or ex officio police officer, or any other law enforcement officer from carrying or wearing, while on duty, such weapons as shall be necessary in the proper discharge of their duties.

(c) Forfeiture of Weapons. Every person convicted of a violation of this subsection shall forfeit to the Village such dangerous or deadly weapon so concealed or displayed.

(d) Disposition of Confiscated Weapons. Every public safety officer, upon making any arrest and taking a weapon used in violation of this section, shall deliver the same to the court hearing the action to be held by it until the final determination of the prosecution for said offense; and upon the finding of guilt, it shall then be the duty of the judge of the court to deliver said weapon forthwith to the Department of Public Safety who shall make disposition of the weapon.

42.02 BONFIRES. No person shall make or assist in making any bonfire in or upon any public street or place within the Village without the permission of the Department of Public Safety.
(a)  Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be responsible for a civil infraction, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined no less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such offense, or such fine in the discretion of the court, together with the costs of such prosecution. Each day that a violation of this Ordinance continues shall be a separate offense.
1. Enforcement. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and expenses, the judge or magistrate shall be authorized to issue any judgement, writ or order necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of this Chapter.

42.03 HITCHHIKING. No person shall hitchhike, "thumb rides" or go upon the public streets and highways for the purpose of soliciting free transportation.
(a)  Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be responsible for a civil infraction, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined no less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such offense, or such fine in the discretion of the court, together with the costs of such prosecution. Each day that a violation of this Ordinance continues shall be a separate offense.
1. Enforcement. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and expenses, the judge or magistrate shall be authorized to issue any judgement, writ or order necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of this Chapter.

42.04 EXPECTORATING. No person in the Village shall expectorate upon any sidewalk, street, floor in public buildings or upon any other public place.
(a)  Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be responsible for a civil infraction, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined no less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such offense, or such fine in the discretion of the court, together with the costs of such prosecution. Each day that a violation of this Ordinance continues shall be a separate offense.
1. Enforcement. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and expenses, the judge or magistrate shall be authorized to issue any judgement, writ or order necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of this Chapter.

42.05 INJURING PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.

(a) Injury or Removal. No person shall willfully, maliciously, wantonly, negligently or otherwise injure, deface, destroy or remove real property or improvements thereto, or movable or personal property belonging to the Village or to any person in the Village.

(b) Scattering Rubbish. No person shall throw or permit to be deposited or scattered upon any sidewalk, alley, street, bridge or public passageway, or upon any private property, any waste or other material of any kind.

(c) Posting Notices. No person shall fasten in any way any showcard, poster, or other advertising device upon public or private property in the Village unless legally authorized to do so.

42.06 TAMPERING WITH PUBLIC PROPERTY.

(a) Tampering. No person shall tamper with, injure, deface, destroy or remove any sign, notice, marker, fire alarm box, fireplug, topographical survey monument or any other personal property erected or placed by the Village.

(b) Obstructing Passageways. No person shall place or erect upon public way or passageway to any building an obstruction of any type, provided that this subsection shall not prevent the duly authorized or required placing of temporary barriers or warning signs for the purpose of safeguarding the public.

(c) Removal of Earth. No person shall move, disturb, or take any earth, stone or other material from any public street, alley, park or other public ground.

42.07 OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS.

(a) Vulgar Language. No person shall use vulgar, profane, or indecent language on any public street or other public place or in any public dance hall, club dance, skating rink, or place of business open to public patronage.
(b) Indecent Exposure. No person shall publicly expose his person or make any indecent gestures.
{Ord. 369; 7-16-19}
(d) Window-Peeping. No person shall look, peer, or peep into, or be found loitering around or within view of any window not on his own property with the intent of watching or looking through the window.
(e) Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be responsible for a civil infraction, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined no less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such offense, or such fine in the discretion of the court, together with the costs of such prosecution. Each day that a violation of this Ordinance continues shall be a separate offense.
1. Enforcement. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and expenses, the judge or magistrate shall be authorized to issue any judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of this Chapter.

42.08 GAMBLING.

(a) Participation Prohibited. No person shall engage in a game of chance prohibited by the statutes of the State of Michigan of ordinances of this Village.
(b) Possession of Materials. No person shall have in his possession any evidence of illegal gambling in the nature of policy or pool tickets, slips or checks or memoranda of any combination or bet, or any policy wheel, dice, implement, apparatus or material of any form of illegal gambling or lottery.
(c) Owner of Premises. No person being the owner or person in control of premises shall knowingly permit the use or occupancy thereof for gambling.

42.09 PROSTITUTION.

(a) Committing. No person shall commit or offer or agree to commit a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion.
(b) Securing. No person shall secure or offer another for the purpose of committing a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion.
(c) Frequenting. No person shall be in or near any place frequented by the public, or any public place, for the purpose of inducing, enticing, or procuring another to commit a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion.
(d) Meretricious Display. No person shall make a meretricious display in or near any public place, any frequented by the public, or any place open to the public view.
(e) Transportation. No person shall knowingly transport any person to any place or building for the purpose of committing any lewd act or act of prostitution or moral perversion.
(f) Permitting. No person shall knowingly receive, or offer to receive or agree to receive any person into any place or building for the purpose of performing a lewd act, or an act of prostitution or moral perversion, or to knowingly permit any person to remain in any place or building for any such purpose.
(g) Directing. No person shall direct or offer to direct any person to any place or building for the purpose of committing any lewd act or act of prostitution or moral perversion.
(h) Aiding. No person shall aid, abet, allow, permit, or participate in the commission of any of the acts prohibited in subsection (a) through (g) above.

42.10 CONSUMPTION OF LIQUOR IN PUBLIC PLACES.

(a) No person shall consume any alcoholic liquor on any public highway.
(b) No person shall consume any alcoholic liquor, except beer and/or wine, in public parks and places of amusement not licensed to sell for consumption on the premises under the Michigan Liquor Control Act. 

42.10.10 PURCHASE, CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR BY MINORS. 

(a) Fines and sanctions. A minor shall not purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, consume or attempt to consume alcoholic liquor, or possess or attempt to possess alcoholic liquor, or have any bodily alcohol content, except as provided in this section. A minor who violates this subsection is responsible for a municipal civil infraction or guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by the folliwng fines and sanctions.

(1) For the first violation, the minor is responsible for a civil infraction and shall be fined not more than $100.00.  A court may order the minor to participate in substance use disorder services as defined in section 6230 of the public health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.6230, and designated by the administrator of the office of substance abuse services, and may order the minor to perform community service and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at the individuals own expense.

(2)  For a violation of this subsection that occurs after 1 prior judgment, the minor is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 30 days if the court finds that the minor violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile adjudication, or by a fine of not more than $200.00, or both. A court may order the minor to participate in substance use disorder services as defined in section 6230 of the public health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.6230, and designated by the administrator of the office of substance abuse services, to perform community service, and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at the individuals own expense.

(3) For a violation of this subsection that occurs after 2 or more prior judgments, the minor is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 60 days, if the court finds that the minor violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile adjudication, or by a fine of not more than $500.00, or both, as applicable. A court may order the minor to participate in substance use disorder services as defined in section 6230 of the public health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.6230, and designated by the administrator of the office of substance abuse services, to perform community service, and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at the individuals own expense.

(b) An individual who furnishes fraudulent identification to a minor or, notwithstanding subsection (a), a minor who uses fraudulent identification to purchase alcoholic liquor, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100.00, or both.

(c) If an individual who pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation of subsection (a)(2) or offers a plea of admission in a juvenile delinquency proceeding for a misdemeanor violation of subsection (a)(2), the court, without entering a judgment of guilt in a criminal proceeding or a determination in a juvenile delinquency proceeding that the juvenile has committed the offense and with the consent of the accused, may defer further proceedings and place the individual on probation. The terms and conditions of that probation include, but are not limited to, the sanctions set forth in subsection (a)(3), payment of the costs including minimum state cost as provided for in section 18m of chapter XIIA of the probate code of 1939, 1939 PA 288, MCL 712A.18m, and section 1j of chapter IX of the code of criminal procedure, 1927 PA 175, MCL 769.1j, and the costs of probation as prescribed in section 3 of chapter XI of the code of criminal procedure, 1927 PA 175, MCL 771.3. If a court finds that an individual violated a term or condition of probation or that the individual is utilizing this subsection in another court, the court may enter an adjudication of guilt, or a determination in a juvenile delinquency proceeding that the individual has committed the offense, and proceed as otherwise provided by law. If an individual fulfills the terms and conditions of probation, the court shall discharge the individual and dismiss the proceedings. A discharge and dismissal under this section is without adjudication of guilt or without a determination in a juvenile delinquency proceeding that the individual has committed the offense and is not a conviction or juvenile adjudication for purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law on conviction of a crime. An individual may obtain only 1 discharge and dismissal under this subsection. The court shall maintain a nonpublic record of the matter while proceedings are deferred and the individual is on probation and if there is a discharge and dismissal under this subsection. The secretary of state shall retain a nonpublic record of a plea and of the discharge and dismissal under this subsection. These records shall be furnished to any of the following:

(1) To a court, prosecutor, or police agency on request for the purpose of determining if an individual has already utilized this subsection.

(2) To the department of corrections, a prosecutor, or a law enforcement agency, on the department's, a prosecutor's, or a law enforcement agency's request, subject to all of the following conditions:
i.    At the time of the request, the individual is an employee of the department of corrections, the prosecutor, or the law enforcement agency, or an applicant for employment with the department of corrections, the prosecutor, or the law enforcement agency.
ii.   The record is used by the department of corrections, the prosecutor, or the law enforcement agency only to determine whether an employee has violated his or her conditions of employment or whether an applicant meets criteria for employment.

(d) A misdemeanor violation of subsection (a) successfully deferred, discharged, and dismissed under subsection (c) is considered a prior judgment for the purposes of subsection (a)(3).

(e) A court may order an individual found responsible for or convicted of violating subsection (a) to undergo screening and assessment by a person or agency as designated by the department-designated community mental health entity as defined in section 100a of the mental health code, 1974 PA 258, MCL 330.1100a, to determine whether the individual is likely to benefit from rehabilitative services, including alcohol or drug education and alcohol or drug treatment programs. A court may order an individual subject to a misdemeanor conviction or juvenile adjudication of, or placed on probation regarding, a violation of subsection (a) to submit to a random or regular preliminary chemical breath analysis. The parent, guardian, or custodian of a minor who is less than 18 years of age and not emancipated under 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.1 to 722.6, may request a random or regular preliminary chemical breath analysis as part of the probation.

(f) A law enforcement officer, on determining that an individual who is less than 18 years of age and not emancipated under 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.1 to 722.6, allegedly consumed, possessed, or purchased alcoholic liquor, attempted to consume, possess, or purchase alcoholic liquor, or had any bodily alcohol content in violation of subsection (a) shall notify the parent or parents, custodian, or guardian of the individual as to the nature of the violation if the name of a parent, guardian, or custodian is reasonably ascertainable by the law enforcement agency. The law enforcement officer shall notify the parent, guardian, or custodian not later than 48 hours after the law enforcement agency determines that the individual who allegedly violated subsection (a) is less than 18 years of age and not emancipated under 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.1 to 722.6. The law enforcement officer may notify the parent, guardian, or custodian by any means reasonably calculated to give prompt actual notice including, but not limited to, notice in person, by telephone, or by first-class mail. If an individual less than 17 years of age is incarcerated for violating subsection (a), his or her parents or legal guardian shall be notified immediately as provided in this subsection.

(g) This section does not prohibit a minor from possessing alcoholic liquor during regular working hours and in the course of his or her employment if employed by a person licensed by the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998 (MCL 436.1101 et seq.), by the state liquor control commission, or by an agent of the commission, if the alcoholic liquor is not possessed for his or her personal consumption.

(h) The following individuals are not considered to be in violation of subsection (a):

(1)  A minor who has consumed alcoholic liquor and who voluntarily presents himself or herself to a health facility or agency for treatment or for observation including, but not limited to, medical examination and treatment for any condition arising from a violation of sections 520b to 520g of the Michigan penal code, 1931 PA 328, MCL 750.520b to 750.520g, committed against a minor.

(2) A minor who accompanies an individual who meets both of the following criteria:

i.    Has consumed alcoholic liquor.
ii.   Voluntarily presents himself or herself to a health facility or agency for treatment or for observation including, but not limited to, medical examination and treatment for any condition arising from a violation of sections 520b to 520g of the Michigan penal code, 1931 PA 328, MCL 750.520b to 750.520g, committed against a minor.

(3) A minor who initiates contact with a peace officer or emergency medical services personnel for the purpose of obtaining medical assistance for a legitimate health care concern.

(i) This section does not limit the civil or criminal liability of a vendor or the vendor's clerk, servant, agent, or employee for a violation of the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998 (MCL 436.1101 et seq.).

(j) The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor who is enrolled in a course offered by an accredited postsecondary educational institution in an academic building of the institution under the supervision of a faculty member is not prohibited by this section if the purpose of the consumption is solely educational and is a requirement of the course.

(k) The consumption by a minor of sacramental wine in connection with religious services at a church, synagogue, or temple is not prohibited by this section.

(l) Subsection (a) does not apply to a minor who participates in either or both of the following:

(1) An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person's employer and with the prior approval of the local prosecutor's office as part of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement action.

(2) An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the state police, the state liquor control commission, or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action unless the initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of alcoholic liquor by the minor was not under the direction of the state police, the state liquor control commission, or the local police agency and was not part of the undercover operation.

(m) In a prosecution for the violation of subsection (a) concerning a minor having any bodily alcohol content, it is an affirmative defense that the minor consumed the alcoholic liquor in a venue or location where that consumption is legal.

(n) As used in this section: 

(1) "Any bodily alcohol content" means either of the following:

i.    An alcohol content of 0.02 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.
ii.   Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from the consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than consumption of alcoholic liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony.

(2) "Emergency medical services personnel" means that term as defined in section 20904 of the public health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.20904.

(3) "Health facility or agency" means that term as defined in section 20106 of the public health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.20106.

(4) Minor means a person under the age of 21.

(5) "Prior judgment" means a conviction, juvenile adjudication, finding of responsibility, or admission of responsibility for any of the following, whether under a law of this state, a local ordinance substantially corresponding to a law of this state, a law of the United States substantially corresponding to a law of this state, or a law of another state substantially corresponding to a law of this state:

i.    This section or section 701 or 707 of the Michigan Liquor Control Code.
ii.   Section 624a, 624b, or 625 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.624a, 257.624b, and 257.625.
iii.  Section 80176, 81134, or 82127 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, MCL 324.80176, 324.81134, and 324.82127.
iv.  Section 167a or 237 of the Michigan Penal Code, 1939 PA 328, MCL 750.167a and 750.237.  {Ord. 320, 3-1-05}{Ord. 360, 2-3-18}

42.11 CURFEW AND PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.

(a) Authority. This section is adopted under the authority granted to the Village Council of the Village of Beverly Hills by Act 246 of the Public Acts of 1945 as amended.

(b) Finding of Necessity. The Village Council finds that offenses against the laws of the United States, the statutes of the State of Michigan, and the ordinances of the Village of Beverly Hills by minors under the age of seventeen (17) years are increasing at an alarming rate; that in a great many of the cases a lack of proper supervision and control of the minor child by his parents or guardian is evident; that the increasing problem of criminal offenses by children will not be solved by sanctions imposed upon the children alone but that it is necessary that sanctions be imposed upon parents whose neglect of their duty to properly supervise and control their children is a proximate cause of the delinquency of those children.

(c) Contributing to Neglect or Delinquency of Children. Any parent, legal guardian or other person having the care or custody of a minor child under the age of seventeen (17) years who shall by any act, or by any word, or by the failure to act, or by lack of supervision and control over said minor child, encourage, contribute toward, cause or tend to cause said minor child to become neglected or delinquent so as to come to tend to come under the jurisdiction of the Juvenile Division of the Probate Court as defined in Section 2 of Chapter 12a of Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of 1939, as added by Act No. 54 of the Public Acts of the first extra session of 1944, and any amendments thereto, whether or not such child shall in fact be adjudicated a ward of the Probate Court, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

(d) Curfew for Twelve Year Old Children. No minor, twelve (12) years of age or under, shall loiter, idle or congregate in or on any public street, alley, park, school, or other public place, or other place normally open to the public, including but not limited to shopping centers, places of amusement, private recreation areas or similar places, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless the minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian, or some adult delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany the child.

(e) Curfew for Sixteen Year Old Children. No minor, Sixteen (16) years of age or under, shall loiter, idle or congregate in or on any public street, alley, park, school, or other public place, or other place normally open to the public, including but not limited to shopping centers, places of amusement, private recreation areas or similar places, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., immediately following, except where the minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian, or some adult over the age of twenty-one (21) years delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany the minor child, or where the minor is upon an errand or other legitimate business directed by his parent or guardian.

(f) Violation of Curfew. Any parent, legal guardian or other person having the care or custody of any minor child, sixteen (16) years of age or under who shall assist, aid, abet, allow, permit or encourage said minor to violate the provisions of subsections (d) and (e), either by overt act, by failing to act or by lack of supervision and control over said minor, is guilty of a misdemeanor. The fact that a child twelve (12) years of age or under or sixteen (16) years of age or under, is apprehended while on the public street, alley, park, school, or other public place, or other place normally open to the public during the hours defined above shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section on the part of the parents, legal guardian or other person having the care or custody of said minor child.

42.12 GAMES IN STREETS. No person shall throw, kick, or knock any ball, or play ball in any other manner upon any public street, alley or sidewalk.
(a)  Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be responsible for a civil infraction, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined no less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such offense, or such fine in the discretion of the court, together with the costs of such prosecution. Each day that a violation of this Ordinance continues shall be a separate offense.
1. Enforcement. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and expenses, the judge or magistrate shall be authorized to issue any judgement, writ or order necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of this Chapter.

42.13   MARIJUANA AND DANGEROUS DRUGS. 

(a)       Definitions.

(1) Controlled substance means a drug, substance, or immediate precursor included in schedules 1 through 5, of part 72, of the Michigan Public Health Code, Act 368 of 1978, MCL 333.7201 et. al.

(2) Controlled substance analogue means a substance the chemical structure of which is substantially similar to that of a controlled substance in schedule 1 or 2 and that has a narcotic, stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system substantially similar to or greater than the narcotic, stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system of a controlled substance included in schedule 1 or 2 or, with respect to a particular individual, that the individual represents or intends to have a narcotic, stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system substantially similar to or greater than the narcotic, stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system of a controlled substance included in schedule 1 or 2. Controlled substance analogue does not include 1 or more of the following:

(a) A controlled substance.
(b) A substance for which there is an approved new drug application.
(c) A substance with respect to which an exemption is in effect for investigational use by a particular person under section 505 of the federal food, drug and cosmetic act, chapter 675, 52 Stat. 1052, 21 U.S.C. 355, to the extent conduct with respect to the substance is pursuant to the exemption.
(d) Any substance to the extent not intended for human consumption before an exemption takes effect with respect to the substance.

(3) Counterfeit prescription form means a printed form that is the same or similar to a prescription form and that was manufactured, printed, duplicated, forged, electronically transmitted, or altered without the knowledge or permission of a prescriber.

(4) Counterfeit substance means a controlled substance that, or the container or labeling of which, without authorization, bears the trademark, trade name or other identifying mark, imprint, number, or device, or any likeness thereof, of a manufacturer, distributor, or dispenser other than the person who in fact manufactured, distributed, or dispensed the substance.

(5) Deleterious drug means a drug, other than a proprietary medicine, likely to be destructive to adult human life in quantities of 3.88 grams or less.

(6) Deliver or delivery means the actual, constructive, or attempted transfer from one person to another of a controlled substance, whether or not there is an agency relationship.

(7) Drug means a substance recognized as a drug in the official United States pharmacopoeia, official homeopathic pharmacopoeia of the United States, or official national formulary, or any supplement to any of them; a substance intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease in human beings or animals; a substance other than food intended to affect the structure or any function of the body of human beings or animals; or, a substance intended for use as a component of any article specified in this subsection. It does not include a device or its components, parts, or accessories.

(8) Human consumption means application, injection, inhalation, or ingestion by a human being.

(9) Manufacture means the production, preparation, propagation, compounding, conversion, or processing of a controlled substance, directly or indirectly by extraction from substances of natural origin, or independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis. It includes the packaging or repackaging of the substance or labeling or relabeling of its container, except that it does not include:
(a) The preparation or compounding of a controlled substance by an individual for his or her own use.
(b) The preparation, compounding packaging, or labeling of a controlled substance:
(i) By a practitioner as an incident to the practitioner's administering or dispensing of a controlled substance in the course of his or her professional practice.
(ii) By a practitioner, or by the practitioner's authorized agent under his or her supervision, for the purpose of, or as an incident to, research, teaching, or chemical analysis and not for sale.

(10) Marijuana means all parts of the plant Canabis sativa L., growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant or preparation of the plant or its seeds or resin. It does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin extracted there from, fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.

(11) Narcotic drug means one or more of the following, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction from substances of vegetable origin, or independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis:
(a) Opium and opiate, and any salt, compound, derivative, or preparation of opium or opiate.
(b) Any salt, compound, isomer, derivative, or preparation thereof which is chemically equivalent or identical with any of the substances referred to in subdivision (a), but not including the isoquinoline alkaloids of opium.

(b) Possession, sale, manufacture, creation, delivery, or possession with intent to manufacture, create, or deliver a controlled substance classified in schedule 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5 of the Michigan Public Health Code, Act 368 of 1978, MCL 333.7201 et. al., a controlled substance analogue, a counterfeit substance, a deleterious drug, a prescription form, or a counterfeit prescription form.

A person shall not knowingly or intentionally possess, sell, offer for sale, manufacture, create or deliver a controlled substance classified in schedule 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5 of the Michigan Public Health Code, Act 368 of 1978, MCL 333.7201 et. al., a controlled substance analogue, a counterfeit substance, a deleterious drug, a prescription form, a counterfeit prescription form, unless the controlled substance, controlled substance analogue, deleterious drug, or prescription form was obtained directly from, or pursuant to, a valid prescription or order of a practitioner while acting in the course of the practitioner's professional practice, or except as otherwise authorized by law.

A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500.00 or both. The court may place a person who has not previously been convicted of violating this section on probation subject to the terms and conditions set forth in MCL 333.7411.

(c) Use of a controlled substance or controlled substance analogue.  A person shall not use a controlled substance classified in schedule 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5 of the Michigan Public Health Code, Act 368 of 1978, MCL 333.7201 et. al., or controlled substance analogue unless the substance was obtained directly from, or pursuant to, a valid prescription or order of a practitioner while acting in the course of the practitioner's professional practice, or except as otherwise authorized by law.

A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500.00 or both. The court may place a person who has not previously been convicted of violating this section on probation subject to the terms and conditions set forth in MCL 333.7411.

(d) Implements of manufacture of controlled substance.

(1) A person shall not do any of the following:

(a) Own, possess, or use a vehicle, building, structure, place, or area that he or she knows or has reason to know is to be used as a location to manufacture a controlled substance in violation of this Article or a counterfeit substance or a controlled substance analogue in violation of this Article.

(b) Own or possess any chemical or any laboratory equipment that he or she knows or has reason to know is to be used for the purpose of manufacturing a controlled substance in violation of this Article or a counterfeit substance or a controlled substance analogue in violation of this Article.

(c) Provide any chemical or laboratory equipment to another person knowing or having reason to know that the other person intends to use that chemical or laboratory equipment for the purpose of manufacturing a controlled substance in violation of this Article or a counterfeit substance or a controlled substance analogue in violation of this Article.

(2) This section does not prohibit the person from being charged with, convicted of, or punished for any other violation of law committed by that person while violating or attempting to violate this section.

A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500.00 or both.

(e) Fraudulently obtaining controlled substance or prescription from health care provider.

(1) A person shall not fraudulently obtain or attempt to obtain a controlled substance or a prescription for a controlled substance from a health care provider.

(2) As used in this section, "health care provider" means a health professional, health facility, or local health department as that term is defined in section MCL 333.9206.

A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500.00 or both. The court may place a person who has not previously been convicted of violating this section on probation subject to the terms and conditions set forth in MCL 333.7411.

(f) Recruiting, inducing, soliciting, or coercing minor to violate this Article.  A person 17 years of age or over who recruits, induces, solicits, or coerces a minor less than 17 years of age to commit or attempt to commit any act that would be a violation of this Article, if committed by an adult, is guilty of a Misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500.00 or both.

(g) Loitering where drugs or drug paraphernalia are present.  No person shall knowingly loiter about, frequent or live in any building, apartment, store, motor vehicle, boat, boathouse, aeroplane or other place of any description whatsoever where a controlled substance or drug paraphernalia is used, sold, dispensed, furnished, given away, stored or kept.

A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500.00 or both.

(h) Drug paraphernalia defined.  As used in this Article, drug paraphernalia means any equipment, product, material, or combination of equipment, products, or materials, which is specifically designed for use in planting; propagating; cultivating; growing; harvesting; manufacturing; compounding; converting; producing; processing; preparing; testing; analyzing; packaging; repackaging; storing; containing; concealing; injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance; including, but not limited to, all of the following:

(a) An isomerization device specifically designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which plant is a controlled substance.

(b) Testing equipment specifically designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of a controlled substance.

(c) A weight scale or balance specifically designed for use in weighing or measuring a controlled substance.

(d) A diluent or adulterant, including, but not limited to, quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose, and lactose, specifically designed for use with a controlled substance.

(e) A separation gin or sifter specifically designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana.

(f) An object specifically designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body.

(g) A kit specifically designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived.

(h) A kit specifically designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances.

(i) A device, commonly known as a cocaine kit, that is specifically designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing controlled substances into the human body, and which consists of at least a razor blade and a mirror.

(j) A device, commonly known as a bullet, that is specifically designed to deliver a measured amount of controlled substances to the user.

(k) A device, commonly known as a snorter, that is specifically designed to carry a small amount of controlled substances to the user's nose.

(l) A device, commonly known as an automotive safe, that is specifically designed to carry and conceal a controlled substance in an automobile, including, but not limited to, a can used for brake fluid, oil, or carburetor cleaner which contains a compartment for carrying and concealing controlled substances.

(m) A spoon, with or without a chain attached, that has a small diameter bowl and that is specifically designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing controlled substances into the human body.

Possession of drug paraphernalia.
A person shall not knowingly or intentionally possess drug paraphernalia.

A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500.00 or both.

(j) Sale of drug paraphernalia.

(1) Subject to subsection (2), a person shall not sell or offer for sale drug paraphernalia, knowing that the drug paraphernalia will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance.
(2) Before a person is arrested for a violation of subsection (1), the prosecuting attorney shall notify the person in writing, not less than 2 business days before the person is to be arrested, that the person is in possession of specific, defined material that has been determined by the prosecuting attorney to be drug paraphernalia. The notice also shall request that the person refrain from selling or offering for sale the material and shall state that if the person complies with the notice, no arrest will be made for a violation of subsection (1).
(3) If a person complies with a notice sent under subsection (2), the compliance is a complete defense for the person against a prosecution under this section, as long as the compliance continues.

A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500.00 or both. {Ord. 341; 6-19-12}

42.14 TOXIC CHEMICALS.

(a) Definition. As used in this section "chemical agent" means any substance containing a toxic chemical or organic solvent or both, having the property of releasing toxic vapors. The term includes, but is not limited to, glue, acetone, toluene, carbon tetrachloride, hydrocarbons and hydrocarbon derivatives.
(b) Introduction into Respiratory or Circulatory System Prohibited. No person shall, for the purpose of causing a condition of intoxication, euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction or dulling of the senses or nervous system, intentionally smell or inhale the fumes of any chemical agent or intentionally drink, eat or otherwise introduce any chemical agent into his respiratory or circulatory system. This shall not prohibit the inhalation of any anesthesia for medical or dental purposes.
(c) Aiding and Abetting. No person shall assist, aid, abet, or encourage any person to violate the provisions of subsection (b) of this section.

42.15 DISTURBANCES AT SCHOOLS.
(a) Entering School Buildings. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain in any public, private or parochial school building, or to enter or remain on the property of any public, private or parochial school, except when in attendance as a regularly enrolled student, educator, administrator or employee, or when engaged in legitimate school business or pursuits.

(b) Disturbance. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously make or cause to be made any noise, disturbance or diversion in or near any school building or the property thereof, by which the peace, quiet or good order of any public, private or parochial school is disturbed.

42.16 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE. No person in the Village shall:

(a) Disorderly Conduct. Disturb, tend to disturb, or aid in disturbing the peace of others by violent, tumultuous, offensive or obstreperous conduct, and no person shall knowingly permit such conduct upon any premises owned or possessed by him or under his control.

(b) Assault. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully assault another or engage in or aid in a fight, quarrel or other disturbance and/or either attempt to commit a battery on another person or do an illegal act that causes another person to reasonably fear an immediate battery. A person who assaults an individual is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or a fine of not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) or both.

Assault and Battery. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a battery on another individual or to commit an assault and battery on another individual or to commit an assault and battery on another individual by a forceful or violent touching of another person or something closely connected with that person, whether or not that touching causes an injury. A person who assaults and batters an individual is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or a fine of not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) or both.

Domestic Assault and Domestic Assault and Battery. An individual who assaults or assaults and batters a "spouse or intimate partner," which is defined as all of the following:
(i) Spouse.
(ii) Former Spouse.
(iii) An individual with whom he or she has had a child in common.
(iv) An individual with whom he or she resides or has resided in the same household with.
(v) An individual with whom he or she has or has had a dating relationship with as that term is defined below

is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three (90) days or a fine of not more than Five Hundred Dollars $500.00) or both.
As used herein, "dating relationship" means frequent, intimate associations primarily characterized by the expectation of affectional involvement. This term does not include a casual relationship or an ordinary fraternization between 2 individuals in a business or social context.

Deferral of Proceedings: Conditions. 
(A) When an individual who has not been convicted previously of a violation of this Section or Section 81 or 81a of the Michigan Penal Code, Act No. 328 of the Public Acts of 1931, as amended, being MCL 750.81 and MCL 750.81a of the Michigan Compiled Laws, or a violation of a local ordinance substantially corresponding to this Ordinance or Section 81 of Act No. 328 of the Public Acts of 1931, pleads guilty to, or is found guilty of, a violation of Section 81 of Act No. 328 of the Public Acts of 1931, as amended, and the victim of the assault is the offender=s spouse or former spouse, an individual who has a child in common with the offender, or an individual residing or having resided in the same household as the offender, or an individual with whom offender has or has had a dating relationship, as defined above, the court, without entering a judgment of guilty and with the consent of the accused and of the prosecuting attorney in consultation with the victim, may defer further proceedings and place the accused on probation, as provided in this Section. However, before deferring proceedings under this Subsection, the court shall contact the Department of State Police and determine whether, according to the records of the Department of State Police, the accused has previously been convicted under Section 81 or 81a of Act No. 328 of the Public Acts of 1931, or under local ordinance substantially corresponding to this Ordinance or to Section 81 of Act No. 328 of the Public Acts of 1931, or has previously availed himself or herself of this Section. If the search of the records reveals an arrest for a violation of Section 81 or 81a of Act No. 328 of the Public Acts of 1931 or this Ordinance or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to Section 81 of Act No. 328 of the Public Acts of 1931, but no disposition, the court shall contact the arresting agency and the court that had jurisdiction over the violation to determine the disposition of that arrest for purposes of this Section.
(B) Upon a violation of a term or condition of probation, the court may enter an adjudication of guilty and proceed as otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
(C) An order of probation entered under this Subsection may require the accused to participate in a mandatory counseling program. The court may order the accused to pay the reasonable costs of the program.
(D) The court shall enter an adjudication of guilty and proceed as otherwise provided in this Ordinance if any of the following circumstances exist:

(1) The accused commits an assaultive crime during a period of probation. As used in this Ordinance, "assaultive crime" means one or more of the following:

(a) That term as defined in 82.16(b) and/or 42.16(b) (1) of this Ordinance;
(b) That term as defined in Section 9(a) of Chapter X, MCLA 770.9a;
(c) A violation of Chapter XI of the Michigan Penal Code, Act No. 328 of the Public Acts of 1931, being MCL 750.81, 750.90 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.

(2) The accused violates an order of the court that he or she receive counseling regarding his or her violent behavior.

(3) The accused violates an order of the court that he or she have no contact with a named individual.

(E) Upon fulfillment of the terms and conditions, the court shall discharge the person and dismiss the proceedings against the person. Discharge and dismissal under this Section shall be without adjudication of guilt, and is not a conviction for purposes of this Section or for purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon conviction of a crime.
(F) There may be only one discharge and dismissal under this Section with respect to any individual. This court shall submit a non-public record to be maintained by the Department of State Police of an arrest and discharge or dismissal under this Section. This record shall be furnished to a court or police agency upon request for the purpose of showing that a defendant in a criminal action under Section 81 or 81a of Act No. 328 of the Public Acts of 1931, as amended, this Ordinance, or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to Section 81 of Act No. 328 of the Public Acts of 1931 has already once availed himself or herself of this Section. {Ord. 309, 6-22-02}

(c) Inebriated. Be intoxicated in a public place and either endanger the safety of another person or property or act in a manner that causes a public disturbance.

(d) Disturb Religious Worship. Disquiet or disturb any congregation or assembly for religious worship by making a noise or by rude or indecent behavior, or profane discourse within their place of worship, or so near the same as to disturb the order or solemnity of the meeting.

(e) Vagrancy. Have the status or condition of a "vagrant." The following persons shall be deemed vagrants:

1. No Lawful Means of Support. Any person having no lawful means of employment and having no lawful means of support realized solely from lawful occupations or sources; or, any person who lives idly and without visible means of support.

2. Begging. Any person wandering abroad and begging; or any person who goes about from door-to-door of private homes or commercial and business establishments, or places himself in or upon any public way or public place to beg or receive alms for himself.

3. Loitering. Any person found loitering or strolling in, or about, or upon any street, alley, or other public way or public place, or at any public gathering or assembly, or in or around any store, shop, or business or commercial establishment, or on any private property or place without lawful business and conducting himself in a lewd, wanton or lascivious manner in speech or behavior.

4. Illegal Employment. Any person who frequents or loafs, loiters, or idles in or around or is the occupant of or is employed in any gambling establishment or establishment where intoxicating liquor is sold without a license.

5. Illegal Association. Any person who keeps, operates, frequents, lives in, or is employed in any house or other establishment of ill fame, or who (whether married or single) engages in or commits acts of fornication or perversion for hire. 

6. Unlawful Occupancy. Any person wandering abroad and occupying, lodging, or sleeping in any vacant or unoccupied barn, garage, shed, shop, or other building or structure, or in any automobile, truck, railroad car, or other vehicle, without owning the same or without permission of the owner or person entitled to possession of the same, or sleeping in any vacant lot during the hours of darkness and not giving a satisfactory account of himself.

7. Burglars' Tools. Any person upon whose person or in whose possession shall be found any instrument, tool, or other implement for picking locks or pockets, or any implement that is usually employed or that reasonably may be inferred to have been designed to be employed in the commission of any felony, misdemeanor or the violation of any ordinance, and who shall fail to account satisfactorily for the possession of the same.

8. Concealing Stolen Property. Any person who keeps a place where lost or stolen property is concealed.

9. Abroad at Unusual Hours. Any person who wanders about the streets, alleys, or other public ways or places, or who is found abroad at late or unusual hours in the night without any visible or lawful business and not giving a satisfactory account of himself.

10. Fraudulent Schemes. Any person who shall engage in any fraudulent scheme, device, or trick to obtain money or other valuable thing from others; or any person who aids or assists such trick, device or scheme.

(f) Telephone Harassment. No person shall telephone, whether or not conversation ensues, any person repeatedly or cause the same to be done for the primary purpose of harassing such other person or his family; or use any threatening, vulgar, indecent, obscene, immoral or insulting language over any telephone.

42.17 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY. No person in the Village shall:

(a) Resisting Officer. Resist any Public Safety Officer, any member of the Public Safety Department, or any person duly empowered with police authority, while in the discharge or apparent discharge of his duty, or in any way interfere with or hinder him in the discharge of his duty.

(b) Assisting in Escape. Offer or endeavor to assist any person in the custody of a Public Safety Officer, a member of the Public Safety Department or a person duly empowered with police authority to escape or to attempt to escape from such custody.

(c) Impersonating an Officer. No person, other than an official Public Safety Officer of the Village, shall wear or carry other insignia of office like or similar to, or a colorable imitation of that adopted and worn or carried by the Public Safety Officers of the Village.

(d) False Report of Crime. Make to, or file with, the Public Safety Department of the Village any false, misleading or unfounded statement or report concerning the commission or alleged commission of any crime occurring within the Village.

(e) False Alarm. Intentionally make, turn in, or give a false alarm of fire, or of a need for police or ambulance assistance, or aid or abet in the commission of such act.

(f) Throwing Missiles. Throw any stone, snowball or any other missile upon or at any vehicle, building, tree or other public or private property, or upon or at any person in any public or private way or place or enclosed or unenclosed ground.

(g) Fireworks. No person shall ignite, discharge, or use fireworks within the Village at any time, except that:

Consumer fireworks may be discharged only on the day before, the day of, and the day after, a National holiday. The ignition, discharge or use of consumer fireworks is prohibited on the day before, the day of and the day after national holidays between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. except on New Year's Day when ignition, discharge or use of consumer fireworks is prohibited between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. {Ord. 346; 9-28-13}

Water Drainage onto Streets. Section 5.03
Debris in Streets. Section 5.04

42.18 DEPOSITING OF SNOW, ICE OR SLUSH.

(a) Definitions:

Person: Shall not include the State of Michigan, Oakland County Road Commission or Village of Beverly Hills or an employee thereof operating within the scope of his duties.

Safety Vision: Means an unobstructed line of sight enabling a driver to travel upon, enter, or exit a roadway in a safe manner.

(b) A person shall not remove, or cause to be removed snow, ice or slush onto or across a roadway or the shoulder of the roadway in a manner which obstructs the safety vision of the driver of a motor vehicle other than off-road vehicles.

(c) A person shall not deposit, or cause to be deposited snow, ice or slush onto or across a roadway or the shoulder of the roadway.

(d) A person shall not deposit, or cause to be deposited snow, ice or slush on any roadway, street, highway or appurtenances lawfully located thereon.

(e) Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be responsible for a civil infraction, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined no less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such offense, or such fine in the discretion of the court, together with the costs of such prosecution. Each day that a violation of this Ordinance continues shall be a separate offense.
1. Enforcement. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and expenses, the judge or magistrate shall be authorized to issue any judgement, writ or order necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of this Chapter.

42.19 LARCENY. No person shall commit the offense of larceny, by stealing, of the property of another, any money, goods or chattels, or any bank note, bank bill, bonds, promissory note, due bill, bill of exchange, or other bill, draft, order or certificate, or any book of accounts for or concerning money or goods due or to become due, or to be delivered, or any deed or writing containing a conveyance of land, or any other valuable contract in force, or any receipt, release of defeasance or any writ, process of public record of the value of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) or less.

42.20 NOISE CONTROL.

(a) It is found and declared that:

1. The making and creation of excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noises within the limits of the Village of Beverly Hills is a condition which has existed for some time and the extent and volume of such noises is increasing;

2. The making, creation or maintenance of such excessive unnecessary, unnatural or unusually loud noises which are prolonged, unusual and unnatural in their time, place and use affect and are a detriment to public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of the residents of the Village of Beverly Hills; and

3. The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted, is declared as a matter of legislative determination and police policy, and it is further declared that the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity and the peace and quiet of the Village of Beverly Hills and its inhabitants.

(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the limits of the Village.

(c) Noises prohibited-unnecessary noise standard. The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this ordinance, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:

1. Horns and Signal Devices. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, street car or other vehicle while not in motion except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control or to give warning of intent to get under motion, or if in motion, only as a danger signal; the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time;

2. Radio and Musical Instruments. The playing of any radio, television, phonograph, or any musical instruments in such a manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at the time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity;

3. Shouting and Whistling. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing or the making of any other loud noise on the public streets, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or the making of any such noise at any time so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity:

4. Hawking. The hawking of goods, merchandise or newspapers in a loud and boisterous manner.

5. Animal and Bird Noises. The keeping of any animals or birds which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort of any person;

6. Whistle Or Siren. The blowing of any whistle or siren, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger;

7. Engine Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which effectively prevents loud explosive noises therefrom;

8. Construction Noises. The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration, or repair of any building, the excavation and/or grading of streets, highways, or private property other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Mondays through Saturdays, unless a permit be first obtained from the Building Department for building work or from the Engineering Department for street work.

9. Handling Merchandise. The creating of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading and unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and containers;

10. Devices to Attract Attention. The use of any drum, loud speaker, amplifier or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention for any purpose.

11. Noise or Commotion in Vehicles. To make a commotion or make unnecessarily loud noises, whereby the peace and good order of the neighborhood is disturbed, or persons owning or occupying property in the neighborhood are disturbed or annoyed.

12. Sound Trucks. To operate or cause to be operated a sound truck with radio or amplifier within the Village without first having obtained a permit therefore from the Village Council.

13. Exceptions. None of the prohibitions herein shall apply to or be enforced against; any police or fire vehicle of the Village or ambulance while engaged upon necessary public emergency business; necessary excavations or repairs of bridges, streets, or highways on behalf of the Village, County or State during the night, when the public safety, welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day; the reasonable use of stationary amplifiers or loud speakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character.

Also see Section 32.10

(d)  Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be responsible for a civil infraction, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined no less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such offense, or such fine in the discretion of the court, together with the costs of such prosecution. Each day that a violation of this Ordinance continues shall be a separate offense.
1. Enforcement. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and expenses, the judge or magistrate shall be authorized to issue any judgement, writ or order necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of this Chapter.

42.21 REGULATING THE USE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND DRUGS AT OPEN HOUSE PARTIES

(a) Purpose

The Village Council of the Village of Beverly Hills finds that the unregulated use of alcohol and drugs by minors created public health, safety and general welfare problems in many communities throughout the United States, including the Village of Beverly Hills; and

The use of alcohol and drugs by minors can have devastating effects on not only minors but on the public at large, including but not limited to, injuries caused by vehicles operated by persons under the influence of alcoholic beverages or drugs; and:

The Village Council for the Village of Beverly Hills further finds that adults could significantly alleviate alcohol and drug problems by assuming the responsibility for open house parties which occur at their residence.

(b) Definitions. For the purpose of this Section, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
1. "Adult" means a person seventeen (17) years of age or older.

2. "Alcoholic Beverage" means any beverage containing more than one half (1/2) of one percent (1%) of alcohol by weight. The percentage of alcohol by weight shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of Michigan Compiled Laws, Section 436.2, as amended.

3. "Minor" means a person not legally permitted by reason of age to possess alcoholic beverage pursuant to Michigan Compiled Laws, Section 4326.33b, as amended.

4. "Residence" means a home, apartment, condominium or dwelling unit and includes the curtilage (i.e., the area surrounding) of such dwelling unit.

5. "Open House Party" means a social gathering of persons at a residence, other than the owner of those with rights of possession or their immediate family members.

6. "Drug" means a controlled substance as defined now or hereafter by the Public Acts of the State of Michigan. Currently, such controlled substances are defined by Act No. 196 of the Public Acts of 1971, as amended, being Sections 335.301 to 335.367 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.

7. "Control" means any form of regulation or dominion including a possessory right.

(c) No adult having control of any residence shall allow an open house party to take place at said residence if any alcoholic beverage or drug is possessed or consumed at said residence by any minor where the adult knew or reasonably should have known that an alcoholic beverage or drug was in the possession of or being consumed by a minor at said residence, and where the adult failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the possession or consumption of the alcoholic beverage or drug at said residence.

(d) Exception. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to legally protected religious observances or legally protected educational activities.

(e) Penalties. The penalties for violation of this Section shall be as follows:

1. For the first violation, a fine not exceeding Five Hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment in the County jail for a term not to exceed thirty (30) days or by both such fine and imprisonment.

2. For subsequent violations, a fine not exceeding Five Hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment in the County jail for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days or by both such fine and imprisonment.

42.22 RETAIL FRAUD.

(a) Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Village of Beverly Hills, by providing an ordinance which will help store owners in the Village of Beverly Hills be able to prosecute for thefts and larceny-type offenses that occur in their place of business.

(b) Retail Fraud. Any person who does any of the following in a store or in its immediate vicinity is guilty of retail fraud:

(1) While a store is open to the public, alters, transfers, removes and replaces, conceals, or otherwise misrepresents the price at which property is offered for sale, with the intent not to pay for the property or to pay less than the price at which the property is offered for sale.

(2) While a store is open to the public, steals property of the store that is offered for sale.

(3) With intent to defraud, obtains or attempts to obtain money or property from the store as a refund or exchange for property that was not paid for and belongs to the store.

42.23 PROHIBITING THE USE OF A TOBACCO PRODUCT ON SCHOOL PROPERTY.

(a) Except as otherwise provided in Subsection (c), a person shall not use a tobacco product on school property.

(b) As used in this Section:

1. "School property" means a school district, local act school district, or intermediate school district, as those terms are defined in the School Code of 1976, Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of 1976, being Sections 380.1 to 380.1852 of the Michigan Compiled Laws; a joint high school district formed under Part 3a of Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of 1976, being Sections 380.171 to 380.187 of the Michigan Compiled Laws; or a consortium or cooperative arrangement consisting of any combination of these.

2. "School property" means a building, facility, or structure and other real estate owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by a school district.

3. "Tobacco product" means a preparation of tobacco to be inhaled, chewed, or placed in a person's mouth.

4. "Use a tobacco product" means any of the following:

aa. The carrying by a person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other lighted smoking device.

bb. The inhaling or chewing of a tobacco product.

cc. The placing of a tobacco product within a person's mouth.

(c) Subsection (1) does not apply to that part of school property consisting of outdoor areas including, but not limited to, an open-air stadium, during either of the following time periods:

1. Saturdays, Sundays, and other days on which there are no regularly scheduled school hours.

2. After 6 p.m. on days during which there are regularly scheduled school hours.

Chapter 43 - Regulation of Alarm Systems
43.01 PURPOSE
43.02 DEFINITIONS
43.03 REGISTRATION
43.04 AUTOMATIC VOICE DIALER ALARMS - PROHIBITED
43.05 DUTIES OF AN ALARM USER
43.06 DUTIES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY
43.07 FALSE ALARM
43.08 SHUTOFF OF LOCAL ALARMS
43.09 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION

43.01 PURPOSE

The purpose of this ordinance is to establish the registration of alarm systems within the Village; to encourage alarm users to properly use and maintain the operational effectiveness of an alarm system, to provide for the identification and repair of defective alarm systems, to establish a fee schedule in order to defray the cost of responding to false alarms; to provide for a penalty for the violation of this Ordinance; and to thereby reduce or eliminate false alarms which might otherwise divert Public Safety Officers from attending to other responsibilities. {Ord. 310; 12-18-02}

43.02 DEFINITIONS

For the purpose of this ordinance, the following definitions shall apply.

Alarm Registration means a current record of the alarm system user, to include owner, property site, responsible parties able to respond to deactivate the alarm system, among others.

Alarm System means a device or series of devices, which emit or transmit a remote or local audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an alarm condition and intended to summons Public Safety services.

Automatic Voice Dialer means any electrical, electronic, mechanical or other device capable of being programmed to send a prerecorded voice message, when activated, over a telephone line or other means directly to any telephone number assigned to the Department of Public Safety or its dispatching agency.

False Alarm means the activation of an alarm system for reasons other than the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and response by the Department of Public Safety, whether through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner, tenant or occupant of an alarm system or a firm's employee, agent or otherwise. The term "false alarm" does not include an alarm activated by:

1. Storms, earthquakes or other violent conditions beyond the control of the owners, tenants or occupants.
2. Persons working on an alarm with prior notification to the Department of Public Safety.
3. Disruption or disturbance of telephone, electrical or other electronic utilities.

Local Alarm means an alarm system that employs audible signals designed to alert persons outside the premises in which the alarm system is located. {Ord. 310; 12-18-02}

43.03 REGISTRATION

No alarm user shall operate or cause to be operated an alarm system without first having a valid alarm registration on file with the Department of Public Safety. A separate registration is required for each residential or commercial site. Employees of the Department of Public Safety shall hold information contained on the alarm registration in confidence. Each alarm registration will include the following information:

1. The complete name, address and contact telephone numbers of the person who will be the registration holder and responsible for the proper maintenance of the alarm system and payment of any fees assessed under this ordinance.
2. The complete name and telephone numbers of at least two individuals who have agreed to receive notification of an alarm activation and are able to respond to the alarm site within 30 minutes, and upon request can grant access to the alarm site to deactivate the alarm system as necessary.
3. Mailing address and telephone numbers if different from the alarm site.
4. Classification of the alarm site, be it residential, commercial or public.
5. Type of business conducted at any non-residential site.
6. Type of alarm signals capable of being generated (burglar, fire, panic, medical, etc.)
7. Any premise conditions that could pose a danger to responders.
8. There will be a one-time registration fee established by Village Council for each alarm site; an update of an existing alarm registration will be allowed at no additional fee.
9. Alarm registrations are not transferable; new owners or tenants must register that alarm system as a new alarm site upon taking occupancy.

Employees of the Department of Public Safety shall hold as confidential all information contained on the alarm registration.

The Department of Public Safety shall provide all alarm system registrants with a copy of this Chapter along with the registration form. Receipt of the provision by the registrant shall constitute notice to the registrant of the obligation and liabilities under this Chapter.

The registration form shall contain a statement, signed by the alarm user who is registering the system, that the registrants have read the copy of this Chapter provided and are signing the registration with full knowledge and understanding of the provisions of this Chapter, and that if applicable, they consent to the Department of Public Safety disabling or disconnecting a local alarm under the circumstances described by a defective alarm in this Chapter. {Ord. 310; 12-18-02}

43.04 AUTOMATIC VOICE DIALER ALARMS - PROHIBITED

No person shall sell, install, operate, adjust, arrange for, or contract to provide a device or combination of devices that will upon activation, either mechanically, electronically, or by other means, imitate the automatic calling, dialing or connection to any telephone number assigned to the Public Safety Department or its dispatching agency. {Ord. 310; 12-18-02}

43.05 DUTIES OF AN ALARM USER

1. The alarm user shall maintain the premises and the alarm system in a manner that will minimize false alarms.
2. The alarm user shall, upon request of the Public Safety Department, make every reasonable effort to respond to or cause a representative to respond to the alarm site to provide access, to deactivate the alarm or provide for alternative security for the alarm site.
3. The alarm user shall have the alarm system adjusted so that any audible signal will not sound for longer than 15 minutes.
4. The alarm user shall not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report.
5. The alarm user shall notify the Department of Public Safety immediately of any changes to the information provided to the department in the alarm system registration. {Ord. 310; 12-18-02}

43.06 DUTIES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY

1. The Department of Public Safety shall designate a telephone number at which alarm calls will be received.
2. The Department of Public Safety shall establish a procedure to accept the cancellation of any alarm condition.
3. The Department of Public Safety shall establish a procedure to record information on alarm response requests necessary for the department to maintain records.
4. The Department of Public Safety shall notify the alarm user/occupant of each instance where the department responds to the alarm site after an alarm activation. {Ord. 310; 12-18-02}

43.07 FALSE ALARM

1. FEES. Notwithstanding any penalties provided for in the event of a conviction for a violation of this Chapter, and notwithstanding the fact that a prosecution for a violation of this Chapter has or has not been commenced, the owner or lessee of an alarm system described in this Chapter shall pay to the Village a sum established by Village Council from time to time by resolution for each occasion that a false alarm signal is activated and responded to by the Public Safety Department more than three occurrences each calendar year. The fee shall be paid in order to defray a portion of the cost of responding to false alarms.

2. REPORTING AND BILLING. The Public Safety Department shall monitor the frequency of false alarms on a regular basis during the calendar year and shall furnish a written report thereon to the Village Treasurer, identifying alarm users who have more than three false alarms. The Village Treasurer shall bill such alarm users for charges incurred for false alarms at regular intervals during the year. Failure to pay after receipt to the billing shall cause a special assessment procedure to be initiated against the premises in question.

3. DEFECTIVE ALARMS. An alarm system signaling more than five false alarms within a calendar year is presumed defective. Failure to repair or replace a defective alarm system within 30 days of receipt of notification by the Department of Public Safety shall constitute grounds for revocation of the alarm user's registration. At its option, the department may also demand, upon written notice to the alarm user, that an inspection be made by the alarm system contractor and a report of the inspection be filed with Public Safety Department.

4. NOTICE. Upon responding to a false alarm, the Public Safety Department shall serve the alarm user with a false alarm notice, notifying such user of its determination of the false alarm and the date and time of such response.

5. APPEALS. Appeals shall be executed as follows:

a. An alarm user may appeal a determination of a false alarm within 21 business days of service of a false alarm notice. Failure to appeal within this time shall render the department's determination final.
b. The appeal, directed to the Department of Public Safety, shall contain appropriate documentation of the applicable condition or reason why the determination of false alarm should be set aside.
c. Within ten business days of the receipt of the appeal by the department, the director or his designee shall made a determination on the appeal and shall notify the alarm user of the decision in writing.
d. If the alarm user is not satisfied with the decision of the director, a further written appeal may be filed within ten business days with the Village Manager or his designee.
e. Within ten business days of receipt of the appeal and supporting documentation, the Village Manager or his designee shall review the request, make a determination, and shall notify the alarm user of the decision in writing. {Ord. 310; 12-18-02}

43.08 SHUTOFF OF LOCAL ALARMS

Local alarms shall be equipped with an automatic shutoff device, deactivating audible signals within a reasonable time. Whenever any local alarm continues to emit audible signals, whether continuously or on a regularly repeating basis for over 30 minutes, and persons listed on the registration for the alarm system cannot be contacted by the department, or do not respond within 30 minutes of being contacted, and the audible signals create a nuisance or disturbance of the peace and tranquility of the neighborhood, the alarm user of such alarm shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition, the Department of Public Safety shall be authorized to disconnect or otherwise disable such local alarm by cutting such wires, disconnecting such speakers or disabling such other components of the alarm system as are located on the exterior of the premises. {Ord. 310; 12-18-02}

43.09 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION

Any person violating any provision of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a municipal civil infraction. {Ord. 310; 12-18-02}

Chapter 44 - Landlord's License
44.01 LANDLORD'S LICENSE

44.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this code is to protect the public health, safety and welfare in buildings intended for human habitation and accessory structures as hereinafter provided by:

(1) Establishing minimum standards for exterior property areas, exterior structure, interior structure, basic facilities, light and ventilation, occupancy requirements and fire safety. These standards are designed to be reasonably high, but at the same time, practical and attainable and should not be interpreted as a guarantee to the purchaser or tenant.

(2) Fixing the responsibility as owners, operators and occupants of every building or structure used or intended for commercial or residential use or occupancy, in whole or in part.

(3) Provide for administration, enforcement and penalties.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all existing structures. Any new building construction or additions to existing structures in the Village must comply with the requirements of the building code as amended. The minimum standards required under this code are designed to prevent fire hazard, structural deterioration, inadequate light, air and heat, and unsanitary and overcrowded conditions, which constitute a menace to the safety, health and welfare of the occupants or the surrounding area.

44.02 DEFINITIONS. The following words and phrases when used in this division shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:

"Rental Unit" means a non-owner occupied structure, or part of a structure, used as a home, residence, or sleeping unit by a person or household unit, or any grounds or other facilities or area promised for the use of a residential tenant, whether for remuneration or not, but without limitation, apartment units, boarding houses, rooming houses, mobile home spaces and single and two-family dwellings.

A "Landlord" means the owner, lessor, or sublessor of the rental unit, or the property of which it is a part and, in addition, means a person authorized to exercise any aspect of the management of the premises, including a person who, directly or indirectly, acts as a rental agent, receives rent, other than as a bona fide purchaser, and who has no obligation to deliver the receipts to another person.

44.03 REQUIRED; LIMITS ON REMEDY. It is the duty of every landlord to acquire a landlord license from the building department before allowing any person or persons to occupy a rental unit. A separate license is required for each rental property. A landlord shall be licensed with the Village to be entitled to rent and/or to evict tenants and/or occupants residing and/or located on the premises.

44.04 APPLICATION FEE. Every landlord seeking a license under this division shall make an application to be accompanied by an annual fee, per unit, which shall be established by Council resolution, payable to the Village. Such application shall state his/her name and address and identify the number of tenants occupying the property.

44.05 ISSUANCE, REVOCATION; APPEAL.

(A) The building official shall issue a license under this division if:

(1) The applicant's property is not in violation of any ordinance of the Village; and

(2) The applicant provides a full legal description of all parcels of property he or she rents.

(B) The building official is hereby empowered to revoke a license issued under this division if it is discovered that the applicant has either:

(1) Misrepresented himself or herself or the state of the property; or

(2) His or her property is or becomes violative of any of the ordinances of the Village; and the building official has given a 30 day notice to cure to the property owner/tenant, which cure has not been effective after the expiration of the 30 day cure.

44.06 INSPECTIONS BY BUILDING OFFICIAL.

(A) The building official, or such other persons as the building official may designate, is hereby authorized to make inspections of premises licensed under this division:

(1) Prior to occupation of any premises which have been vacated;

(2) Not less than every two years;

(3) As deemed necessary by the building official.

(B) An applicant for a license under this division shall consent to such inspections to determine the condition of the apartment building, multiple unit, multiple dwelling, rooming house, dwelling or dwelling units within the Village. For the purpose of making such inspections, the building official or his or her authorized representative is hereby authorized, upon seven days notice, to enter and inspect at all reasonable times all apartment buildings, multiple dwellings, rooming houses and rental dwelling units. The landlord, tenant or person in charge of an apartment building, multiple dwelling, rooming house or rental dwelling units shall give the building official or his or her designee free access to the premises.

44.07 PENALTIES. Any persons violating the provisions of this ordinance shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and upon a finding of responsibility thereof shall be fined not exceeding $500, plus costs of prosecution and each day will be deemed a continuing offense.

44.08 SEVERABILITY. If any section, clause or provision of this ordinance shall be declared to be inconsistent with the constitution and laws of the State of Michigan and voided by any court of competent jurisdiction, said section, clause or provision declared to be unconstitutional and void shall thereby cease to be a part of this ordinance, but the remainder of this ordinance shall stand and be in full force. {Ord. 330, 7-1-09}

Chapter 45 - Marihuana Establishments
45.01 MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS

Pursuant to Section 6.1 of the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, the Village of Beverly Hills completely prohibits marihuana establishments, as defined in the Act, within the Villages municipal boundaries.

Section 2.01.   Severability.   This ordinance and each article, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, part, provision, sentence, word and portion thereof are hereby declared to be severable, and if they or any of them are declared to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, it is hereby provided that the remainder of this ordinance shall not be affected thereby.

Section 3.01.    Penalty.  All violations of this ordinance shall be municipal civil infractions and upon a determination of responsibility therefore shall be punishable by a civil fine of not more than $500.

Section 4.01.   Effective Date.  The provision of this Ordinance shall become effective 20 days following its publication in The Eccentric, a newspaper circulated within said Village. {Ord. 365; 04-02-19}

Section 22.24 Single-family Building Coverages 10/18/18
SECTION 22.24 AREA, HEIGHT BULK, AND PLACEMENT REGULATIONS
ALL ZONE DISTRICTS
SECTION 22.24 SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
Zoning District Lot Minimums
Area
Width
(Sq. Ft.) (Feet)
Maximum
Building Height
In
Stories Feet
Maximum
Coverage of
Lot by All
Buildings
(Percent)
Minimum Setback Measured From Lot Line (Feet)
 Front Side Open Space Rear
 Open One Other Open
 Space (p) (p) Space (p)
Minimum Usable
Floor Area Per
Unit (in Square
Feet)
(p)
PP-Public Property 0 0 2 30 -- 35 10 20 20 None
R-A Single Family 25,000 130 2 30
 25 (q) 40 (a) 15 20 40
 (o)
1 story = 1600
1  or 2 story =
2000
R-1 Single Family 16,000 (n) 100 2 30
R-1A Single Family 12,000 (n) 100 2 30 25 (q) 40 (a)
(o)
12.5(b) 17.5 40 1 story  1400
1  or 2 story =
1800
R-2 Single Family 12,000 (n) 75 2 30 25 (q) 40 (a)
(o)
12.5(b) 17.5 40 1 story = 1200
1  or 2 story =
1600
R-2A Single Family 6,000 (n) 60 2 30 30 (q) 40 (a)
(o)
5(b)* 10* 30 1 story = 1200
1  or 2 story =
1600
R-2B Single Family 9,000 (n) 75 2 30 25 (q) 40 (a)
(o)
5(b)* 10* 40 1 story = 1200 1 
or 2 story = 1600
R-3 Single Family 4,000 (n) 40 2 30 35 (q) 40 (a)
(o)
5(b)* 5* 30 1 story = 900
1  or 2 story =
1200
R-M Multiple
Family
(k)(l)(m)
(e) (d)(f) 2 30 30(h) 40 (h)
(g)
(h)
20
(g)
(h)
20
(g)
(h)
35
(g)
(f)
PParking -- -- 2 30 -- -- (c) (c) -- None
O-1 Office -- -- 2 30 -- 35 Site plan
approval
Site plan
approval
20 None
B-Business -- -- 2 30 -- 35 Site plan
approval
Site plan
approval
20 None
Note: See Section 22.24.010 addendum following for specifications assigned to letters in parenthesis.
* See Section 22.08.130