Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties, remedies and enforcement — Ch.
40.
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 10-24-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to MCLA § 41.186, the ordinances of the Charter Township of
Cascade of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Township Board
of the Charter Township of Cascade, as revised, codified and consolidated
into chapters and sections by General Code, LLC, and consisting of
Chapters 1 through 400, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved,
adopted, ordained and enacted as the Code of the Charter Township of
Cascade, hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all general and permanent
ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except such
ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or continued in
force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall become effective upon publication after adoption.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Township Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Charter
Township of Cascade by impressing thereon the Seal of the Township, as
provided by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of
the Township Clerk, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the
same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Charter Township
of Cascade" shall be understood and intended to include such additions
and amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements
to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as
provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Charter Township of Cascade, pursuant to law, shall cause
to be published, in the manner required, a copy of this Adopting Ordinance
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Sufficient copies
of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection
by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee
to be set by the Township Board, or may be furnished electronically. The
Clerk may also arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation of
the Code.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Charter
Township of Cascade to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this
section or any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a
fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or
both, in the discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
This Code and the various parts, sections, subsections, paragraphs,
sentences, phrases, and clauses thereof are hereby declared to be
severable. If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, phrase,
or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, it is hereby provided that the remainder of this Code shall not
be affected thereby and shall remain in effect and valid.
§ 1-6 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 1-11
1:4
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances.
§ 1-13. Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as
ordinances previously adopted by the Township relating to the same subject
matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and
not as entirely new enactments.
§ 1-14. Affect on prior offenses or rights.
A. This Code shall be deemed to repeal, supersede, and replace the prior
ordinances of the Township that are incorporated into this Code. In
addition, all other ordinances and parts thereof which are in conflict in
whole or in part with any of the provisions of this Code are repealed as
of the effective date of this Code, but only to the extent of any such
conflict.
B. The following ordinances are specifically repealed:
(1) Ord. No. 5-17-56 (Dumps for refuse and garbage).
(2) Ord. No. 3-1980 (Motor fuels containing alcohol).
(3) Ord. No. 4-1985 (Construction Code administration and
enforcement).
(4) Ord. No. 1-1987 (Plumbing Code enforcing agency).
(5) Ord. No. 3-1994 (Fire Prevention Code).
(6) Ord. No. 5-1994 (Building Code).
(7) Ord. No. 6-1994 (Electrical Code).
(8) Ord. No. 7-1994 (Mechanical Code).
(9) Ord. No. 8-1994 (Plumbing Code).
(10) Ord. No. 9-1980 (Fire Prevention Ordinance).
(11) Ord. No. 10-1980 (Fire control measures and regulations).
A. Nothing in this Code (or the ordinance adopting this Code) affects any
offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or
any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:5
§ 1-15. Ordinances saved from repeal; certain ordinances not
affected by this Code.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the validity of following ordinances,
rights and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal. The
ordinances or portions of ordinances designated below continue in full force
and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code.
B. The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the
continuation of any use of a structure, building, or premises in violation
of any Township ordinance on the effective date of this Code.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to December 14, 2011.
B. Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance promising or guaranteeing
the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other
instruments of indebtedness.
C. Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance authorizing or approving any
contract, deed, or agreement.
D. Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance granting any right or
franchise.
E. Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance making or approving any
appropriation or budget.
F. Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance providing for salaries or
other employee benefits not codified in this Code.
G. Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance levying, imposing, or
otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code.
H. Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance adopting or amending the
Township Master Plan.
I. Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance dedicating, accepting, or
vacating any plat or subdivision.
J. Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance dedicating, establishing,
naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing, or
vacating any street, sidewalk, or alley.
K. Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance establishing the grade of any
street or sidewalk.
L. Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance levying or imposing any
special assessment.
M. Any ordinance rezoning property.
N. The Township's Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
§ 1-14 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 1-15
1:6
§ 1-16. References to Michigan Compiled Laws.
§ 1-17. Effective date.
This Code was adopted by the Cascade Charter Township Board on October
24, 2012, and became effective upon the expiration of 30 days after the
notice of adoption appeared in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Township.
§ 1-18. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
O. Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance that is temporary, although
general in effect.
P. Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance that is special, although
permanent in effect.
Q. Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance the purpose of which has
been accomplished.
R. Any Township ordinance (or portions thereof) not fully incorporated or
restated within this Code.
A. Throughout the Code, a reference to "Michigan Compiled Laws" shall
include all sections of law, as last amended, which are assigned a
compilation number by the legislative service bureau and are not
subsequently repealed.
B. Unless otherwise specifically provided, a reference to all or part of a
statute, regardless of whether the words "as amended" are used in the
reference, shall include the latest amendments to the statute or part.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain grammatical changes and other minor changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
Township Board that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as
if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to
read as such.
B. Throughout the Code, the following nomenclature changes were made:
References to: Were changed to:
Township of Cascade Charter Township of Cascade
Cascade Township Cascade Charter Township
Manager Township Manager
C. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith,
to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter
and section number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:7
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-18C, the chapters, parts and sections that were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) October 24, 2012 by Ord.
No. 7-2012." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in
the Township offices.
§ 1-18 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 1-18
1:8
ARTICLE II
Definitions and Interpretation
[Adopted 10-24-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012]
§ 1-19. Definitions and rules of construction.
Words and terms used in this Code, unless specifically otherwise defined
herein, shall have the meanings prescribed by state law and common usage.
In the construction of this Code, or any provision thereof, the following rules
and definitions shall control, except those which are inconsistent with the
manifest intent as disclosed in a particular provision, section, or chapter:
A. Definitions. As used in this Code, the following words and terms shall
have the following meanings unless expressly otherwise indicated in a
particular provision of this Code:
CODE — This Code of Ordinances of the Charter Township of Cascade
in Kent County, Michigan.
COUNTY — Kent County, Michigan, as well as its departments,
agencies, and bodies.
DESIGNEE — Following an official of the Township, means the
authorized agent, employee, or representative of such official.
LAW — All applicable laws of the United States of America, the State of
Michigan, and the Charter Township of Cascade.
ORDINANCE — Includes any ordinance of Cascade Charter Township,
including any provision of the Code of the Charter Township of Cascade.
OWNER — As it applies to a building, structure, or land, includes any
part owner, land contract vendor or vendee, joint owner, owner by any
type of tenancy and, in general, any person that has any interest in the
subject building, structure, or land.
PERSON — Includes any individual, partnership, association,
unincorporated club, limited liability company, firm, joint venture or
corporation, any trust, or any other group or combination of persons
acting as a unit and, in general, any entity or organizations through
which more than one person can act.
PREMISES — When used as applicable to property, extends to and
includes land, structures, and buildings.
PROPERTY — Includes both real and personal property (and fixtures)
unless a particular section indicates otherwise.
PUBLIC ACTS — The public acts or statutes of the State of Michigan.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public roadway, sidewalk or trail, any public
park, any public building, or any public place of assembly and, in
general, any place open to or frequented by the public, whether such
place is owned by a public agency or by a private individual.
§ 1-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-19
1:9
STATE — The State of Michigan, as well as its departments, agencies,
and bodies.
TOWNSHIP BOARD or BOARD — The legislative body of the Charter
Township of Cascade.
TOWNSHIP or CHARTER TOWNSHIP — The Charter Township of
Cascade in Kent County, Michigan, as well as its departments, agencies,
and bodies.
B. Rules of construction.
(1) Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires an officer or
head of a department of the Township to do some act or to make
certain inspections, it is to be construed as authorizing the officer
or head of the department to designate, delegate, and authorize
subordinates to perform the required act or make the required
inspection unless the terms of the particular chapter or section
indicate otherwise.
(2) Gender. A word implying or identifying the masculine gender shall
extend and be applied to females and to other legal entities, such as
corporations, firms, partnerships, etc., unless the context of a
particular section requires a limited construction.
(3) Minimum requirements. In the interpretation and application of
any provision of this Code, such provision shall be held to be the
minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public
safety and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code
imposes a greater restriction upon a particular subject matter than
a general provision imposed elsewhere by the Code, the provision
imposing the greater or more specific restriction or regulation shall
be deemed to be controlling.
(4) Names of officers and commissions. The name or title of any officer,
board, commission, or agency when appearing alone in the Code is
to be construed as if the words "of the Charter Township of Cascade
in Kent County, Michigan" followed it.
(5) Number. A word implying the singular number shall be applied to
several persons and things in addition to one person and thing,
unless a specific section requires a limited construction.
(6) Calendar; computation of time. The terms "month" and "year" mean
the calendar month or year. The time expressed in days within
which an act is to be done or a period is to expire shall be computed
by excluding the first and including the last day, unless the last day
is a Sunday or a legal holiday, in which case it shall be excluded. If
time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a legal holiday
shall be excluded.
(7) Conjunctions. "And" includes "or" and "or" includes "and," if the
sense so requires.
§ 1-19 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 1-19
1:10
§ 1-20. Administrative liabilities.
No officer, agent, employee, or member of the Township, Township Planning
Commission, Township Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, or any other
Township body shall render himself or herself personally liable for any
damage that may accrue as the result of any act, decision, or other
consequence or occurrence arising out of the discharge of his or her duties
and responsibilities pursuant to this Code.
§ 1-21. Nonwaiver; rule of nonestoppel.
If any provision of this Code is not enforced against a particular person,
lot, parcel, or property or throughout the Township in general, that shall
not be deemed to be a waiver (or constitute laches or estoppel) regarding
the ability of the Township thereafter to enforce that provision (or any
other provision) of this Code against a particular person, lot, parcel, or
property involved or throughout the Township in general. Furthermore,
should any Township official, body, or commission render, undertake or
make any approval, interpretation, determination, action, inaction, or
opinion, or undertake (or not undertake) any other action pursuant to this
Code, and it is determined that any such opinion, interpretation, approval,
action, or inaction was done in error, in an ultra vires or otherwise mistaken
fashion, that shall not preclude the Township from reversing, revoking,
or revising any such approval, interpretation, opinion, action, or inaction
which was done in error and to thereafter enforce the provision or
provisions of this Code involved. The Michigan common law "rule of
municipal nonestoppel" shall benefit the Township, as well as its officials,
officers, bodies, and commissions.
§ 1-22. Zoning Ordinance.
The Cascade Charter Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended, has not
been incorporated into this Code and stands as a fully valid ordinance apart
from and outside of this Code.
(8) Common usage; technical terms. Except as otherwise provided in
this section, words and phrases shall be construed according to the
common usage of the language; provided, however, that technical
words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a special
meaning in the law shall be construed according to such technical
or special meaning.
(9) Joint authority. Words giving authority to a board, commission,
authority, or to three or more officers or employees or other
persons shall be construed as giving authority to a majority thereof,
unless otherwise specifically provided.
(10) Shall and may. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
(11) Tenses. The use of any verb in the present tense includes the
future.
§ 1-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-22
1:11
Chapter 18
DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 400.
§ 1-22 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 1-22
1:12
ARTICLE I
Downtown Development Authority
[Adopted 6-23-1993 by Ord. No. 10-1993 (Part 125 of the 1991
Compilation of Ordinances)]
§ 18-1. Legislative findings.
The Township Board hereby finds that the maintenance and enhancement of
the Township business district is important to existing and future residents
of the Township. The Township Board further finds that it is in the best
interest of the Township and its residents to halt property value
deterioration, if any, and promote economic growth in the Township
business district. Without a thriving business district the Township will lack
an identity to promote future economic growth.
§ 18-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish an authority pursuant to the Act,2
that will correct and prevent the deterioration of property in the business
district, increase property tax valuation, create and implement development
plans and promote economic growth.
§ 18-3. Creation Authority.
The Township Board hereby creates pursuant to the Act a downtown
development authority to be known as the "Cascade Charter Township
Downtown Development Authority" (the "Authority"). The Authority shall be
a public body corporate which may sue and be sued in any court of the
State of Michigan and shall possess all the powers necessary to carry out
the purposes of its incorporation. The enumeration of a power in this article
or in the Act shall not be construed as a limitation upon the general powers
of the Authority.
§ 18-4. Creation of district.
The downtown district in which the Authority shall exercise its powers as
provided by the Act shall consist of property located in the Township and
shall have the boundaries identified in Exhibit 1 following this chapter. The
street addresses and permanent parcel numbers of those properties located
in the downtown district are identified in Exhibit 2 following this chapter.
§ 18-5. Composition of Authority Board.
The Authority shall be under the supervision and control of a Board (the
"Board") consisting of the Township Supervisor, the chief executive officer
of the Township and eight additional members. All Board members shall
be appointed by the Township Supervisor, subject to the approval of the
Township Board. The terms of office of the Board members shall be as
2. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1651 et seq.
§ 18-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-5
1:13
provided in the Act. Each Board member shall serve without compensation
but shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses and shall hold
office until a successor is appointed.
§ 18-6. Adoption of rules, selection of director and election of
officers.
The Downtown Development Authority shall, pursuant to the provisions of
the Act:
A. Adopt rules governing its procedure and the holding of meetings,
subject to the approval of the Township Board;
B. Select a Director, subject to the approval of the Township Board;
C. Elect a Chairperson, Secretary and Treasurer; and
D. Retain legal counsel.
§ 18-5 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 18-6
1:14
ARTICLE II
Downtown Development Plan and Tax Increment Financing Plan
[Adopted 4-13-1994 by Ord. No. 11-1994 (Part 126 of the 1991
Compilation of Ordinances); amended in its entirety 12-14-2011 by
Ord. No. 12-2011]
§ 18-7. Findings with respect to 2011 Amended Plans.
The 2011 Amended Plans as presented to the Township Board constitute a
public purpose and the Township Board specifically finds that:
§ 18-8. Approval of 2011 Amended Plans.
The 2011 Amended Plans in the form presented are hereby approved
replacing in their entirety the Plans and Amended Plans.
A. The 2011 Amended Plans meet the requirements of Act 197 including
specifically Section 17(2) of Act 197;
B. The proposed method of financing the Improvements identified in the
2011 Amended Plans is feasible and the DDA has the ability to arrange
the financing of the improvements as described in the 2011 Amended
Plans;
C. The improvements are reasonable and necessary to carry out the
purposes of Act 197;
D. The 2011 Amended Plans are in reasonable accord with the Township's
Master Plan;
E. Public services, including fire and police protection and utilities, will
continue to be adequate to serve the DDA District;
F. No changes in zoning are required to undertake and implement the
improvements; and
G. Changes in streets and utilities required to undertake and implement
the improvements are identified in the 2011 Amended Plans and are
reasonably necessary to implement the 2011 Amended Plans and for
the Township.
§ 18-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-8
1:15
Chapter 23
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
§ 23-1. Intent and purpose.3
§ 23-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words used herein are defined as
follows:
BOARD — The Township Board of the Charter Township of Cascade.5
COORDINATOR — A person appointed to coordinate emergency planning
and services within the Charter Township of Cascade or as prescribed in
this chapter. In the absence of an appointed person, "Coordinator" shall
mean the Supervisor.
DISASTER — An occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe
damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or manmade
cause, including but not limited to fire, flood, snow, ice or wind storm,
wave action, oil spills, water contamination requiring emergency action to
avert danger or damage, utility failure, hazardous peacetime radiological
incident, major transportation accident, epidemic, air contamination, blight,
drought, infestation, explosion, riot, or hostile military or paramilitary
action. Riots and other civil disorders are not within the meaning of this
term unless they directly result from and are an aggravating element of the
disaster.
DISTRICT COORDINATOR — The Michigan State Police District Emergency
Services Coordinator or his authorized representative.6
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN (EMERGENCY ACTION GUIDE) — The
Charter Township of Cascade Emergency Operations Plan which is an annex
A. It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to establish the position of
Emergency Management Coordinator to provide liaison between this
Township and the county and to ensure complete and efficient
utilization of all resources during periods of emergency.
B. The Emergency Management Coordinator of the County, in accordance
with Act 390, Public Acts of 1976, as amended,4 is the Coordinator of
Civil Defense activities at the county level.
C. This chapter will not relieve any elected official or Township
department of the normal responsibilities or authority given by general
law or ordinance, nor will it affect the work of volunteer agencies
organized for relief in a natural or man-made disaster.
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
4. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 30.401 et seq.
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 18-8 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 23-2
1:16
to the Kent County Emergency Plan to coordinate disaster response and
recovery within the Charter Township of Cascade.7
EMERGENCY SERVICES — Has a broad meaning to include preparations
for, and relief from, the effects of natural and man-made disasters as defined
herein.8
EMERGENCY SERVICES AGENCIES — All disaster relief agencies; all
agencies of the Township government, private and volunteer personnel,
public officers and employees; and all other persons or groups of persons
having duties or responsibilities under this chapter or pursuant to a lawful
order or directive authorized by this chapter.9
EMERGENCY SERVICES VOLUNTEER — Any person duly registered and
appointed by the Coordinator and assigned to participate in the emergency
services activity.
EMERGENCY SITUATION — Any situation confronting a community
requiring emergency actions of a lesser nature than a disaster, as defined
above, to include, but not limited to, civil disturbances, labor strikes, visits
by national or international dignitaries, and build-up activities prior to an
actual disaster.
STATE OF DISASTER — A declaration by executive order or proclamation
by the Governor under the provisions of Act 390, Public Acts of 1976, which
activates the disaster response and recovery aspects of state, local, and
interjurisdictional disaster emergency plans and authorizes the deployment
and use of any forces to which the plan or plans apply.
STATE OF EMERGENCY — A declaration by the Supervisor pursuant to this
chapter which activates the disaster response and recovery aspects of the
Charter Township of Cascade Emergency Operations Plan and authorizes
the deployment and use of any Township forces to which the plan applies.
SUPERVISOR — The Chief elected official of the Charter Township of
Cascade.
§ 23-3. Organization for emergency services.10
A. The Supervisor, with the approval of the Board, is hereby authorized
and directed to prepare for community disasters, utilizing to the fullest
extent existing agencies within the Township. The Supervisor as
executive head of the Township government shall be responsible for the
organization, administration and operation of the Township's
emergency services agencies, if any, working through the Kent County
Emergency Management Coordinator and the Township Emergency
Management Coordinator.
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
9. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 23-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-3
1:17
§ 23-4. Emergency Management Coordinator.11
The Supervisor, with the approval of the Board, shall appoint a Coordinator
who shall be a person with the personal attributes and experience to
provide liaison services to county officials and to coordinate the activities
of certain designated Township departments, boards, agencies, and
commissioners to protect the public health, safety, and welfare during
emergency situations or disasters.
Chapter 40
PENALTIES, REMEDIES AND ENFORCEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Definitions applying to entire Code — See Ch.
1, Art. II.
B. The employees, equipment, and facilities of all Township departments,
boards, agencies, and commissions suitable for or adaptable to
emergency service activities may be designated as part of the total
emergency services agencies of the county. Such designations shall be
made by the Township Supervisor with the approval of the Township
Board.
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 23-3 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 23-4
1:18
ARTICLE I
Municipal Civil Infraction Actions and Citations
[Adopted 3-22-1995 by Ord. No. 5-1995 (Part 3 of the 1991
Compilation of Ordinances)]
§ 40-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT — Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended.12
AUTHORIZED TOWNSHIP OFFICIAL — A Township official, police officer
or other personnel or agent of the Township authorized by this Code or any
ordinance to issue municipal civil infraction citations.
MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION ACTION — A civil action in which the
defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction.
MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATION — A written complaint or notice
prepared by an authorized Township official, directing a person to appear in
court regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction
violation by the person cited.
TOWNSHIP — Cascade Charter Township.
§ 40-2. Commencement of action.
A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance
by an authorized Township official of a municipal civil infraction citation
directing the alleged violator to appear in court.
§ 40-3. Issuance and service.
Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by authorized
Township officials as follows:
A. The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a
reasonable time after the citation is issued.
B. The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the District
Court which has jurisdiction over Cascade Charter Township.
C. Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form
approved by the State Court Administrator. The original citation shall
be filed with the District Court. Copies of the citation shall be retained
by the Township and issued to the alleged violator as provided by
Section 8705 of the Act.13
D. A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized
Township official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation
12.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 600.8701 et seq.
13.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 600.8705.
§ 40-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-3
1:19
§ 40-4. Contents of citation.
alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing
the complaint and if the citation contains the following statement
immediately above the date and signature of the official: "I declare
under the penalties of perjury that the statements above are true to the
best of my information, knowledge, and belief."
E. An authorized Township official who witnesses a person commit a
municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as
possible and as completely as possible, an original and required copy of
a citation.
F. An authorized Township official may issue a citation to a person if:
(1) Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to
believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil
infraction; or
(2) Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly
witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the
official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is
responsible for an infraction and if the Township Attorney approves
in writing the issuance of the citation.
G. Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an authorized
Township official as follows:
(1) Except as otherwise provided below, an authorized Township
official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged
violator.
(2) If the municipal civil infraction action involves the use or
occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the
citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged
violator but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land,
building or structure by posting a copy on the land or attaching the
copy to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the citation
shall be sent by first-class mail to the owner of the land, building, or
structure at the owner's last known address.
A. A municipal ordinance citation shall contain the name and address of
the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction alleged, the place
where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number
of the court, and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made.
B. Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that he or she may
do one of the following:
(1) Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in
person, or by representation, at or by the time specified for
appearance.
§ 40-3 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 40-4
1:20
(2) Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction "with
explanation" by mail by the time specified for appearance or, in
person, or by representation.
(3) Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing either
of the following.
(a) Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a Judge or
District Court Magistrate, without the opportunity of being
represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a
Judge is requested by the Township.
(b) Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a Judge, with
the opportunity of being represented by an attorney.
C. The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of the following:
(1) That if the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility "with
explanation" in person or by representation, the alleged violator
must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by
representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain
a scheduled date and time for an appearance.
(2) That if the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the
alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by
telephone, or by representation within the time specified for
appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a
hearing, unless a hearing date is specified on the citation.
(3) That a hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing
is requested by the alleged violator or the Township.
(4) That at an informal hearing the alleged violator must appear in
person before a Judge or District Court Magistrate, without the
opportunity of being represented by an attorney.
(5) That at a formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person
before a Judge with the opportunity of being represented by an
attorney.
D. The citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced type that the failure of
the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the citation or
at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor
and will result in entry of a default judgment against the alleged
violator on the municipal civil infraction.
§ 40-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-4
1:21

ARTICLE II
Authorization to Issue Citations
[Adopted 3-22-1995 by Ord. No. 6-1995 (Part 4 of the 1991
Compilation of Ordinances)]
§ 40-5. Short title.
This article shall be known as "Municipal Civil Infraction Citation
Authorization."
§ 40-6. Persons authorized to serve citations.
Unless prohibited by state law or unless otherwise provided by specific
provisions of a particular Cascade Charter Township ordinance to the
contrary, the following officials are hereby designated as the authorized
Township officials to issue and serve municipal civil infraction citations
for violations of Township ordinances which provide for a municipal civil
infraction for a violation thereof:
A. The Township Clerk.
B. The Chief of the Township Fire Department.
C. The Township Fire Department officers and other authorized
personnel.14
D. The Township Building Inspector.
E. The Kent County Sheriff and all other Deputy County Sheriffs of said
county.
F. The Township Manager.15
G. The Township Planner or Planning Director.
H. The Township Mechanical, Plumbing and Electrical Inspectors.
I. The Township Ordinance Enforcement Officer.
J. The Township Zoning Administrator.
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
15.Editor's Note: The Township Fire Marshal and Fire Inspector, which previously followed
this subsection, were deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I).
§ 40-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-6
1:23

ARTICLE III
Authorization to Issue Appearance Tickets
[HISTORY: Adopted 3-22-1995 by Ord. No. 8-1995 (Part 1 of the
1991 Compilation of Ordinances)]
§ 40-7. Short title.
This article shall be known as "Appearance Tickets Authorization."
§ 40-8. Persons authorized to serve appearance tickets.
Unless prohibited by state law or unless otherwise provided by specific
provisions of a particular Cascade Charter Township ordinance to the
contrary, the following officials are empowered to issue and serve
appearance tickets for violations of Township ordinances which contain
criminal misdemeanor penalties for violations of the ordinance involved:
A. The Township Clerk.
B. The Chief of the Township Fire Department.
C. The Township Fire Department officers and other authorized
personnel.16
D. The Township Building Inspector.
E. The Kent County Sheriff and all other Deputy County Sheriffs of said
county.
F. The Township Manager.17
G. The Township Planner or Planning Director.
H. The Township Zoning Administrator.
I. The Township Mechanical, Plumbing and Electrical Inspectors.
J. The Township Ordinance Enforcement Officer.
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
17.Editor's Note: The Township Fire Marshal and Fire Inspector, which previously followed
this subsection, were deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I).
§ 40-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-8
1:25

ARTICLE IV
Penalties for Misdemeanors and Municipal Civil Infractions
[Adopted 3-22-1995 by Ord. No. 7-1995 (Part 5 of the 1991
Compilation of Ordinances)]
§ 40-9. Term defined.
For purposes of this article, the words "municipal civil infraction" shall
mean an act or omission that is prohibited by an ordinance of the Charter
Township of Cascade, but which is not a crime under the particular
ordinance involved, and for which civil sanctions, including, without
limitation, fines, damages, expenses and costs, may be ordered, as
authorized by Chapter 87 of Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as
amended, and Public Acts 12-26 of 1994, as amended.18 A municipal civil
infraction is not a lesser included offense of a violation of a Township
ordinance that is a criminal offense.
§ 40-10. General penalties; sanctions for violations; continuing
violations; injunctive relief.
A. Unless a violation of an ordinance of the Charter Township of Cascade
or this Code is specifically designated in the ordinance as a municipal
civil infraction, the violation shall be deemed to be a criminal
misdemeanor.19
B. The penalty for a misdemeanor violation shall be a fine not exceeding
$500 (plus costs of prosecution) or imprisonment not exceeding 93
days, or both, unless a specific penalty is otherwise provided for the
violation by the ordinance involved.20
C. The sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil infraction shall be
a civil fine in the amount as provided by the ordinances involved, plus
any costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions, as authorized under
Chapter 87 of Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended,
Public Acts 12-26 of 1994, as amended,21 and other applicable laws.
(1) Unless otherwise specifically provided for a particular municipal
civil infraction violation by an ordinance, the civil fine for a
municipal civil infraction violation shall be not less than $50, plus
costs and other sanctions, for each infraction.
(2) Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeated violations by a
person of any requirement or provision of an ordinance. As used in
this article, "repeat offense" means a second (or any subsequent)
municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or
ordinance: i) committed by a person within any twelve-month
18.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 600.8701 et seq.
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
21.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 600.8701 et seq.
§ 40-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-10
1:27
§ 40-11. Persons chargeable with violations.22
Persons chargeable with a violation of an ordinance and subject to being
responsible for a municipal civil infraction may include the following:
period (unless some other period is specifically provided by an
ordinance); and ii) for which the person admits responsibility or
is determined to be responsible. Unless otherwise specifically
provided by an ordinance for a particular municipal civil infraction
violation, the increased fine for a repeat offense shall be as follows:
(a) The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be
not less than $500, plus costs.
(b) The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any
subsequent repeat offense shall be not less than $750, plus
costs.
D. A violation includes any act which is prohibited or made or declared to
be unlawful or an offense by an ordinance and any omission or failure to
act where the act is required by an ordinance.
E. Each day on which any violation of an ordinance continues constitutes a
separate offense and shall be subject to penalties or sanctions as a
separate offense.
F. In addition to any remedies available at law, the Township may bring an
action for an injunction or other process against a person to restrain,
prevent or abate any violation of any Township ordinance.
A. The owner, agent, lessee, tenant, contractor or any other person using
or having control or possession of the land, building or premises where
such violation has been committed or shall exist;
B. Any person who knowingly commits, aids and abets, takes part or
assists in any such violation; or
C. Any person who owns or maintains any land, building, or premises on
which such violation shall exist.
22.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 40-10 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 40-11
1:28
ARTICLE V
Code Violations and Enforcement
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
§ 40-12. Violations of Code.
§ 40-13. Aiding or abetting violations.
No person shall cause, secure, assist, aid, or abet a violation of this Code. A
person violating this section shall be subject to punishment as if the person
had directly committed a violation of the Code provision involved, and such
a violation shall be a municipal civil infraction or a criminal misdemeanor,
as applicable.
§ 40-14. Additional remedies; nuisances.
A. Pursuant to this chapter, "violation of this Code" means any of the
following:
(1) Doing any act that is prohibited or made or declared to be unlawful,
an offense, a violation or misdemeanor or municipal civil infraction
by this Code, by any Township ordinance or by any rule or
regulation authorized by this Code.
(2) Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by this
Code, Township ordinance, or by any rule or regulation authorized
by this Code.
(3) Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or
declared to be unlawful, an offense, violation, or a misdemeanor or
civil infraction by this Code, Township ordinance, or by any rule or
regulation authorized by this Code.
(4) The violation or infraction of any license, approval, or permit issued
pursuant to this Code, or any conditions attached thereto.
B. In this chapter, "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a
Township officer or Township employee to perform an official duty
unless it is expressly provided that the failure to perform the duty is
punishable as provided in this chapter.
A. In addition to (or in lieu of) pursuing a municipal civil infraction
proceeding or criminal misdemeanor prosecution pursuant to this
chapter, the Township may also institute an appropriate action in a
court of competent jurisdiction seeking injunctive, declaratory, or other
equitable relief to enforce or interpret this Code or any provision of this
Code.
B. All remedies available to the Township under this chapter, this Code, or
Michigan law shall be deemed to be cumulative and not exclusive.
§ 40-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-14
1:29
C. Each and every day during which a violation of this Code shall exist
shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
D. Any use of land as commenced or conducted, any activity or any
building, item, or structure which is erected, moved, placed,
reconstructed, raised, extended, enlarged, altered, maintained, or
changed in violation of any provision of this Code is also declared to be
a nuisance per se.
§ 40-14 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 40-14
1:30
Chapter 85
ADULT BUSINESSES AND ADULT MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Massage establishments — See Ch. 251.
§ 40-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-14
1:31

ARTICLE I
Display of Material Harmful to Minors
[Adopted 1-14-1998 by Ord. No. 1-1998 (Part 48 of the 1991
Compilation of Ordinances)]
§ 85-1. Purpose.
The Charter Township of Cascade hereby finds and declares that:
§ 85-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms have the following meanings,
unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
HARMFUL TO MINORS — The quality of any description, exhibition, or
representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual
excitement, or sadomasochistic abuse when the material, taken as a whole,
has the following characteristics:
KNOWINGLY — Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief
or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both:
A. There exists a need to prevent commercial exposure of minors to
sexually provocative written, photographic, printed, or published
material as are hereinafter defined and are hereby declared to be
harmful to minors; and
B. It is in the best interest of the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens
of this Township and state, and particularly of minors within the
Township and state, that commercial display of such sexually
provocative written, photographic, printed, or published material
deemed harmful to minors be restricted from persons under the age of
18 years.
The average adult person applying contemporary community standards
would find that the material has a predominant tendency to appeal to
the prurient interest in sex to minors; and
A.
The average adult person applying contemporary community standards
would find that the material depicts or describes nudity, sexual conduct,
sexual excitement, or sadomasochistic abuse in a manner that is
patently offensive to prevailing standards of the adult community with
respect to what is suitable to minors; and
B.
The material lacks serious literary, scientific, educational, artistic, or
political value to minors.
C.
The character and context of any material which is reasonably
susceptible to examination by the defendant; and
A.
The age of the minor; provided, however, that an honest mistake shall
constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a
bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such minor.
B.
§ 85-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-2
1:33
MATERIAL — Any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print,
picture, figure, description, or image.
MINOR — Any unmarried person under the age of 18 years.
NUDITY — The showing of human male or female genitals, pubic area, or
buttocks with less than full opaque covering; the showing of the female
breast with less than opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top
of the nipple; or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, or other
legal entity of any kind.
REASONABLE BONA FIDE ATTEMPT — An attempt to ascertain the true
age of the minor by requiring production of a driver's license, marriage
license, birth certificate, or other governmental or educational
identification card or paper and not relying solely on the oral assertions or
apparent age of the minor.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE — Actual or simulated flagellation or torture
by or upon a person who is nude, clad in undergarments, a mask or
bizarre costume, or the condition of being constrained, bound or otherwise
physically restrained on the part of the one so clothed or nude.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — The acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual
intercourse, or physical conduct with a person's clothed or unclothed
genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such person be a female, breast.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT — The condition of human male or female genitals
when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
§ 85-3. Offenses enumerated.
A. No person having custody, control, or supervision of any commercial
establishment shall knowingly:
(1) Display material which is harmful to minors in such a way that
minors, as part of the general invited public, will be exposed to
view of such material provided; or
(2) Sell, furnish, present, distribute, allow to view, or otherwise
disseminate to a minor, with or without consideration, any material
which is harmful to minors.
B. However, a person shall be deemed not to have displayed materials to
minors if the material is kept behind devices commonly known as
"blinder racks" so that the lower 2/3 of the material is not exposed to
view, or if each item of such materials is blocked from view by a
wrapping with a nontransparent cover, only if those portions of the
cover, covers, or packaging is not exposed to view by the
nontransparent cover.
§ 85-2 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 85-4
1:34
§ 85-4. Scope.
Section 85-3 of this article shall not apply to a recognized and established
school, church, museum, medical clinic, hospital, public library,
governmental agency or quasi-governmental agency or persons acting in
their capacity as employees or agents of such organizations.
§ 85-5. Violations and penalties.23
A person who violates a requirement of § 85-3 is guilty of a criminal
misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties in Chapter 40, Article IV,
Penalties for Misdemeanors and Municipal Civil Infractions.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 85-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-5
1:35

ARTICLE II
Adult-Oriented Businesses
[Adopted 4-25-2001 by Ord. No. 3-2001]
§ 85-6. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Adult-Oriented Business Ordinance."
§ 85-7. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this article unless otherwise specifically stated:
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, restaurant, or other establishment which
regularly features or displays:
ADULT MERCHANDISE STORE — An establishment that emphasizes
merchandise that is predominantly distinguished or characterized by its
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to any specified sexual
activity or any specified anatomical area. An establishment emphasizes
merchandise that is predominantly distinguished by its emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to any specified sexual activity or any
specified anatomical area if any one or more of the following applies to the
establishment:
Live performances predominantly characterized by an emphasis on the
exposure of any specified anatomical area or by any specified sexual
activity; or
A.
Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, other photographic
reproductions, or visual media predominantly characterized by an
emphasis on the depiction or description of any specified sexual activity
or any specified anatomical area.
B.
Twenty-five percent of the establishment's retail floor space (i.e.,
excluding bathrooms, office areas, fitting rooms, eating areas, storage
rooms/closets, etc.) is used for the sale of merchandise that is
predominantly distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to any specified sexual activity
or any specified anatomical area.
A.
Twenty-five percent of the establishment's visible inventory is
comprised of merchandise that is predominantly distinguished or
characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to any specified sexual activity or any specified anatomical
area.
B.
Twenty-five percent of the establishment's gross revenues are
generated by the sale or rental of merchandise that is predominantly
distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to any specified sexual activity or any specified
anatomical area.
C.
§ 85-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-7
1:37
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar establishment that:
ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS — A business or commercial establishment
engaging in one or more of the following enterprises:
The establishment is operated consistent with its being an adultoriented
business [e.g., advertising is directed to an "adults only"
market; the establishment self-imposes (or imposes consistent with
state or federal law) prohibitions on minors being present in the
establishment; segregated areas of the business are devoted
predominantly to the sale or rental of such merchandise; etc.].
D.
The establishment displays merchandise that is predominantly
distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to any specified sexual activity or any specified
anatomical area such that that merchandise is visible to patrons in
the store and without cover (as opposed to a situation where a de
minimus amount of such merchandise, while available for sale or rental,
is covered or otherwise shielded from the view of patrons).
E.
A comparison between i) the establishment's ratio of general product
to merchandise that is predominantly distinguished or characterized
by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to any
specified sexual activity or any specified anatomical area and ii) other
retail establishments' ratio of general product to merchandise that
is predominantly distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to any specified sexual activity
or any specified anatomical area, indicates that the establishment
emphasizes merchandise depicting, describing or relating to any
specified sexual activity or any specified anatomical area.
F.
An establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or
display of adult-oriented merchandise.
G.
Offers accommodation to the public for any form of consideration and
provides patrons with closed-circuit television (as distinguished from
commercial cable services) transmissions, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides, other photographic reproductions or visual media that
are characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of any
specified sexual activity or any specified anatomical area; or
A.
Offers a sleeping room for rent, or allows a tenant or occupant of a
sleeping room to subrent the room, for a period of time that is less than
10 hours, if the rental of such rooms accounts for more than 10% of the
establishment's gross revenues.
B.
A. Adult cabaret;
B. Adult merchandise store;
C. Adult motel;
D. Adult theater;
§ 85-7 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 85-7
1:38
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
establishment which regularly features live performances predominantly
characterized by an emphasis on the exposure of any specified anatomical
area or by any specified sexual activity or which regularly or primarily
shows films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, other photographic
reproductions or visual media predominantly characterized by an emphasis
on the depiction or description of any specified sexual activity or any
specified anatomical area. This definition includes, without limitation,
establishments which offer individual viewing booths.
ESCORT — A person who, for any form of consideration and regardless of
who pays that consideration, agrees to act or offers to act as a companion or
date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie
or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or entity which furnishes, offers to furnish,
or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a
fee, tip, or other consideration. An escort agency is deemed to be operated
in the location where:
MASSAGE — An alcohol rub, fomentation, bath, common massage,
magnetic message procedure, manual manipulation of the body or any
method treating external parts of the body for remedial or hygienic
purposes, consisting of rubbing, stroking, kneading, adjusting or tapping
with the hand, elbow, fingers or any instrument, electric, magnetic or
otherwise, with or without supplementary aids.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any building, Turkish bath parlor, steam
bath, sauna bath, room, premises, place, institution or establishment, where
body message is regularly practiced on the human body, to club members or
to the general public for a charge or consideration, but the term "massage
establishment" shall not include licensed hospitals, nursing homes, medical
clinics, office of a physician, surgeon, osteopath or chiropractor.
MATERIALS — Anything tangible, whether through the medium of reading,
observation, sound, or in any other manner, including, but not limited to,
anything printed or written, any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet,
picture, drawing, pictorial representation, motion picture, photograph,
videotape, video disk, film, transparency, slide, audiotape, audio disk,
computer tape, holographic images, or any other medium used to
electronically produce or reproduce images, or any mechanical, chemical,
or electronic reproduction. Material includes undeveloped photographs,
molds, printing plates, and other latent representational objects whether
or not processing or other acts are required to make the content of the
E. Escort agency;
F. Nude model studio; or
G. Sexual encounter center.
A. A request for an escort is received; or
B. The escort and the person requesting the escort are together.
§ 85-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-7
1:39
material apparent. This definition is intended to include material which is
the product of any technology, whether that technology is available on the
effective date of this article or becomes available after that date.
MERCHANDISE — Material and novelties.
NOVELTY — Any instrument, device, or paraphernalia which depicts or
describes any specific anatomical area or any specific sexual act, or which
is designed for use, or commonly used, in connection with specific sexual
activities, excluding condoms and other birth control and disease
prevention products.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears in a
state of nudity or displays any specified anatomical area is provided to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by any other person who pays money or any form of consideration.
24
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — An establishment, except that which is
part of the practice of and under the supervision and control of a physician,
psychologist, or psychiatrist licensed to practice in Michigan that offers:
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA — Any one or more of the following:
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY — Any of the following:
§ 85-8. General requirements.
All adult-oriented businesses shall comply with the following:
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same
sex when one or more of the persons exposes or displays any specified
anatomical area; or
A.
The matching and/or exchanging of persons for any specified sexual
activities.
B.
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, anus, or
female breast at or below the top of the areola; or
A.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
B.
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breast; or
A.
A sex act, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or
sodomy; or
B.
C. Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of activities set
forth in Subsection A, B or C above.
D.
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 85-7 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 85-8
1:40
A. No person under the age of 18 years shall enter or be on the premises of
an adult-oriented business at any time the adult-oriented business is
open, nor shall any owner, partner, performer, contractor, or employee
of an adult-oriented business sell or provide goods, merchandise, or
services to persons under the age of 18.
B. The following shall not be visible or audible to a person outside the
building in which an adult-oriented business is operated, whether
through a window or doorway or otherwise:
(1) Any depiction or description in any material of any specified sexual
activity or any specified anatomical area; or
(2) Any novelty; or
(3) Any person engaging in any specified sexual activity or exposing
any specified anatomical area.
C. No adult-oriented business shall allow the consumption of alcohol on
the premises of the business.
D. No person or establishment shall operate an adult-oriented business:
(1) Before 8:00 a.m. or after midnight Monday through Saturday; or
(2) On any Sunday or legal holiday.
E. No adult-oriented business shall engage in business unless each of the
following are satisfied:
(1) At least two employees, excluding entertainers, are on the
premises of the business at all times the business is open; and
(2) The business is equipped with operational security cameras which
shall be used at all times the business is open.
F. Any booth, room, or cubicle, located in any adult-oriented business,
used by patrons for the viewing of merchandise or any other
entertainment must comply with all of the following requirements:
(1) It must be unobstructed by any door, lock, or other entrance and
exit control device;
(2) One side must be totally open to a public, lighted aisle so that there
is an unobstructed view at all times from the adjoining aisle of any
occupant;
(3) It must be illuminated such that a person of normal visual acuity
looking into the booth, room, or cubicle from the entrance
adjoining the public lighted aisle can clearly determine the number
of people within; and
§ 85-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-8
1:41
§ 85-9. Additional requirements for businesses offering live
entertainment.
(4) There shall be no holes or openings in any side or rear wall not
relating to utility, ventilation, or temperature control services or
otherwise required by any governmental code or authority.
G. No sign or advertising for an adult-oriented business may include any
photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or other representations of any
specified anatomical area or any specified sexual activity.
H. All adult-oriented businesses shall be open to inspection by the
Township's Ordinance Enforcement Officer, the Building Inspector any
public safety officer, any police officer, any Sheriff deputy, and any
Michigan State Police trooper for the purpose of ensuring compliance
with the law at any time the establishment is occupied or open for
business.
I. Each escort agency shall maintain permanent records on the premises
showing the name, address, and telephone number of every person for
whom an escort is provided, the fee paid, the name of the escort or
escorts so provided, and the location where the escort and the person
requesting the escort initially meet. These records shall be made
available, upon demand and without prior notice, to any Township
official inspecting the premises pursuant to this article.
A. Any adult-oriented business offering live entertainment shall provide all
of the following:
(1) A dressing room for performers with direct access between the
dressing area and the performance area or stage so that the
performer may enter the performance area or stage without
entering the area from which patrons will view the performance;
(2) That the access, performance area, or stage and dressing room is
handicapped accessible to the extent required by the Americans
With Disabilities Act and the Elliott Larsen Civil Rights Act;25
(3) That all performances shall occur on a stage elevated at least 18
inches above the immediate floor level and removed at least six feet
from the nearest employee or patron; and
(4) That the dressing area for performers be separate and not freely
accessible from areas of the business accessible to patrons, and
that the dressing area contains hot and cold running water and
toilet facilities.
B. There shall be no physical contact between any performer and any
other performer or between any performer and any owner, independent
contractor, employee, patron or other person during or for at least 15
25.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 37.2101 et seq.
§ 85-8 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 85-9
1:42
§ 85-10. Registration.
Each adult-oriented business shall register its existence with the Township
Clerk and Zoning Administrator prior to commencing business. The
registration shall provide the following information:
§ 85-11. Prohibited conduct.
§ 85-12. Violations and penalties; enforcement.26
minutes following such performance. "Physical contact" includes, but is
not limited to, any contact in which any part of the body or clothing
of one person touches any part of the body or clothing of the other
person or if a person causes anything under that persons direct control
to touch any part of the body or clothing of another person.
A. The name, residence address and business address, and telephone
number of the applicant and manager. If the applicant is a partnership,
limited liability company, corporation, or similar business entity, the
name and residence address of each of the officers, directors,
managers, and each of the owners, partners, or shareholders owning
10% interest or more, either directly or beneficially, shall also be
provided.
B. The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the building
where the business will be conducted; also, the name, address, and
telephone number of the building manager (if different from the owner).
C. The location, mailing address, and all telephone numbers where the
business is to be conducted.
A. Except on a stage or other area of performance as specified in § 85-9 of
this article, no person within an adult-oriented business shall display to
the view of any other person any specified anatomical area.
B. No person shall engage in any specified sexual activity on the premises
of an adult-oriented business.
A. The following shall be a deemed a criminal misdemeanor, subject to the
penalties in Chapter 40, Article IV, Penalties for Misdemeanors and
Municipal Civil Infractions:
(1) A violation of any provision of this article; or
(2) Permitting, allowing, encouraging, or promoting any violation of
any provision of this article, including any owner, manager,
employee, patron, customer, officer, partner or other person; or
(3) Aiding, assisting, or abetting the violation of any provision of this
article.
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 85-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-12
1:43
B. A violation of any provision of this article shall also be a nuisance per
se, and the Township may seek an injunction against the violation.
§ 85-12 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 85-12
1:44
Chapter 92
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open burning — See Ch. 129.
§ 85-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-12
1:45

ARTICLE I
False Fire Alarms
[Adopted 3-10-2010 by Ord. No. 1-2010]
§ 92-1. Title.
This article shall be known and referred to as the "False Fire Alarm
Ordinance of the Charter Township of Cascade."
§ 92-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to facilitate the reduction of false fire alarms
and the misuse of the manpower and resources of the Fire Department
caused by the dispatch of units to the scene of a false alarm.
§ 92-3. Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACT OF GOD — An unusual, extraordinary, sudden or unexpected display of
the forces of nature against which the science and the skill of mankind are
of no avail.
ALARM SYSTEM — Any device or piece of equipment or an assembly
of equipment and devices designed or arranged to signal visibly, audibly,
electronically, mechanically or by any combination of these methods the
presence of a fire requiring urgent attention and to which the Township's
Fire Department is expected to respond.
ALARM USER — Any person, whether owner, occupant or tenant,
residential or commercial properties, upon whose premises an alarm system
is maintained or operated within the Township, except for alarm systems on
motor vehicles.
FALSE ALARM — Any activation of an alarm system not resulting from a
fire of the type which the alarm system is designed and intended to detect,
except activation caused by criminal activity, acts of God or verifiable
interruptions of electrical or telephonic service to an alarm user and any
water surges from the City of Grand Rapids Water Department.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, unincorporated
association or any group of persons.
§ 92-4. Fines.27
No alarm user shall maintain, use, or allow the use of an alarm system or
alarm systems, which signals false alarms. An alarm system user shall be
in violation of this Code whenever any alarm system signals more than two
false alarms in any three-hundred-sixty-five-day period. Except as otherwise
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 92-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-4
1:47
set forth herein, any person who violates this article shall be punishable by
a civil fine determined in accordance with the following schedule:
§ 92-5. Disposition of funds.
All false alarm fees received under this article shall be utilized only for
funding the Township's Fire Department.
§ 92-6. Violations and penalties for intentional false alarms.28
Any person who knowingly or willfully initiates a false alarm shall be guilty
of a municipal civil infraction and subject to the penalties in Chapter 40,
Article IV, Penalties for Misdemeanors and Municipal Civil Infractions.
A. The fine for the first false alarm in excess of the number herein
permitted shall be no less than $50.
B. The fine for the second false alarm in excess of the number herein
permitted shall be not less than $75.
C. The fine for the third false alarm in excess of the number herein
permitted shall be not less than $150.
D. The fine for the fourth and each subsequent false alarm in excess of the
number herein permitted shall be not less than $300.
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 92-4 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 92-6
1:48
Chapter 99
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animal control — See Ch. 282.
§ 92-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-6
1:49

ARTICLE I
Animal Control
[Adopted 7-14-1999 by Ord. No. 4-1999]
§ 99-1. Interpretation; enforcement.
§ 99-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms have the following meanings,
unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — An agent of the Director of the Kent
County Department of Animal Control, or successor agency.30
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of an animal, means every
person having a right of property in the animal and every person who
keeps or harbors the animal or has it in his care, and every person who
permits the animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by him.
For purposes of this article, any person keeping or harboring any animal
for seven consecutive days shall be deemed the owner thereof within the
meaning of this article.
§ 99-3. Dogs running at large prohibited.
No person owning or having charge, care, custody, or control of any dog
shall cause, permit, or allow the dog to run or be at large within the
Township whether it be upon any highway, street, lane, alley, court, park,
or other public place, or upon any private property or premises other than
those of the person owning or having charge, care, custody, or control of
such dog, unless such dog is restrained by a substantial chain or retractable
leash not exceeding 20 feet in length and is in the charge, care, custody, or
control of a person with the ability to restrain it.
§ 99-4. Animal waste.
A person having custody of any dog shall not permit, either willfully or
through failure to exercise due care or control, such dog to commit a
A. It is deemed by the Township that the ownership of an animal is a
privilege which carries with it responsibilities to the Township and its
residents with regard to the care and custody of said animal. In
interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be
construed to impose a primary responsibility for compliance with the
provisions of this article on the owner of said animal.
B. Responsibility for enforcement of this article shall be vested in the
Director of the Kent County Department of Animal Control, or
successor agency, and his or her agents and employees.29
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 99-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-4
1:51
nuisance within the Township by defecating upon any public property or
upon any private property or premises other than those of the person having
charge, care, custody, or control of such dog, without the consent of the
owner or person in lawful occupation of such property. Notwithstanding
the above, it shall not be a violation of this article if the owner of the dog
immediately cleans up the area where the dog has defecated.
§ 99-5. Violations and penalties; impounding of animals.31
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to the penalties in
Chapter 40, Article IV, Penalties for Misdemeanors and Municipal Civil
Infractions.
B. In addition, any animal which is in violation of the provisions of this
article shall be subject to being impounded by an Animal Control
Officer.
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 99-4 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 99-5
1:52
Chapter 103
ASSEMBLIES, OUTDOOR
§ 103-1. Findings and declarations.
The Township Board of the Charter Township of Cascade finds and declares
that the interests of the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens
of Cascade Charter Township require the regulation, licensing and control
of assemblages of large numbers of people in excess of those normally
drawing upon the health, sanitation, fire, police, transportation, utility and
other public services regularly provided in this Township.
§ 103-2. Definitions. [Amended 8-22-1979 by Res. No. 14-1979]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ATTENDEE — Any person who attends an outdoor assembly.
LICENSEE — Any person to whom a license is issued pursuant to this
chapter.
OUTDOOR ASSEMBLY — Hereinafter referred to as "assembly" means any
event, all or any part of which includes a theatrical exhibition, public show,
display, entertainment, festival, rally, amusement or other exhibition, but
does not mean:
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, corporation, association,
entity or organization.32
SPONSOR — Any person who organizes, promotes, conducts or causes to
be conducted an outdoor assembly.
§ 103-3. License required.
A person shall not sponsor, operate, maintain, conduct or promote an
outdoor assembly in Cascade Charter Township unless he shall have first
made application for, and obtained, as hereinafter prescribed, a license for
each such assembly.
An event which is conducted or sponsored by a governmental unit or
agency on publicly owned land or property;
A.
An event held entirely within the confines of a permanently enclosed
and covered structure;
B.
C. An event which will not exceed 200 attendees at any one time.
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 99-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-4
1:53
§ 103-4. Application for license.33
Application for a license to conduct an outdoor assembly must be made
in writing on such forms and in such manner as prescribed by the Clerk
of the Township and shall be made at least 60 days prior to the date of
the proposed outdoor assembly. Each application shall be accompanied by
a nonrefundable fee as set by the Township Board by resolution and shall
include at least the following:
§ 103-5. Application; accompanying information.
A. The name, age, residence and mailing address of the person making the
application. Where the person making the application is a partnership,
corporation or other association, this information shall be provided for
all partners, officers and directors or members.
B. A statement of the kind, character and type of proposed outdoor
assembly.
C. The address, legal description and proof of ownership of the site at
which the proposed outdoor assembly is to be conducted. Where
ownership is not vested in the prospective licensee, he shall submit an
affidavit or other evidence from the owner indicating his consent to the
use of the site for the proposed outdoor assembly.
D. The date or dates and hours during which the proposed assembly is to
be conducted.
E. An estimate of the maximum number of attendants expected at the
assembly for each day it is conducted and a detailed explanation of the
evidence of admission which will be used and of the sequential
numbering or other method which will be used for accounting
purposes.
A. Each application shall be accompanied by a detailed explanation,
including drawings and diagrams where applicable, of the prospective
licensee's plans to provide for the following:
(1) Police and fire protection.
(2) Food and water supply and facilities.
(3) Health and sanitation facilities.
(4) Medical facilities and services, including emergency vehicles and
equipment.
(5) Vehicle access and parking facilities.
(6) Camping and trailer facilities.
(7) Illumination facilities.
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 103-4 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 103-5
1:54
§ 103-6. Review of application.
On receipt by the Clerk, copies of the application shall be forwarded to the
Kent County Sheriff, the Kent County Health Department, the Fire Chief
serving the subject area, and to such other appropriate public officials as
the Clerk shall deem necessary. Such officers and officials shall review and
investigate matters relevant to the application and, within 20 days of receipt
thereof, shall report their findings and recommendations to the Township
Board.
§ 103-7. Action upon application.
Within 30 days of the filing of the application, the Township Board shall
issue, set conditions prerequisite to the issuance of, or deny, a license.
The Township Board may require that adequate security or insurance be
provided before a license is issued and may impose such other reasonable
conditions in such license as it deems proper. Where conditions are imposed
as prerequisite to the issuance of a license, or where a license is denied,
within five days of such action, notice thereof must be mailed to the
applicant by certified mail, and, in the case of denial, the reasons therefor
shall be stated in the notice.
§ 103-8. Denial of license.
A license may be denied if:
§ 103-9. Contents of license.
A license shall specify the name and address of the licensee, the kind
and location of the outdoor assembly, the maximum number of attendants
permissible, the duration of the license and any other conditions imposed
pursuant to this chapter. It shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the
premises of the outdoor assembly and shall not be transferred to any other
person or location.
(8) Communications facilities.
(9) Noise control and abatement.
(10) Facilities for cleanup and waste disposal.
(11) Insurance and bonding arrangements.
B. In addition, the application shall be accompanied by a map or maps of
the overall site of the proposed outdoor assembly.
A. The applicant fails to comply with any or all requirements of this
chapter, or with any or all conditions imposed pursuant hereto, or with
any other applicable provision of state or local law; or
B. The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent
statement in the application or in any supporting document.
§ 103-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-10
1:55
§ 103-10. Terms and conditions.
§ 103-11. Prohibited actions by licensee.
It shall be unlawful for a licensee, his employee, or agent, to:
§ 103-12. Violations and penalties.34
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be responsible
for a municipal civil infraction, subject to the penalties in Chapter 40,
Article IV, Penalties for Misdemeanors and Municipal Civil Infractions.
Chapter 114
BOATS AND BOATING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Jumping from bridges — See Ch. 118.
A. In processing an application, the Township Board may, in its sound
discretion, impose such reasonable terms therein as it deems
necessary, to ensure that the granting of such license will not
unreasonably interfere with the use of adjacent property, nor constitute
a nuisance, nor conflict with the preservation of the welfare, safety and
health of the citizens of Cascade Charter Township. Such terms and
conditions may require water and sanitary facilities, regulate food
service, require medical facilities, provide for traffic control and, where
swimming is contemplated, all applicable laws and ordinances shall be
complied with.
B. Further, adequate provisions shall be made for traffic control, parking
and lighting. All trailers and campers and the like shall also comply with
all applicable laws and ordinances. The Township Board may also
require such public liability insurance, and such performance and
indemnity bonds as it deems necessary and reasonable.
A. Advertise, promote or sell tickets to, conduct or operate an outdoor
assembly without first obtaining a license as herein provided.
B. Conduct or operate an outdoor assembly in such a manner as to create
a public or private nuisance.
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 103-10 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 103-12
1:56
ARTICLE I
Motorboats on Walden Lake
[Adopted 2-25-1976 by Ord. No. 1-1976 (Part 30 of the 1991
Compilation of Ordinances)]
§ 114-1. Definitions.
All words and phrases used in this article shall be construed and have the
same meanings as those words and phrases defined in Act 303, P.A. 1967,
as amended, M.S.A. 18.1287(8).35
§ 114-2. Motorboats prohibited.
Regulation No. 41, Kent County:
R281.741.2. Walden Lake — motorboats prohibited.
On the waters of Walden (Waldron) Lake, Section 5, T6N, R10W, Cascade
Charter Township, Kent County, it is unlawful to operate a motorboat.
§ 114-3. Violations and penalties.36
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be responsible for
a criminal misdemeanor, subject to the penalties in Chapter 40, Article IV,
Penalties for Misdemeanors and Municipal Civil Infractions.
35.Editor's Note: See now MCLA § 324.80101 et seq.
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 114-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-3
1:57
Chapter 118
BRIDGES, JUMPING FROM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Motorboats on Walden Lake — See Ch. 114,
Art. I.
§ 114-3 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 114-3
1:58
ARTICLE I
Thornapple River
[Adopted 9-22-1976 by Ord. No. 3-1976 (Part 45 of the 1991
Compilation of Ordinances)]
§ 118-1. Definitions.
In the interpretation of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
BRIDGE — Any bridge or trestle, whether or not currently used as such, for
vehicular, train or pedestrian crossing over the Thornapple River, and any
impoundments or tributaries thereof located in Cascade Charter Township,
Kent County, Michigan.
§ 118-2. Entering water from bridges prohibited.
No person shall dive, jump or otherwise enter the waters of the Thornapple
River or any impoundment or tributary thereof from any bridge located in
Cascade Charter Township; provided, however, that this section shall not
apply to any person whose trade, business or occupation requires him to so
enter said waters, nor to any person entering such waters for emergency
purposes.
§ 118-3. Violations and penalties.37
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be responsible for
a municipal civil infraction, subject to the penalties in Chapter 40, Article
IV, Penalties for Misdemeanors and Municipal Civil Infractions.
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 118-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 118-3
1:59
Chapter 129
BURNING, OPEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
False fire alarms — See Ch. 92, Art. I.
§ 129-1. Purpose.
The open outdoor burning of leaves, grass, and wood creates hazardous
by-products that can irritate eyes and lungs, obscure visibility, soil nearby
surfaces, create odors, increase fire hazards and risks, and pose other
health threats. Open burning can also substantially increase the discomfort
of people who suffer from asthma, chronic bronchitis, and other respiratory
ailments. This chapter is intended to reduce the negative impacts of open
burning of leaves, yard clippings, and other landscape debris throughout
the Township, but particularly within that portion of the Township which is
most densely populated.
§ 129-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVED FIRE PIT OR RING — A pit or ring that is no larger than three
feet by three feet in diameter and constructed of noncombustible material.
OPEN BURNING — The outdoor burning of any materials wherein products
of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing
through a stack or chimney from an enclosed chamber.
RECREATIONAL FIRE — An outdoor fire or the burning of material other
than rubbish, leaves, and yard clippings where the fire being burned is
contained in an approved fire pit or ring.
RESTRICTED AREA — That portion of Cascade Charter Township generally
located north of Interstate 96 and west of Buttrick Avenue, as delineated on
the Township map contained in Attachment A of this chapter.38
YARD CLIPPINGS — Includes leaves, grass clippings, weeds, vegetable, or
other garden debris, but does not include shrubbery, brush, tree branches,
or tree trimmings.
§ 129-3. General open burning regulations.
The following regulations shall control the burning of yard clippings,
shrubbery, brush, tree branches, and tree trimmings (less than six inches
38.Editor's Note: Attachment A is included as the end of this chapter.
§ 118-3 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 129-3
1:60
in diameter) on all properties in Cascade Charter Township. The following
provisions do not prohibit recreational fires in Cascade Charter Township.
A. Limitations on open burning in the restricted area.
(1) Open burning of leaves and yard clippings is hereby prohibited
within the restricted area.
(2) Open burning of shrubbery, brush, tree branches, and tree
trimmings (less than six inches in diameter) may be permitted on
the second and fourth Saturdays of each calendar month during the
time period spanning from December 1 through August 31 of each
calendar year, provided that all of the following conditions are
satisfied:
(a) A written burning permit is obtained from the Cascade Charter
Township Fire Department;
(b) The property owner (or his/her agent) assures the Fire
Department that the proposed fire is on their residential
property and will remain on their premises, with constant
supervision and control during the duration of the open
burning event;
(c) The open burning event takes place between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m.;
(d) No open burning event shall occur within 25 feet of an existing
building or any paved portion of a public right-of-way; and
(e) The fire will be of a short duration. For the purposes of this
chapter, "a short duration" shall be constructed to be no more
than five hours.
(3) In no event shall any person burn any garbage, plastic, Styrofoam,
skid, chemically treated lumber, synthetic material or other
hazardous materials, nor shall any rubber or rubber-based material
(such as, but not limited to, rubber tires) be burned in the Township
regardless of the method being used to burn.
B. Limitation on open burning in portions of the Township not within the
restricted area.
(1) Open burning of yard clippings, leaves, shrubbery, brush, tree
branches, and tree trimmings (less than six inches in diameter)
may occur with a Cascade Charter Township Fire Department
burning permit on properties not within the restricted area, subject
to the following conditions:
(a) A written burning permit is obtained from the Cascade Charter
Township Fire Department;
§ 129-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-3
1:61
§ 129-4. Recreational fires.
Recreational fires are allowed in both the restricted and nonrestricted areas
of the Township subject to the following conditions and requirements:
§ 129-5. Burning construction materials prohibited.
§ 129-6. Supervision of fires.
(b) The open burning event takes place during the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m.;
(c) The fire will be of a short duration. For the purposes of this
chapter, "a short duration" shall be construed to be no more
than five hours;
(d) The property owner (or his/her agent) assures the Fire
Department that the proposed fire is on their residential
property and will remain on their premises, with constant
supervision and control, during the duration of the open
burning event; and
(e) No open burning event shall occur within 25 feet of an existing
building or any paved portion of a public right-of-way.
(2) No burning event shall occur on any Sunday during the months of
September through November.
(3) In no event shall any person burn any garbage, plastic, Styrofoam,
skid, chemically treated lumber, synthetic material or other
hazardous materials, nor shall any rubber or rubber-based material
(such as, but not limited to, rubber tires) be burned in the Township
regardless of the method being use to burn.
A. No recreational fire shall exceed a size of three feet by three feet on the
ground.
B. No yard clippings or leaves shall be burned in any recreational fire.
C. To reduce unnecessary fire calls, it is recommended that the property
owner call the Fire Department prior to starting any recreational fire.
D. Recreational fires must be contained within an approved fire pit or ring
or in an outdoor fireplace. If that does not occur, the property owner
must obtain a written burning permit from the Fire Department prior to
the creation of a recreational fire.
A. No burning of any type of construction materials shall occur.
B. If land is being cleared for a housing development or the construction of
a house, the burning of trees or timber, which is cut down from on site,
is allowed, provided that the Fire Department inspects and approves all
tree or timber piles to be burned prior to burning occurring.
§ 129-3 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 129-6
1:62
§ 129-7. Issuance of burning permit.
Burning permits pursuant to this chapter shall be issued by the Cascade
Charter Township Fire Department. The Fire Department may impose
reasonable conditions on the issuance of a burning permit, including, but
not limited to, limitations in the size, duration, time of day, location, and
manner of burning.
§ 129-8. Revocation of burning permit.
A burning permit may be revoked by the Fire Department after issuance
if the open burning event would likely be unsafe due to the particular
circumstances or requests, including, but not limited to, unfavorable
weather conditions.
§ 129-9. Natural disaster event.
In the event of a natural disaster which causes extensive damage to shrubs,
bushes, and trees, the limitations on open burning of shrubbery, brush,
tree branches, and tree trimmings in this chapter may be waived by the
Fire Chief (or his/her designated representative), upon consulting with the
Township Manager prior to the waiver.
§ 129-10. Conflict with other ordinances.
In the event of conflict between any provisions of this chapter and those
of any other ordinance of the Township, the provisions hereof shall be
controlling.
§ 129-11. Exceptions.
The following are exempt from the rules of this chapter prohibiting open
burning:
A. The property owner (or his/her agent) must personally supervise any
and all fires which occur on the property owner's land. Anyone
supervising a fire must be at least 18 years of age or older.
B. The property owner (or his/her agent) must be present outdoors on the
property at the fire at all times when smoke or flames are present.
C. No smoke is allowed to occur after the burning time period has expired.
D. No accelerants can be utilized to start a fire. Such prohibited
accelerants include, but are not limited to, gasoline, diesel fuel, or any
other type of flammable fluid.
E. The size of a fire cannot exceed 10 feet by 10 feet on the ground.
A. Township parks in which fires are permitted by the rules governing said
parks; and
§ 129-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-11
1:63
§ 129-12. Loss of burning privileges.
Any person found responsible for a violation of a municipal civil infraction
offense pursuant to this chapter shall have their burning privileges
suspended for 60 days for any and all properties which they own within
Cascade Charter Township, unless the Fire Chief waives all or part of that
suspension for good cause shown.
§ 129-13. Violations and penalties.39
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be responsible
for a municipal civil infraction, subject to the penalties in Chapter 40,
Article IV, Penalties for Misdemeanors and Municipal Civil Infractions.40
Chapter 135
CABLE SERVICE RATES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Franchises — See Ch. A410.
§ 135-1. Definitions.
B. Fires authorized for the training of firefighters or other controlled
burnings approved by the Fire Chief.
A. For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACT — The Communications Act of 1934, as amended (and specifically
as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. 102-385), and as may be amended
from time to time.
ASSOCIATED EQUIPMENT — All equipment and services subject to
regulation pursuant to 47 CFR 76.923.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE — "Basic service" as defined in the FCC Rules,
and any other cable television service which is subject to rate
regulation by the Township pursuant to the Act and the FCC Rules.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FCC RULES — All rules of the FCC promulgated from time to time
pursuant to the Act.
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
40.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 97.0013, Enforcement, which previously followed this section,
was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 129-11 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 135-1
1:64
§ 135-2. Purpose; interpretation.
§ 135-3. Rate regulations promulgated by FCC.
In connection with the regulation of rates for basic cable service and
associated equipment, the Charter Township of Cascade shall follow all FCC
Rules.
§ 135-4. Filing; additional information; burden of proof.
INCREASE IN RATES — An increase in rates or a decrease in
programming or customer services as provided in the FCC Rules.
B. All other words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the same
meaning as defined in the Act and FCC Rules.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to:
(1) Adopt regulations consistent with the Act and the FCC Rules with
respect to basic cable service rate regulation; and
(2) Prescribe procedures to provide a reasonable opportunity for
consideration of the views of interested parties in connection with
basic cable service rate regulation by the Township.
B. This chapter shall be implemented and interpreted consistent with the
Act and FCC Rules.
A. A cable operator shall submit its schedule of rates for the basic service
tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates in
accordance with the Act and the FCC Rules. The cable operator shall
include as part of its submission such information as is necessary to
show that its schedule of rates or its proposed increase in rates
complies with the Act and the FCC Rules. The cable operator shall file
10 copies of the schedule or proposed increase with the Township
Clerk. For purposes of this chapter, the filing of the cable operator shall
be deemed to have been made when at least 10 copies have been
received by the Township Clerk. The Township Board may, by resolution
or otherwise, adopt rules and regulations as allowed by law prescribing
the information, data and calculations which must be included as part
of the cable operator's filing of the schedule of rates or a proposed
increase.
B. In addition to information and data required by rules and regulations of
the Township pursuant to Subsection A above, a cable operator shall
provide all information requested by the Township Manager that is
related and helpful in connection with the Township's review and
regulation of existing rates for the basic service tier and associated
equipment or a proposed increase in these rates. The Township
Manager may establish reasonable deadlines for submission of the
requested information, and the cable operator shall comply with such
deadlines.
§ 135-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-4
1:65
§ 135-5. Proprietary information.
§ 135-6. Public notice; initial review of rates.
C. A cable operator has the burden of proving that its schedule of rates for
the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase
in such rates complies with the Act and the FCC Rules including,
without limitation, 47 U.S.C. § 543 and 47 CFR 76.922 and 76.923.
A. If this chapter, any rules or regulations adopted by the Township
pursuant to § 135-4A, or any request for information pursuant to
§ 135-4B requires the production of proprietary information, the cable
operator shall produce the information. However, at the time the
allegedly proprietary information is submitted, a cable operator may
request that specific, identified portions of its response be treated as
confidential and withheld from public disclosure. The request must
state the reason why the information should be treated as proprietary
and the facts that support those reasons. The request for confidentiality
will be granted if the Township determines that the preponderance of
the evidence shows that nondisclosure is consistent with the provisions
of the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. § 552. The Township shall
place in a public file for inspection any decision that results in
information being withheld. If the cable operator requests
confidentiality and the request is denied, 1) where the cable operator is
proposing a rate increase, it may withdraw the proposal, in which case
the allegedly proprietary information will be returned to it; or 2) the
cable operator may seek review within five working days of the denial in
any appropriate forum. Release of the information will be stayed
pending review.
B. Any interested party may file a request to inspect material withheld as
proprietary with the Township. The Township shall weigh the policy
considerations favoring nondisclosure against the reasons cited for
permitting inspection in light of the facts of the particular case. It will
then promptly notify the requesting entity and the cable operator that
submitted the information as to the disposition of the request. It may
grant, deny or condition a request. The requesting party or the cable
operator may seek review of the decision by filing an appeal with any
appropriate forum. Disclosure will be stayed pending resolution of any
appeal.
C. The procedures set forth in this section shall be construed as analogous
to and consistent with the rules of the FCC regarding requests for
confidentiality including, without limitation, 47 CFR 0.459.
A. Upon the filing of 10 copies of the schedule of rates or the proposed
increase in rates pursuant to § 135-4A above, the Township Clerk shall
publish a public notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Township which shall state that:
§ 135-4 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 135-6
1:66
§ 135-7. Tolling order.
After a cable operator has filed its existing schedule of rates or a proposed
increase in these rates, the existing schedule of rates will remain in effect
or the proposed increase in rates will become effective after 30 days from
the date of filing under § 135-4A above unless the Township Board (or other
properly authorized body or official) tolls the thirty-day deadline pursuant to
47 CFR 76.933 by issuing a brief written order, by resolution or otherwise,
within 30 days of the date of filing. The Township Board may toll the thirtyday
deadline for an additional 90 days in cases not involving cost-of-service
showings and for an additional 150 days in cases involving cost-of-service
showings.
§ 135-8. Public notice; thirty-day deadline on rates hearing.
If a written order has been issued pursuant to § 135-7 and 47 CFR 76.933
to toll the effective date of existing rates for the basic service tier and
associated equipment or a proposed increase in these rates, the cable
operator shall submit to the Township any additional information required
or requested pursuant to § 135-4 of this chapter. In addition, the Township
Board shall hold a public hearing to consider the comments of interested
parties within the additional ninety-day or one-hundred-fifty-day period, as
the case may be. The Township Clerk shall publish a public notice of the
public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the Township
which shall state: 1) the date, time, and place at which the hearing shall
be held; 2) interested parties may appear in person, by agent, or by letter
at such hearing to submit comments on or objections to the existing rates
or the proposed increase in rates; and 3) copies of the schedule of rates
or the proposed increase in rates and related information (except those
parts which may be withheld as proprietary) are available for inspection or
copying from the office of the Clerk. The public notice shall be published not
(1) The filing has been received by the Township Clerk and (except
those parts which may be withheld as proprietary) is available for
public inspection and copying; and
(2) Interested parties are encouraged to submit written comments on
the filing to the Township Clerk not later than seven days after the
public notice is published.
B. The Township Clerk shall give notice to the cable operator of the date,
time, and place of the meeting at which the Township Board shall first
consider the schedule of rates or the proposed increase. This notice
shall be mailed by first-class mail at least three days before the
meeting. In addition, if a written staff or consultant's report on the
schedule of rates or the proposed increase is prepared for
consideration of the Township Board, then the Township Clerk shall
mail a copy of the report by first-class mail to the cable operator at least
three days before the meeting at which the Township Board shall first
consider the schedule of rates or the proposed increase.
§ 135-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-8
1:67
less than 15 days before the hearing. In addition, the Township Clerk shall
mail by first-class mail a copy of the public notice to the cable operator not
less than 15 days before the hearing.
§ 135-9. Staff or consultant report; written response.
Following the public hearing, the Township Manager shall cause a report
to be prepared for the Township Board which shall (based on the filing
of the cable operator, the comments or objections of interested parties,
information requested from the cable operator and its response, staff or
consultant's review, and other appropriate information) include a
recommendation for the decision of the Township Board pursuant to
§ 135-10. The Township Clerk shall mail a copy of the report to the cable
operator by first-class mail not less than 20 days before the Township Board
acts under § 135-10. The cable operator may file a written response to the
report with the Township Clerk. If at least 10 copies of the response are
filed by the cable operator with the Township Clerk within 10 days after the
report is mailed to the cable operator, the Township Clerk shall forward it
to the Township Board.
§ 135-10. Rate decisions and orders.
The Township Board shall issue a written order, by resolution or otherwise,
which, in whole or in part, approves the existing rates for basic cable
service and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates,
denies the existing rates or proposed increase, orders a rate reduction,
prescribes a reasonable rate, allows the existing rates or proposed increase
to become effective subject to refund, or orders other appropriate relief,
in accordance with the FCC Rules. If the Township Board issues an order
allowing the existing rates or proposed increase to become effective subject
to refund, it shall also direct the cable operator to maintain an accounting
pursuant to 47 CFR 76.933. The order specified in this section shall be
issued within 90 days after the tolling order under § 135-7 in all cases not
involving a cost-of-service showing. The order shall be issued within 150
days after the tolling order under § 135-7 in all cases involving a cost-ofservice
showing.
§ 135-11. Refunds; notice.
The Township Board may order a refund to subscribers as provided in 47
CFR 76.942. Before the Township Board orders any refund to subscribers,
the Township Clerk shall give at least seven days written notice to the
cable operator by first-class mail of the date, time, and place at which the
Township Board shall consider issuing a refund order and shall provide an
opportunity for the cable operator to comment. The cable operator may
appear in person, by agent, or by letter at such time for the purpose of
submitting comments to the Township Board.
§ 135-8 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 135-12
1:68
§ 135-12. Written decisions; public notice.
Any order of the Township Board pursuant to § 135-10 or 135-11 shall be in
writing, shall be effective upon adoption by the Township Board, and shall
be deemed released to the public upon adoption. The Clerk shall publish a
public notice of any such written order in a newspaper of general circulation
within the Township which shall summarize the written decision and state
that copies of the text of the written decision are available for inspection or
copying from the office of the Clerk. In addition, the Township Clerk shall
mail a copy of the text of the written decision to the cable operator by firstclass
mail.
§ 135-13. Rules and regulations.
In addition to rules promulgated pursuant to § 135-4, the Township Board
may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt rules and regulations for basic
cable service rate regulation proceedings (including, without limitation, the
conduct of hearings), consistent with the Act and the FCC Rules.
§ 135-14. Failure to give notice.
The failure of the Township Clerk to give the notices or to mail copies
of reports as required by this chapter shall not invalidate the decisions
or proceedings of the Township Board so long as there is substantial
compliance with this chapter.
§ 135-15. Additional hearings.
In addition to the requirements of this chapter, the Township Board may,
in its sole discretion, hold additional public hearings upon such reasonable
notice as the Township Board shall prescribe.
§ 135-16. Additional powers.
The Township shall possess all powers conferred by the Act, the FCC Rules,
the cable operator's consent agreement, and all other applicable law. The
powers exercised pursuant to the Act, the FCC Rules, and this chapter shall
be in addition to powers conferred by law or otherwise. The Township may
take any action not prohibited by the Act and the FCC Rules to protect the
public interest in connection with basic cable service rate regulation.
§ 135-17. Failure to comply; remedies.
The Township may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies against
the cable operator (including, without limitation, all remedies provided
under a cable operator's consent agreement with the Township) for failure
to comply with the Act, the FCC Rules, any orders or determinations of
the Township pursuant to this chapter, any requirements of this chapter, or
any rules or regulations promulgated hereunder. Subject to applicable law,
failure to comply with the Act, the FCC Rules, any orders or determination
of the Township pursuant to this chapter, any requirements of this chapter,
§ 135-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-17
1:69
or any rules and regulations promulgated hereunder shall also be sufficient
grounds for revocation or denial of renewal of a cable operator's consent
agreement.
Chapter 142
CEMETERIES
§ 142-1. Purpose and scope.
This chapter is for the purpose of providing for the health, safety and
welfare of the people of Cascade Charter Township in the matter of all
Township cemeteries by the adoption of proper rules and regulations
therefor, and all Township cemeteries in Cascade Charter Township are
subject to this chapter and any and all amendments hereto, and to any
fees and charges established by the Cascade Charter Township Board as
provided for herein. Reference to any Township rules and regulations in any
document affecting any Cascade Charter Township cemetery shall have the
same force and effect as are set forth in this chapter.
§ 142-2. Definitions. [Amended 9-11-1996 by Ord. No. 10-1996]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSIGNEE — Any person to whom any lot, plot, grave site, or burial unit
has been assigned by the Township. Any and all rights of such assignee shall
be as defined herein and by statute.
BURIAL UNIT — A lot or any portion thereof.
CEMETERY — Any cemetery owned or operated by the Charter Township
of Cascade, and where appropriate to the context, the word shall include
the officials in charge of the cemetery and/or the Cascade Charter Township
Board.
FAMILY — One person or group of two or more persons related by bonds of
matrimony, consanguinity or legal adoption.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — Two persons related by bonds of matrimony,
including their financially supported or dependent children. "Immediate
family" does not include other consanguineous or legal relationships (e.g.,
brother-brother, sister-sister, brother-sister, etc.)
INTERMENT — The permanent disposition of the remains of a deceased
person by cremation and interment, entombment or burial.
LOT, PLOT OR BURIAL UNIT — Terms shall be used interchangeably and
shall apply with like effect to one or more than one adjoining graves; to
one or more than one adjoining crypts or vaults; to one or more than one
adjoining niches.
§ 135-17 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-2
1:70
MEMORIAL — Includes a monument, marker, tablet, headstone, private
mausoleum or tomb for family or individual use, tombstone, coping, or
enclosure, surface burial vault, urn and crypt and niche plates.
MONUMENT — Includes a tombstone or memorial of granite, or other
approved stone, which shall extend above the surface of the ground.
REGISTRAR — The Cascade Charter Township Clerk or such other person
as the Township Board may designate from time to time.
RESIDENT — A person living in Cascade Charter Township either owning
or renting a dwelling unit. For the purpose of this chapter a resident shall
also include any person who has resided in Cascade Charter Township at
least 10 years. Where such person is not residing in the Township at death,
such person shall also be classified as a resident if 1/2 of the years of
nonresidency is less than his or her total years of residency.
§ 142-3. Interments; disinterments. [Amended 9-11-1996 by Ord.
No. 10-1996]
A. Subject to laws. Besides being subject to these rules and regulations all
interments, disinterments and removals are made subject to the orders
and laws of the properly constituted authorities of the Township, county
and state.
B. Time and charges. All interments and disinterments and removals must
be made at the time and in the manner and upon such charges as fixed
by the Township Board, as provided by a resolution adopted from time
to time by the Board.
C. Holidays. No interments, disinterments, removals, cremation or
interment service shall be permitted on Sundays, or on any of the
following holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor
Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, and when any of the abovementioned
holidays falls, or is legally observed, on a Saturday or
Monday, except by approval of the Cemetery Registrar.41
D. Notice. The Registrar shall have the right to insist upon at least 36
hours' notice prior to any interment and at least 48 hours' notice prior
to any disinterment or removal.
E. Application of interment. Only residents of Cascade Charter Township
are eligible for internment in a cemetery owned and operated by
Cascade Charter Township. The Registrar shall have the right to refuse
interment in any plot, and to refuse to open any burial space for any
purpose, except on written application by the plot assignee on record
made out on blanks provided by the cemetery and duly filed in the office
of the Registrar.
F. Must use stone, brick, concrete or metal. Every earth interment shall be
made enclosed in a concrete box or a box of acceptable metal.
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 142-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-3
1:71
G. Interment of cremated remains.
(1) The cremated remains must be permanently interred within a
period of four weeks. If the arrangements for this interment are not
made within the specified time, the cemetery shall be in no way
liable for rental space occupied by the remains pending the time
they are permanently interred.
(2) The cemetery shall be in no way liable or held responsible for any
cinerary container, receptacle or urn placed in any plot, other than
that constructed of cast bronze of standard specification.
H. Authorization of one plot assignee sufficient. The Registrar shall have
the right to make an interment of any member of the immediate family
of any one of several plot assignee's upon the latter's authorization. No
other person may be interred in any plot without the written consent of
all those assignees of the plot who are recorded as such on the books of
the cemetery.
I. Location of interment space. When instructions regarding the location
of an interment space in a plot cannot be obtained, or are indefinite, or
when for any reason the interment space cannot be opened where
specified, the Registrar may, in his discretion, open it in such location in
the plot as he deems best and proper, so as not to delay the funeral, and
the cemetery shall not be liable in damages for any error so made.
J. Orders given by telephone. The cemetery shall not be held responsible
for any order given by telephone or for any mistakes occurring from the
want of precise and proper instructions as to the particular space, size
and location in a plot where interment is desired.
K. Errors may be corrected. The Registrar shall have the right to correct
any errors that may be made either in making interments,
disinterments or removals, or in the descriptions, transfer or
conveyance of any interment property, either by cancelling such
conveyance of any interment property, and substituting and conveying
in lieu thereof other interment property in a similar location as far as
possible, or as may be selected by the Registrar, or, in the sole
discretion of the Registrar by refunding the amount of money paid by
the subject assignee. In the event such error shall involve the interment
of the remains of any person in such property, the Registrar shall have
the right to remove and/or transfer such remains so interred to such
other property in a similar location as may be substituted and conveyed
in lieu thereof. The Registrar shall also have the right to correct any
errors made by placing an improper description, including an incorrect
name or date, either on the memorial or on the container for cremated
remains.
L. Delays in interments caused by protests. The Township and Township
officials shall be in no way liable for any delay in the interment of a body
where a protest to the interment has been made, or where the rules and
regulations have not been complied with; and, further, the Township
§ 142-3 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-3
1:72
reserves the right under such circumstances to place the body in the
receiving vault until the full rights have been determined. The Township
shall be under no duty to recognize any protests of interments unless
they be in writing and filed in the office of the Registrar.
M. Not responsible for embalming or for identity. The Township shall not
be liable for the interment permit nor for the identity of the person
sought to be interred or cremated; nor shall the Township be liable in
any way for the embalming of the body, unless such embalming be done
by the Township, and then only for negligence in performing the
embalming.
N. No interment permitted unless all fees and charges are paid. No
interment shall be permitted or memorial placed in or on any grave not
fully paid for except by special consent of the Registrar in writing in
each and every case, and in the event such consent is given, and all
interments or memorials placed in or on said plot shall be considered as
temporary, and a note shall not be considered as payment, and no rights
shall be acquired by the plot assignee of said interment or interments
until such charges and fees are fully paid for in cash, including principal
and interest; and in case the assignee of said plot shall fail to meet all
payments within 30 days after the same are demanded by the cemetery,
then the cemetery may reenter said property and hold the same as of its
former estates. The Township thereupon shall be released from all
obligations thereunder, and it may retain such payments as may have
been made toward the assignment of such property as liquidated
damages. The Township reserves the right and shall have the right
immediately or at any time thereafter, without notice, at its discretion to
cremate or to remove to single graves, to be chosen by the Township,
each of the remains then interred in said plot. The Township, further,
shall have the right to remove any memorial that may have been placed
on said property.
O. Burial boxes over four feet in length. Burial boxes over four feet in
length will be classed as adult size.
P. Funeral zone. Strangers are not allowed to approach the grave at a
funeral. When deemed necessary by the Registrar or on request of a lot
assignee or his representative, a funeral zone may be established and
properly marked, and no one except persons attending the funeral will
be permitted to trespass within its boundaries.
Q. Number of burial rights per lot. The number of burial rights assigned on
any lot will be recorded on the burial certificate when lots are assigned.
R. Care in removal. The Township shall exercise the utmost care in making
a removal, but it shall assume no liability for damage to any casket or
burial vase or urn incurred in making removal.
§ 142-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-4
1:73
§ 142-4. Maintenance of records. [Amended 9-11-1996 by Ord. No.
10-199642]
The Township Clerk shall keep a record in his office of certificates and
receipts for perpetual care of burial units, and a record of burials so
reported to him by the Registrar, and such other records as deemed
necessary by the Township Board. He shall also maintain complete records
of all assignments, receipts, burial records, and all other matters affecting
Township cemeteries.
§ 142-5. Service charges; past due indebtedness.
§ 142-6. Control of work by cemetery.
§ 142-7. Decoration of plots.
A. Payment of service charges. The charges for the cemetery services
must be paid at the time of the issuance of the order of interment or
disinterment and removal.
B. Past due indebtedness. Arrangements for the payment of any and all
indebtedness due the Township must be made before interment will be
made in any plot.
A. Work to be done by cemetery. All grading landscape work and
improvements of any kind and all care of plots shall be done, and all
trees and shrubs and herbage of any kind shall be planted, trimmed, cut
or removed, and all openings and closings of plots, and all interments,
disinterments and removals shall be made only by the cemetery.
B. Registrar must direct and may remove improvements. All
improvements or alterations of individual property in the cemetery
shall be under the direction of and subject to the consent, satisfaction
and approval of the Registrar, and should they be made without his
written consent, he shall have the right to remove, alter or change such
improvements or alterations at the expense of the plot assignee or, in
any event, at any time, in his judgment, they become unsightly to the
eye.
C. Disturbing turf. Cutting into or otherwise disturbing the turf by any
except the cemetery employees is forbidden and automatically releases
the Township from all obligation of resodding or reseeding of same.
A. Floral regulations. The cemetery shall have the authority to remove all
floral designs, flowers, weeds, trees, shrubs, plants, or herbage of any
kind, from the cemetery as soon as, in the judgment of the Registrar,
they become unsightly, dangerous, detrimental or diseased, or when
they do not conform to standards maintained. The cemetery shall not be
liable for floral pieces, baskets, or frames in which or to which such
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 142-4 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-7
1:74
§ 142-8. Right to use cemetery property.
floral pieces are attached, beyond the acceptance of such floral pieces
for funeral services to be held in the cemetery. The cemetery shall not
be responsible for frozen plants, or herbage of any kind, or for plantings
damaged by the elements, thieves, vandals, or by other causes beyond
its control. The cemetery reserves the right to regulate the method
of decorating plots so that a uniform beauty may be maintained. The
cemetery reserves the right to prevent the removal of any flowers, floral
designs, trees, shrubs or plants, or herbage of any kind, unless the
Registrar gives his consent.
B. Plantings on burial units. All trees planted on or removed from any
burial unit shall be done under the supervision of the Registrar. All
plantings, other than annual or perennial flowers, must be approved by
the Registrar as to selection of varieties and arrangement. All plantings
shall be subject to proper attention and pruning by the Registrar, if not
done by the owner upon 30 days' notice by the Registrar. The Township
will not be responsible for the destruction of plants or shrubs made
necessary in cleaning up any burial unit and putting the same in proper
care.
C. Fence, railing, enclosure, etc. No fence, railing, coping, wall, hedge or
enclosure of any kind or nature shall be placed or erected around or on
any burial unit.
D. Removal of offensive structures, etc. If any monument, effigy, or other
structure placed upon any burial unit shall be determined to be
improper or offensive by the cemetery, it shall be the right and duty of
the cemetery to remove same in accord with the terms of notice given
by the cemetery.
A. Right to replant, regrade and use property. The right to enlarge,
reduce, replant and/or change the boundaries or grading of the
cemetery or of a section or sections, from time to time, including the
right to modify and/or change the locations of or remove or regrade
roads, drives and/or walks, or any part thereof, is hereby expressly
reserved. The right to lay, maintain and operate, or alter or change
pipelines and/or gutters for sprinkling systems, drainage, lakes, etc., is
also expressly reserved, as well as is the right to use cemetery property,
not assigned to individual plot owners, for cemetery purposes including
the interring and preparing for interment of dead human bodies, or for
anything necessary, incidental or convenient thereto, a perpetual right
of ingress and egress over plots for the purpose of passage to and from
other plots.
B. No right granted in alleyways. No easement or right of interment is
granted to any plot owner in any road, drive, alley or walk within the
cemetery, but such road, drive, alley, or walk may be used as a means of
access to the cemetery or buildings as long as the cemetery devotes it
to that purpose.
§ 142-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-9
1:75
§ 142-9. Conduct of persons within cemetery.
A. Must use walks. Persons within the cemetery grounds shall use only the
avenues, walks, alleys and roads, and no person shall enter the
cemetery except through an established gate.
B. Trespassers on cemetery plots. Only plot assignees and their relatives
shall be permitted on a cemetery plot. Any other person thereon shall
be considered as a trespasser, and the cemetery shall owe no duty to
said trespasser to keep the property, or the memorial thereon, in a
reasonable safe condition.
C. Children. Children under 18 years of age shall not be permitted within
the cemetery, or the buildings, unless accompanied by proper persons
to take care of them or unless special permission is granted.
D. Flowers, etc. All persons are prohibited from gathering flowers, either
wild or cultivated, or breaking trees, shrubbery or plants, or feeding or
disturbing the birds or fish or other animal life.
E. Refreshment. No person shall consume refreshments or liquors in a
cemetery or carry same on the premises.
F. Lounging on grounds. Strangers shall not be permitted to sit or to
lounge on any of the grounds, graves, or monuments in the cemetery, or
in any of the buildings.
G. Loud talking. No loud talking shall be permitted on the cemetery
grounds within hearing distance of funeral services.
H. Smoking. Smoking within any buildings is prohibited.
I. Rubbish. The throwing of rubbish or debris on the drives and paths, or
on any part of the grounds, or in the buildings is prohibited.
Receptacles for waste materials are located at convenient places.
J. Automobiles. Automobiles shall not be driven through the grounds at a
greater speed than 10 miles per hour and must always be kept on the
right side of the cemetery roadway. Automobiles are not allowed to park
or to come to a full stop in front of an open grave unless such
automobiles are in attendance at the funeral. Automobiles must not:
(1) Drive off the established roads unless permission is given in writing
by the Registrar of cemeteries.
(2) Make a U-turn on a cemetery road.
(3) Use a cemetery road as a public thoroughfare.
K. Bicycles and motorcycles. No bicycles or motorcycles shall be admitted
to the cemetery except such as may be in attendance at funerals or on
business.
§ 142-9 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-9
1:76
§ 142-10. Fees, gratuities and commissions.
Gratuities may not be accepted by employees. No person, while employed
by the cemetery shall receive any fee, gratuity or commission, except from
the Township, directly or indirectly, under penalty of immediate dismissal.
§ 142-11. Protections against loss.
The cemetery shall take reasonable precaution to protect plot assignees
within the cemetery, but it distinctly disclaims all responsibility for loss
or damage from causes beyond its reasonable control, and especially from
damage caused by the elements, acts of God, common enemy, thieves,
vandals, strikers, malicious mischief makers, explosives, unavoidable
accidents, invasions, insurrections, riots, or order of any military or civil
authority, whether the damage be direct or collateral, other than is herein
provided.
§ 142-12. Change in address of plot assignees.
It shall be the duty of the plot assignee to notify the cemetery of any change
in his post office address. Notice sent to an assignee at the last address on
file in the office of the Registrar shall be considered sufficient and proper
legal notification.
L. Peddling or soliciting. Peddling of flowers or plants or soliciting the sale
of any commodity, other than by employees of the cemetery, is positively
prohibited within the confines of the cemetery.
M. Firearms. No firearms shall be permitted within the cemetery except on
special permit from the Registrar.
N. Notices and advertisements. No signs or notices or advertisements of
any kind shall be allowed in the cemetery, unless placed by the
cemetery.
O. Dogs. Dogs shall not be allowed on the cemetery grounds or in any of
the buildings.
P. Improprieties. It is of the utmost importance that there should be strict
observance of all of the proprieties of the cemetery, whether embraced
in these rules or not, as no improprieties shall be allowed, and the
Registrar shall have power to prevent improper assemblages and to
require adherence to all commonly known proprieties.
Q. Registrar to enforce rules. The Registrar is hereby empowered to
enforce all rules and regulations and to exclude from the property of the
cemetery any person violating the same. The Registrar shall have
charge of the grounds and buildings and, at all times, shall have
supervision and control of all persons in the cemetery, including the
conduct of funerals, weddings, traffic, employees, plot owners and
visitors.
§ 142-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-13
1:77
§ 142-13. Perpetual care.43
§ 142-14. Rules for memorial work.
A. Perpetual care of burial units. The term "perpetual care" used in
reference to burial units shall be held to mean the cutting of grass upon
said burial units at reasonable intervals, the raking and cleaning of the
burial units at reasonable intervals, the pruning of shrubs and trees,
meaning and intending the general preservation of the burial units and
grounds, walks, roadways, boundaries and structures, other than the
structures hereinafter excepted and exempted, to the end that said
grounds shall remain and be reasonably cared for as cemetery grounds.
B. Perpetual care exceptions. The term "perpetual care" shall in no case be
construed as meaning the maintenance, repair or replacement of any
grave stone or monumental structures or memorials placed or erected
on burial units, nor the planting or cost of flowers or ornamental plants,
nor sprinkling said burial units with water, nor the maintenance, or
doing of any special or unusual work in the cemetery, nor does it mean
the reconstruction of any marble, granite, bronze or concrete work on
any burial unit in the cemetery, or other buildings or structures, made
necessary by injuries caused by the elements, an act of God, common
enemy, thieves, vandals, strikers, malicious mischief makers,
explosions, unavoidable accidents, invasions, riots, insurrection, or by
the order of any military or civil authority, whether the damage be
direct or collateral, other than herein provided for.
A. Markers, stones, monuments, etc.
(1) All permanent markers, headstones, monuments, mausoleums,
memorials and mementos to be erected or placed in said cemetery
shall be of recognized durable granite or recognized hard marble of
United States Standard Bronze except by permission of Registrar.
(2) All foundations for the setting and placing of the foregoing shall be
erected by the cemetery upon such type or size of foundation as
shall be specified by the Registrar of the cemetery, the cost and
expense thereof to be borne by the assignee of the burial unit and
paid in advance in accord with prices established by the Township
Board.
(3) No person shall erect or place in said cemetery any permanent
memorials or memorial work of any kind or character until plans
and specifications therefor shall have been submitted to and
approved by the Registrar of the said cemetery.
(4) Not more than one upright memorial shall be allowed above the
ground level on any one grave space.
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 142-13 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-14
1:78
§ 142-15. Exceptions and modifications to cemetery rules.
Special cases may arise in which the literal enforcement of a rule may
impose unnecessary hardship. The Township Board, therefore, reserves the
right, without notice, to make exceptions, suspensions or modifications in
any of these rules and regulations when, in its judgement, the same appear
advisable, and such temporary exception, suspension or modifications shall
in no way be construed as affecting the general application of such rule.
§ 142-16. Assignment of graves. [Amended 9-11-1996 by Ord. No.
10-1996]
§ 142-17. Fee schedule and refunds.
Fees and refunds for grave assignments and opening and closing graves
and refunds in cases where application is made therefor shall be as the
Township Board shall establish from time to time by resolution.
§ 142-18. Violations and penalties.45
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be responsible
for a municipal civil infraction, subject to the penalties in Chapter 40,
Article IV, Penalties for Misdemeanors and Municipal Civil Infractions.
Chapter 155
CONSTRUCTION CODES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Contractor registration — See Ch. 163. Fire lanes — See Ch. 194.
B. Excavation, grading, etc. All excavations, grading or removal of earth or
rubbish shall be excavated, graded or removed in such manner as the
Registrar may direct, and no burial unit or drive shall be graded in
shape or in any manner altered from the general plan of the cemetery
without first obtaining the consent of the Registrar.
A. Graves will be assigned only at time of need, when a death occurs in the
family of the applicant.
B. Maximum of two graves will be assigned to any applicant except by
permission of the registrar of the Township Board. Additional graves
may be assigned by the registrar only upon a determination that unique
or special circumstances exist to warrant additional grave sites for
members of the immediate family.44
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 142-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-18
1:79

ARTICLE I
Construction Standards
[Adopted 3-27-2002 by Ord. No. 4-2002]
§ 155-1. Adoption of State Construction Code.
Pursuant to the provisions of this Section 8a and 8b of the Act, Cascade
Charter Township (the "Township") hereby adopts by reference the
Construction Code. The Township assumes responsibility for the
administration and enforcement of the Construction Code and the Act
within the Township.
§ 155-2. Definitions and word usage.
§ 155-3. Civil infractions; fines.47
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of the
Construction Code or Act is responsible for a municipal civil infraction,
subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $100, plus costs and other
sanctions, for each infraction (as authorized by Section 21 of Act 359 of the
Public Acts of 1947, as amended,48 and the Charter Township of Cascade
Municipal Civil Infraction Ordinance). Repeat offenses shall be subject to
A. For purposes of this article, the following words, terms and phrases
shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section:
ACT — The State Construction Code Act, as amended (Act No. 230
of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972, as amended, being MCLA
§ 125.1501 et seq.)
CONSTRUCTION CODE — The State Construction Code promulgated
from time to time by the Director of the Department of Consumer and
Industry Services pursuant to Section 4 of the Act46 consisting of the
Michigan Building Code, the Michigan Residential Code, the Michigan
Uniform Energy Code, the Michigan Electrical Code, the Michigan
Mechanical Code and the Michigan Plumbing Code.
B. The Building Official shall be the enforcing agency of the Construction
Code within the Township pursuant to the Act, shall be responsible for
the administration and enforcement of the Construction Code and the
Act, and shall be responsible for reviewing permit applications and
issuing permits pursuant to the Construction Code.
C. References in the Construction Code to "jurisdiction" and "name of
jurisdiction" shall mean the Township. References in the Construction
Code to Building Official, Code Official, Electrical Inspector,
Mechanical Inspector, and Plumbing Inspector shall mean the
employees of Cascade Charter Township.
46.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1504.
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
48.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 42.21.
§ 155-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-3
1:81
the increased fines as provided by this section. As used in this section,
"repeat offense" means a second or any subsequent violation of the same
requirement or provision of the Construction Code or the Act committed
by a person within any ninety-day period and for which the person admits
responsibility or is determined to be responsible. The increased fine for a
repeat offense under the Construction Code or the Act shall be as follows:
§ 155-4. Construction Code Board of Appeals.
A. The fine for any offense which is a repeat offense shall be not less than
$250, plus costs.
B. The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense, or any
subsequent repeat offense, shall be not less than $500 each, plus costs.
C. Each day on which any violation of the Construction Code or the Act
occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense subject to separate
sanctions. The Township's Building Official is hereby designated as the
authorized official to issue municipal civil infraction citations for
violations of the Construction Code or Act.
A. Pursuant to Section 14 of the Act,49 the Township hereby establishes a
Construction Code Board of Appeals consisting of not less than three
nor more than seven members, appointed by the Township Board. A
member of the Township Board of Appeals shall be qualified by
experience or training to perform the duties of members of the
Township Board of Appeals. The term of members of the Township
Board of Appeals shall be three years.
B. If the Building Official refuses to grant an application for a building
permit, or makes any other decision pursuant or related to the Act or
the Construction Code, an interested person, or the person's authorized
agent, may appeal in writing to the Board of Appeals. An application for
appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of the Construction
Code or the rules governing construction have been incorrectly
interpreted, the provisions of the Construction Code do not fully apply,
or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed.
C. When an appeal is made, notice of the hearing before the Board of
Appeals shall be given according to applicable state or local law. The
Board of Appeals shall hear the appeal and render and file its decision
with a statement of reasons for the decision with the enforcing agency
from whom the appeal was taken not more than 30 days after
submission of the appeal. Failure by the Board of Appeals to hear an
appeal and file a decision within the time limit is a denial of the appeal
for purposes of authorizing the institution of an appeal to the State
Construction Code Commission. A copy of the decision and statement of
the reasons for the decision shall be delivered or mailed, before filing,
to the party taking the appeal.
49.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1514.
§ 155-3 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 155-5
1:82
§ 155-5. Enforcement by Building Official.
The code official responsible for the administration and enforcement of the
Construction Code and the Act shall be the Building Official of Cascade
Charter Township.
§ 155-6. Records to be kept by Building Official.
The Building Official shall keep a reasonable and comprehensive record of
all permits issued by him/her and of all orders and other acts made and
taken by him/her, either by keeping a copy thereof or an accurate statement
thereof, which records shall at all times be available to the officials of
the Township. He/she shall keep an account of all fees and other monies
collected and received by him/her as such official and the names of the
persons from whom such monies were obtained and the date thereof.
§ 155-7. Building permit fees. [Amended 10-24-2012 by Ord. No.
7-2012]
The fee for any permit issued pursuant to the Construction Code shall be
established by resolution of the Township Board pursuant to Section 22 of
the Act.50 No permit shall be issued unless such fee has been paid to the
Township Treasurer.
§ 155-8. Compliance and permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to demolish, erect, construct, enlarge,
alter, repair, improve, convert, equip, use, occupy, maintain or move into
or within the Township any building or structure contrary to or in violation
of any of the provisions of this article, the Act or Construction Code, or to
refuse to fail to obtain such permit, unless written consent shall have been
given by the Building Official to the modification of such plan and drawings.
§ 155-9. Conflict with Zoning Ordinance.
If any provision of the Construction Code conflicts with any provision of
the Township's Zoning Ordinance, as amended from time to time, the most
stringent provision shall control.
50.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1522.
§ 155-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-9
1:83

ARTICLE II
Fire Prevention Standards
[Adopted 11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 9-2014]
§ 155-10. Adoption of standards.
A certain document, two copies of which are on file in the office of the
Cascade Charter Township Fire Department Administrative Offices being
marked and designated as the International Fire Code, 2012 Edition,
including Appendixes B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, and J as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Fire Code
of the Cascade Charter Township in the State of Michigan regulating and
governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion
hazards arising from the storage, handling, and use of hazardous
substances, materials, and devices and from conditions hazardous to life
and property in the occupancies of buildings and premises as herein
provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and
terms of said Fire Code on file in the office of the Cascade Charter Township
are hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof, as if fully set out
in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if any,
prescribed in § 155-11 of this article.
§ 155-11. Amendments to standards.
The following sections and subsections of the International Fire Code,
2012 Edition, are hereby amended, or deleted, and additional sections,
subsections, and items are added as indicated. Subsequent section numbers
used in this section shall refer to the like-numbered sections of the
International Fire Code, 2012 Edition.
A. Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Cascade
Charter Township Fire Prevention Code," hereinafter referred to as
"this code."
B. Section 104.11.4 Unlawful boarding or tampering with Fire
Department emergency equipment. Without proper authorization
from the Fire Chief or officer of the Fire Department in charge of the
emergency equipment, no person shall cling to, attach to, climb upon or
into, board, or swing upon any Fire Department vehicle, operate any
emergency warning equipment, or any equipment or protective
clothing on, or part of, any Fire Department vehicle.
C. Section 105 Permits: Delete.
D. Section 109.4 Violation Penalties. Any person, firm, corporation,
trust, partnership, agent thereof, or other legal entity that violates or
refuses to comply with any provisions of this code, or erects, installs,
alters, repairs or does work in violation of the approved construction
documents or directives of the Fire Code Official, or of a permit or
certificate used under the provisions of this code shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or
§ 155-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-11
1:85
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days in jail, or both; or the Fire Code
Official is authorized to request legal counsel of the jurisdiction to
institute the appropriate legal proceedings at law or in equity to
restrain, correct or abate such violation or to require removal or
termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of
the provisions of this code or of the order or discretion made pursuant
hereto. Each day that the violation continues after due notice has been
served shall be deemed a separate offense.
(1) 109.4.1 Abatement of violation. In addition to the imposition of
the penalties herein described, the Fire Code Official is authorized
to institute appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or
to restrain, correct or abate a violation; or to prevent illegal
occupancy of a structure or premises; or to stop an illegal act,
conduct of business or occupancy of a structure on or about any
premises. The Kent County Sheriff's Department shall be requested
by the Fire Code Official to make arrests for an offense of this code
or orders of the Fire Code Official affecting the immediate safety of
the public.
E. Section 111.4 Failure to comply. Any person, firm, corporation, trust,
partnership, agent thereof, or other legal entity who shall continue any
work after having been served with a stop-work order, except such work
as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and be issued a criminal
misdemeanor ticket, punishable by a fine of not more that $500 or
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both. Each day that the
violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a
separate offense.
F. Section 113 Fees: Delete.
G. Section 307. Open Burning, Recreational Fires, and Portable
Outdoor Fireplaces: Delete.
H. Section 503.1 Where required. Fire apparatus access roads shall be
provided and maintained in accordance with Sections 503.1 through
503.1.3., Appendix D, and the Cascade Charter Township Private Street
Ordinance No. 9 of 2002.
I. Section 503.1.1 Buildings and facilities. Approved fire apparatus
roads/fire lanes shall be provided for every facility, building, or portion
of a building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the
jurisdiction. The fire apparatus access road/fire lane shall comply with
the requirements of this section. Minimum twenty-foot wide paved fire
lanes capable of supporting vehicles at least 75,000 pounds must be
constructed in accordance with the following requirements:
§ 155-11 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 155-11
1:86
Number of sides of a building that must have unobstructed
access roads/fire lanes.
Building Size Required Sides
With longest side up to:
150 feet 1
300 feet 2
400 feet 3
With longest side over 400 feet See below
a. The access road/fire lane may be a parking lot or driveway,
providing the full required width is not obstructed with parking or
parking spaces.
b. If the longest side of a building is longer than 400 feet, or if the
building is of an unusual shape or configuration, the Fire Code
Official shall have the authority to require additional access roads/
fire lanes.
c. All buildings must have a fire lane on the longest side.
d. If the building is less than 12,000 square feet and fully sprinkled,
only one access road/fire lane, on the longest side, shall be
required.
e. There must be a minimum of 10 feet and a maximum of 30 feet of
distance from the building.
f. An access road/fire lane must be within 20 feet of all Fire
Department connections.
g. All access roads/fire lanes must be maintained full width and
unobstructed at all times and in all types of weather in all seasons
of the year, including free of excessive snow and ice.
h. "Fire Lane — No Parking" signs shall be placed at the discretion
of the Fire Code Official and shall be installed in accordance with
Chapter 194, Fire Lanes, of the General Ordinances of Cascade
Charter Township.
EXCEPTION: The Fire Code Official is authorized to increase the
distance of the access road/fire lane from a building or facility
where:
1. The building is equipped throughout with an approved
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section
903.3.1.1, 903.3.1.2, or 903.3.1.3.
2. Fire apparatus access roads cannot be installed due to
location, topography, waterways, nonnegotiable grades
or other similar conditions, and approved alternative
means of fire protection is provided.
J. Section 503.2.3 Surface. Fire apparatus access roads shall be
designed and maintained to support the imposed loads of fire apparatus
§ 155-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-11
1:87
and shall be paved with concrete, asphalt or other approved driving
surface capable of supporting the imposed load of the fire apparatus
weighing at least 75,000 pounds.
K. 507.5.1 Hydrants. Where a portion of the facility or building is
constructed, reconstructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction is
more than 300 feet from a fire hydrant on a public street or fire access
road, as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the
facility or building, supplemental on-site fire hydrants shall be provided
at least every 300 feet in commercial/industrial areas and at least every
400 feet in residential areas where required by the Fire Code Official.
Hydrants and their installation shall meet the type and specifications of
the Grand Rapids Water Department. Supplemental (private) hydrants
shall consist of water mains not less than six inches in diameter, shall be
"looped," and dedicated to the public use of the city and its water
system. All public and supplemental (private) hydrants shall be situated
immediately adjacent to and not more than 20 feet from a public or
private access road. Hydrants shall be safety red in color for
supplemental (private) hydrants, and safety yellow for public/municipal
hydrants.
Exceptions:
1. For Group R-3 and Group U occupancies, the distance
requirements shall be 400 feet.
2. For buildings equipped throughout with an approved
automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with
Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2, the distance requirement
shall be 400 feet.
L. The geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the 2012
International Fire Code are hereby established as follows:
(1) Section 5704.2.9.6.1 Locations where aboveground tanks are
prohibited. Storage of Class I and II liquids in aboveground tanks
outside of buildings is prohibited in all residential zoning districts,
as depicted in the Cascade Charter Township Zoning Ordinance
Map.
(2) Section 5706.2.4.4 Locations where aboveground tanks are
prohibited. The storage of Class I and II liquids in above ground
tanks is prohibited in all residential zoning districts, as depicted in
the Cascade Charter Township Zoning Ordinance Map.
(3) Section 5806.2 Limitations. Storage of flammable cryogenic
fluids in stationary containers is prohibited in all residential zoning
districts, as depicted in the Cascade Charter Township Ordinance
Map.
(4) Section 6104.2 Maximum capacity within established limits.
The storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted for the
protection of heavily populated or congested areas, and the
§ 155-11 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 155-11
1:88
aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not exceed a water
capacity of 2,000 gallons in all residential districts, as depicted in
the Cascade Charter Township Zoning Ordinance Map.
M. Appendix C. Amend the following sections:
(1) C102.1 Fire Hydrant Locations. Fire hydrants shall be provided
along required fire apparatus access roads and adjacent to public
and private streets. All public and supplemental (private) hydrants
shall be situated immediately adjacent to and not more than 20 feet
from a public or private access road. Hydrants shall be red in color
for supplemental (private) hydrants, and yellow for public/
municipal hydrants.
(2) C103.1 Fire Hydrants Available. The minimum number of fire
hydrants available for required fire flow shall not be less than listed
in Table C105.1. The number of fire hydrants available to a complex
or subdivision shall not be less than the spacing requirements
listed in Table C105.1 with a maximum spacing of 300 feet in a
commercial/industrial area or 400 feet in a residential area as they
are applied to the fire apparatus roads and perimeter public streets
from which fire operations could be conducted.
(3) C105.1 Hydrant Spacing. The average hydrant spacing shall not
exceed 300 feet in a commercial/industrial area or 400 feet in a
residential area.
Exception: The Fire Code Official is authorized to accept a
deficiency of up to 10% where existing provide all or a portion of
the required fire hydrant service.
Regardless of the average spacing, fire hydrants shall be located
such that all points on streets and access roads adjacent to a
building are within the distances listed above.
N. Appendix D: Amend the following sections:
(1) D103.2 Grade. Fire apparatus access roads shall not exceed 6% in
grade. In no case shall a 6% grade extend more than 1,000 feet in
length.
Exception: Grade greater than 6% must be approved by the Fire
Code Official.
(2) D103.3 Turning Radius. The minimum turning radius shall be no
less than 30 feet.
(3) D107.1 One- or two- family dwelling residential development.
Developments of one- or two-family dwellings, where the number of
dwelling units exceeds 20, shall be provided with separate and
approved fire apparatus access roads and shall meet the
requirements of section D104.3.
§ 155-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-11
1:89
Exception: Where there are more than 20 dwelling units on a
single public or private fire apparatus access road and all dwelling
units are equipped throughout with an approved automatic
sprinkler system in accordance with Sections 903.3.1.1, 903.3.1.2,
903.3.1.3 of the International Fire Code, access from two
directions shall not be required.
§ 155-11 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 155-11
1:90
Chapter 163
CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction Codes — See Ch. 155.
§ 163-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Cascade Charter
Township Contractor Registration Ordinance."
§ 163-2. Purpose.
Cascade Charter Township (the "Township") adopts this chapter requiring
contractors to register with the Township for purposes of providing for the
health, safety, and welfare of residents and visitors of the Township.
§ 163-3. Scope; definitions.51
This chapter shall apply to all contractors engaged to perform services
within Cascade Charter Township. For purposes of this chapter, the term
"contractor" shall mean any individual, sole proprietorship, partnership,
corporation, joint venture or other legal entity which is required pursuant
to Chapter 155, Construction Codes, to obtain a building, electrical,
mechanical, or plumbing permit from the Township prior to performing
services therein.
§ 163-4. License required.
No contractor shall perform services within or on any building, structure, or
property within the Township unless such contractor is lawfully licensed to
perform such services by the State of Michigan or a local unit of government
of the State of Michigan duly authorized to issue such license.
§ 163-5. Registration required.
No contractor shall perform services within or on any building, structure,
or property within the Township without first registering with and obtaining
a certificate of registration from the Township in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 163-6. Registration form.
Every contractor shall complete and file a registration form with the
Township prior to performing services in the Township. Registration forms
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 155-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-6
1:91
shall be available at the Township office during normal business hours and
shall require the complete name, street address and telephone number of
the contractor. At the time of registration, every contractor shall furnish the
Township a copy of its license as described in § 163-4 of this chapter.
§ 163-7. Registration fee.52
Every contractor shall pay a registration fee set by the Township Board by
resolution to the Township at the time of registration.
§ 163-8. Certificate of registration.
Upon completion of the registration procedure as set forth in this chapter,
the Township shall issue a certificate of registration to the contractor
authorizing the contractor to perform services within or on any building,
structure or property within the Township.
§ 163-9. Term.
A certificate of registration issued pursuant to this chapter shall be effective
until the end of the calendar year in which it is issued. Every contractor
shall obtain a new certificate of registration in accordance with this chapter
at the beginning of each calendar year.
§ 163-10. Violations and penalties.53
Chapter 170
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
A. A contractor who violates any of the provisions of this chapter may be
legally enjoined and otherwise prevented in any manner provided by
law from continuing to perform services within the Township.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be
responsible for a criminal misdemeanor, subject to the penalties in
Chapter 40, Article IV, Penalties for Misdemeanors and Municipal Civil
Infractions.54
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
54.Editor's Note: Original Section 4.08, Revocation of certificate of registration, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 163-6 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 163-10
1:92
ARTICLE I
General Prohibition
§ 170-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC PLACE — Any street, alley, park, sidewalk, trail, public building,
any place of business or assembly open to or frequented by the public, and
any other place which is open to the public view or to which the public has
access.
§ 170-2. Acts prohibited.
No person shall:
A. Commit an assault, or an assault and battery, on any person.
B. Engage in any disturbance, fight, or quarrel in a public place.
C. Be drunk in any public place or under the influence of any narcotic drug
in any public place.
D. Engage in any indecent, insulting, immoral, or obscene conduct in any
public place.
E. Insult, accost, molest, or otherwise annoy, either by word of mouth,
sign, or motion, any person in any public place.
F. Collect or stand in crowds, or arrange, encourage, or abet the collection
of persons in crowds for unlawful mischievous purposes in any public
place to the annoyance or inconvenience of others.
G. Jostle or roughly crowd persons in any street, alley, park, or public
building.
H. Loiter on any street or sidewalk or in any park or public building or
conduct himself in any public place so as to obstruct the free and
uninterrupted passage of the public.
I. Willfully destroy, remove, damage, alter or in any manner deface any
property not his or her own.
J. Engage in peeping in the windows of any inhabited place.
K. Swim or bathe in any public place without wearing proper apparel.
L. Make any immoral exhibition or indecent exposure of his or her person.
M. Engage in any act of prostitution or gross indecency.
N. Solicit or accost any person for the purpose of inducing the commission
of any illegal or immoral act.
§ 170-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-2
1:93
§ 170-3. Minor in possession of alcoholic liquors.
No person under the age of 21 years shall purchase, or knowingly possess
or transport any alcoholic liquor, or knowingly possess, transport, or have
under his control in any motor vehicle any alcoholic liquor unless said
person is employed by a licensee as defined in Public Acts 1952, No. 227, as
amended, and is possessing, transporting or having such alcoholic liquor in
a motor vehicle under his control during regular working hours and in the
course of his employment.
§ 170-4. Violations and penalties
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be responsible for
a criminal misdemeanor, subject to the penalties in Chapter 40, Article IV,
Penalties for Misdemeanors and Municipal Civil Infractions.
O. Attend, frequent, operate or be an occupant or inmate of any place
where prostitution, gambling, the illegal sale of intoxicating liquor or
narcotics, or where any other illegal or immoral business or occupation
is permitted or conducted.
P. Disturb the public peace by loud, boisterous or vulgar conduct.
Q. Permit or suffer any place occupied or controlled by him to be a resort
of noisy, boisterous, or disorderly persons.
R. Obstruct, resist, hinder, or oppose any member of the police force or
any police officer in the discharge of his duties as such.
S. Knowingly furnish to any police officer or other official a false name,
false address, or false information in connection with any arrest or
investigation.
T. Knowingly make to any police officer a fictitious report of the purported
commission of any crime or misdemeanor.
U. Trespass or unlawfully remain upon the premises of another to the
annoyance or disturbance of the lawful occupant or his agent.
V. Prowl about on the private premises of any other person in the
nighttime, without authority or the permission of the owner of such
premises.
W. Wrongfully throw or propel any snowball, missile or object from any
moving automobile.
X. Wrongfully throw or propel any snowball, missile or object toward any
person or automobile.
Y. Smoke in any public park.
§ 170-2 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-4
1:94
ARTICLE II
Begging
§ 170-5. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings provided in this subsection, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
ACCOSTING — Approaching or speaking to a person in such a manner as
could cause the reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the
commission of a criminal act upon his person, or upon property in his
immediate possession.
ASK, BEG or SOLICIT — Means and includes, without limitation, the
spoken, written or printed word or such other acts as are conducted in
furtherance of the purpose of obtaining donations.
FORCING ONESELF UPON THE COMPANY OF ANOTHER — Continuing
to ask, beg or solicit from a person after that person has made a negative
response, blocking the passage of the individual addressed or otherwise
engaging in conduct which could reasonably be construed as intended to
compel or force a person to accede to demands.
§ 170-6. General regulations and prohibitions.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to ask, beg or solicit for money of
other things of value:
(1) On private property if the owner, tenant or lawful occupant has
asked the person not to solicit on the property or has posted a sign
clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the
property.
(2) Within 15 feet of the entrance to or exit from any public toilet
facility.
(3) Within 15 feet of an automated teller machine, provided that, when
an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller
machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the
entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility.
(4) Within any public transportation vehicle, or within 15 feet of any
bus stop, taxi stand or public carpool lot.
(5) From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public
street or right-of-way; provided, however, that this subsection shall
not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency
repairs requested by the owner or passengers of such vehicle.
(6) From any operator of a motor vehicle waiting to exit a private
driveway onto a public roadway if the motor vehicle is within 50
feet of the intersection of the private driveway and public roadway.
§ 170-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-6
1:95
§ 170-7. Additional prohibitions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value
by:
§ 170-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be responsible for
a criminal misdemeanor, subject to the penalties in Chapter 40, Article IV,
Penalties for Misdemeanors and Municipal Civil Infractions.
(7) From any person who is waiting in line for entry to any building,
public or private, including, but not limited to, any residence,
business or athletic facility.
(8) Within 15 feet of the entrance or exit from a building, public or
private, including, but not limited to, any residence, business or
athletic facility.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing herein shall be interpreted to
prohibit related parties from asking for money or other things of value
from one another.
A. Accosting another; or
B. Forcing oneself upon the company of another.
§ 170-6 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-8
1:96
Chapter 194
FIRE LANES
§ 194-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIRE LANE — Any means of access, public or private, improved or
unimproved, that is essential or designated for use by emergency vehicles
by the Fire Department.
§ 194-2. Designation of fire lanes.55
Designation of fire lanes shall be made by posting signs which read "FIRE
LANE NO PARKING." The type of enforcement in designated fire lanes shall
be determined by the Cascade Fire Department. All signs shall be posted
and maintained by the property owner.
§ 194-3. Signs requirements.
Required signs shall not be less than 100 square inches in area. All lettering
of signs shall be red letters laced on a white background. The words "FIRE
LANE" shall not be less than two inches in height per letter.
§ 194-4. Location and height of signs.
Signs shall be placed at both ends of the fire lane and at intervals along said
fire lane not to exceed 100 feet. Sign height is not to be less than four feet
and not more than six feet.
§ 194-5. Parking of nonemergency vehicles prohibited.
Parking of all nonemergency vehicles is prohibited in all designated fire
lanes.
§ 194-6. Enforcement.
The Fire Chief or his designated agents of the Charter Township of Cascade
or the officers of the Kent County Sheriff's Department or any duly authorize
law enforcement officer may cause complaint to be made for the violation of
the provisions of this chapter.
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 170-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-7
1:97
§ 194-7. Violations and penalties.56
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be responsible
for a municipal civil infraction, subject to the penalties in Chapter 40,
Article IV, Penalties for Misdemeanors and Municipal Civil Infractions.
§ 194-8. Presumption of ownership.
In all cases of parking violations, either the registered owner or the
operator of such vehicle may be proceeded against by complaint and
warrant in the 63rd District Court which shall be in addition to the right of
impounding heretofore given, and in any such proceeding proof by verifying
ownership of the vehicle with the Secretary of State that the defendant
named in the complaint was at the time of the parking the registered owner
of the vehicle shall be accepted by the Court as establishing probable cause
for the issuance of a warrant for the arrest of the registered owner, and
creates in evidence a presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle
was the person who parked the vehicle at the point where, and for the time
during which, the violation occurred.
Chapter 216
GRASS, WEEDS AND NOXIOUS VEGETATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pedestrian pathways — See Ch. 287. Property maintenance — See Ch. 299.
§ 216-1. Property conditions declared a public nuisance.
The following conditions are declared to be a public nuisance:
§ 216-2. Nuisances prohibited.
A. Shrubs, bushes, vines, weeds or other plant growth obstructing a
sidewalk, pedestrian walkway, road right-of-way or other public way.
B. Noxious weeds, as defined by state law (MCLA § 247.62 et seq.).
C. Weeds, grasses and undergrowth higher than eight inches.
D. Dead trees deemed hazardous to the public or to an adjacent property.
A. A property owner shall maintain all property, occupied or vacant,
improved or unimproved, free of the nuisances described above and in
accordance with established and prevailing neighborhood standards of
the area in which the subject property is located. For the purposes of
this chapter, "established and prevailing neighborhood standards" is
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 194-7 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 216-2
1:98
§ 216-3. Exceptions.
This chapter shall only apply to those properties lying west of Buttrick
Avenue and north of Interstate 96, and north 28th Street and west of
Interstate 96, as graphically depicted in Attachment A of this chapter.
This chapter shall not apply to properties zoned ARC Agricultural Rural
Conservation in accordance with the Cascade Charter Township Zoning
Ordinance (Ordinance 11 of 1988, as amended).57
§ 216-4. Responsibility for maintenance.
A property owner shall also be responsible for maintaining, free of the
nuisances described in § 216-1, and in accordance with established and
prevailing neighborhood standards all public ways abutting his own
property as follows:
§ 216-5. Notice of violation.
defined as the prevailing and existing yard and lawn maintenance
practices of all property within 500 feet of the subject property in
question.
B. This chapter is not intended to prohibit or discourage the practice of
developing natural groundcover areas, prairie yards, or gardens and
lawns using accepted xerophytic plantings and techniques. It is
intended to abate and eliminate situations where property is in a state
of actual neglect and shows no distinct plan or pattern of upkeep or
maintenance.
A. The Kent County right-of-way between the paved roadway and the
property owners' front property line or front right-of-way easement line.
B. Any private road right-of-way which provides access to the property
owner between the paved private road and the property owners' front
property line or right-of-way easement line.
A. In the event that a property owner fails to comply with this chapter, the
Township is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the property
owner of the violation and to direct the property owner to remove the
nuisance. Such notice shall be in writing, addressed to the property
owner as appears on the latest ad valorem property tax assessment roll,
and shall inform the property owner:
(1) The nature of the violation.
(2) The time in which the violation may be abated, which time shall not
be less than five days nor more than 15 days from the date of the
notice.
57.Editor's Note: Attachment A is included at the end of this chapter. See Ch. 400, Zoning.
§ 216-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-5
1:99
§ 216-6. Abatement.
Upon failure, neglect, or refusal of any property owner to comply with the
provisions of this chapter, the Township or its authorized contractors or
other designee(s) is (are) authorized and empowered to enter his property
to abate the nuisance or to provide and to make payment for the abatement
of the nuisance maintained.
§ 216-7. Violation and penalties.58
§ 216-8. Administrative fee.
An administrative fee shall be added to any costs charged by the Township
to the property owner whenever the Township abates a nuisance under this
chapter.
§ 216-9. Charge to owner.
When the Township abates a nuisance as provided hereunder, the cost of
the abatement and the authorized administrative fee shall be billed to the
property owner. The cost and fee shall be a debt of the property owner
to the Township which may be assessed as a lien against the property,
including interest therein, until paid, and enforced and collected in the
same manner as ad valorem property taxes.
(3) That the Township may act to abate the violation if it is not abated
by the owner within the time allowed.
(4) That in the event the Township abates the nuisance, the cost of
abatement plus an administrative fee shall be assessed as a lien
against the property until paid.
(5) That refusal of the property owner to abate the nuisance or to allow
the Township to abate a violation or nuisance shall result in
prosecution.
B. The failure to receive such notice shall not be a defense to any action
brought by a member of the public for injury or by the Township to
collect the costs of abatement or impose penalties or other fees as
authorized by this chapter.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to the penalties in
Chapter 40, Article IV, Penalties for Misdemeanors and Municipal Civil
Infractions.
B. Any actions by the property owner or the Township to bring the
property into compliance after the issuance of a citation shall not
constitute a defense to a prosecution for violation of the chapter.
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 216-5 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 216-9
1:100
Chapter 222
HAZARDOUS AND FLAMMABLE MATERIALS
§ 216-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-9
1:101

ARTICLE I
Cleanup Costs
[Adopted 2-14-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996 (Part 101 of the 1991
Compilation of Ordinances)]
§ 222-1. Purpose.
In order to protect the Township from extraordinary expenses resulting
from the utilization of Township resources to respond to an incident
involving hazardous materials, the Township Board authorizes the
imposition of charges to recover reasonable and actual costs incurred by
the Township in responding to call for assistance in connection with a
hazardous materials incident or release (or potential release) or the event
arising from such a release or incident.
§ 222-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL INCIDENT OR EMERGENCY — Any accident,
emergency, occurrence, incident or activity where a release of hazardous
materials occurs or might occur as those terms are defined.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Includes, but is not limited to, a chemical that
is a combustible liquid, a flammable gas, explosive, flammable, poison,
an organic peroxide, an oxidizer, pyrophoric, unstable reactive, or water
reactive.
RELEASE — Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying,
discharging, injecting, leaching, dumping, or disposing into the
environment. "Release" shall also include situations where any of the events
in the preceding sentence appear reasonably imminent or where there is a
high probability that a release will occur.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Any individual, firm, corporation, association,
partnership, commercial entity, consortium, joint venture, government
entity, or any other legal entity that is responsible for a release of a
hazardous material, either actual or threatened, or is an owner, tenant,
occupant, or party in control of a property, vehicle, or item, onto which or
from which hazardous materials release.
§ 222-3. Recovery of expenses from responsible party.
The Township is hereby empowered to recover from any responsible party
whose acts cause the hazardous material emergency expenses incurred
by the Township (listed below) due to a release or hazardous materials
incident. The Township shall determine the responsible party or parties for
the emergency and shall notify it/them, by first-class mail, of the expenses
for which it/they are liable.
§ 222-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-4
1:103
§ 222-4. Appeal process.
The party or parties alleged to be responsible may appeal the Township's
decision to the Township Board. The appeal shall be filed not more than 15
days from the date of mailing of the notice of liability. The Township Board
shall hold a public hearing to consider any issues raised by the appeal. At
this public hearing, the appealing party and the Township shall be entitled
to present evidence in support of their respective positions. The appealing
party shall bear the burden of proof. The Township Board shall, after the
hearing, issue a decision assessing responsibility and expenses.
§ 222-5. Charges imposed upon responsible party.59
Where the Township becomes involved in a call for assistance in connection
with a hazardous materials incident or a release, actual costs incurred
by the Township in responding to such a call may be imposed upon the
responsible party or parties, including but not limited to:
A. Charges for each pumper required, in the opinion of the officer in
command, to stand by at the hazardous materials incident.
B. Charges for each water tender required, in the opinion of the officer in
command, to be utilized in responding to the hazardous materials
incident.
C. Charges for each additional Fire Department vehicle required, in the
opinion of the officer in command, to be utilized in responding to the
hazardous materials incident.
D. All personnel-related costs incurred by the Township as a result of
responding to the hazardous materials incident. Such costs may
include, but are not limited to, wages, salaries and fringe benefits and
insurance for full-time and part-time firefighters, overtime pay and
related fringe benefit costs for hourly employees, and fire run fees paid
to on-call firefighters. Such personnel-related charges shall commence
after the first hour that the Fire Department has responded to the
hazardous materials incident and shall continue until all Township
personnel have concluded hazardous materials incident-related
responsibilities.
E. Other expenses incurred by the Township in responding to the
hazardous materials incident, including but not limited to rental or
purchase of machinery, equipment, labor, consultants, legal and
engineering fees, medical and hospitalization costs, and the
replacement costs related to disposable personal protective equipment,
extinguishing agents, supplies, water purchased from municipal water
systems and meals and refreshments for personnel while responding to
the hazardous materials incident.
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 222-4 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 222-5
1:104
§ 222-6. Billing procedures.
Following the conclusion of the hazardous materials incident, the Township
Fire Chief (or his or her designee) shall submit a detailed listing of all
known expenses to the Township Treasurer, who shall prepare an invoice to
the responsible party for payment. The Township Treasurer's invoice shall
demand full payment within 30 days of receipt of the bill. Any additional
expenses that become known to the Township following the transmittal of
the bill to the responsible party shall be billed in the same manner on a
subsequent bill to the responsible party. For any amounts due that remain
unpaid after 30 days, the Township shall impose a late charge of 1% per
month, or fraction thereof.
§ 222-7. Other remedies.
The Township may pursue any other remedy or may institute any
appropriate action or proceeding, in a court of competent jurisdiction to
collect charges imposed under this chapter. In addition to the above, the
Township may, at its sole option and discretion, add any and all
unreimbursed costs of cleanup and restoration as mentioned in this chapter
to the tax roll (via a lien) of the affected property if one or more responsible
parties own(s) the affected property, and to levy and collection of real
property taxes. The recovery of charges imposed under this chapter does
not limit the liability of responsible parties under local ordinance or state or
federal law, rule or regulation.
F. Charges to the Township imposed by any local, state, or federal
government entities related to the hazardous materials incident.
G. Costs incurred in accounting for all hazardous material incident-related
expenditures, including billing and collection costs.
§ 222-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-7
1:105
Chapter 227
HELMETS
§ 222-7 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 222-7
1:106
ARTICLE I
Use of Bicycle Helmets by Persons Under 14 Years
[Adopted 1-16-1997 by Ord. No. 3-1997 (Part 34 of the 1991
Compilation of Ordinances)]
§ 227-1. Findings and declarations.
The Charter Township of Cascade hereby finds and declares that:
§ 227-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms have the following meanings,
unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
OPERATOR — A person who travels on a bicycle seated on a saddle seat
from which that person is intended to and can pedal the bicycle.
PASSENGER — Any person who travels on a bicycle in any manner except
as an operator.
PROTECTIVE BICYCLE HELMET — A piece of headgear which meets or
exceeds that impact standards for protective bicycle helmets set by the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or the Snell Memorial
Foundation, or which is otherwise approved by the Township.
PUBLIC BICYCLE PATH — A right-of-way or easement under the jurisdiction
of the state, county or Township for the use primarily by bicycles and
pedestrians.
§ 227-3. Helmet requirements.
§ 227-4. Enforcement.
A. Injuries sustained in bicycling accidents are a threat to the public
health and safety of the citizens of Cascade Charter Township, and the
prevention of such injuries is a goal of our community; and
B. Head injuries can result from bicycling accidents; and
C. The risk of head injury from bicycling accidents is significantly reduced
for bicyclists who wear proper protective bicycle helmets.
A. No person aged 14 years or under shall operate or be a passenger on a
bicycle on a public roadway, sidewalk, or public bicycle path unless at
all times when the person is so engaged he or she wears a protective
bicycle helmet of good fit fastened securely upon the head with the
straps of the helmet.
B. No person shall rent or lease, a bicycle for the use of another person
aged 14 years or under unless that other person is in possession of a
protective bicycle helmet of good fit at the time of such rental or lease.
§ 227-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-4
1:107
§ 227-5. Violations and penalties.60
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be responsible for
a municipal civil infraction, subject to the penalties in Chapter 40, Article
IV, Penalties for Misdemeanors and Municipal Civil Infractions.
A. A person who violates a requirement of § 227-3 prior to January 1, 1998,
shall be warned of the violation but no written notice will be issued to
his or her parents or legal guardian.
B. Any Deputy Sheriff or designated Township employee observing a
person operating or being a passenger upon a bicycle without wearing
a protective bicycle helmet and reasonably believing the person to be
aged 14 years or under may stop this person for purposes of
establishing his or her identity. Once identity is established, the person
is free to go about his or her intended activities.
C. If the person is aged 14 years or under and is operating or is a
passenger upon a bicycle without wearing a protective bicycle helmet,
the Deputy Sheriff or designated Township employee must report the
person's name to the Township Manager. The Township Manager will
then write a notice to the person's parents or legal guardian informing
them that their child was stopped by Cascade Charter Township
because they were operating or were a passenger upon a bicycle
without wearing a protective bicycle helmet. The notice will include
information which advocates the use of bicycle helmets as a means to
reduce closed head injuries.
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 227-4 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 227-5
1:108
Chapter 245
LIQUOR LICENSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 282.
§ 245-1. Favorable finding from Township required.
The Township Board of the Charter Township of Cascade finds and declares
that in the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare of its
citizens the Township shall require that any establishment seeking a liquor
license from the State of Michigan for the sale and consumption of alcoholic
beverages on the premises shall first obtain a favorable recommendation
from the Township Board.
§ 245-2. Definitions. [Amended 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 10-2014]
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of the
terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
ACCESSORY USE — The incidental and subordinate use to the principal use
within the premises.
APPLICANT — Any person who seeks a recommendation from the Township
Board of the Charter Township of Cascade for an on-premises retail license
as defined by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission.
ON-PREMISES RETAIL LICENSE — A liquor license issued by the Michigan
Liquor Control Commission where alcoholic beverages are served on the
premises. This license enables the business to sell beer, wine, and liquor for
consumption on the licensed premises.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
business, trust, club or lodge.
PREMISES — Includes all of the areas used in carrying out the primary
normal functions of the business of the licensee.
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary or predominant use of any premises.
§ 245-3. Application requirements for new license. [Amended
11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 10-2014]
A. Applications for license to sell beer, wine or spirits shall be made to the
Township Board in writing, signed by the applicant, if an individual, or
by a duly authorized agent thereof, if a partnership or corporation,
verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain the following statements
and information:
§ 227-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-3
1:109
§ 245-4. Township recommendation for or against approval of state
application. [Amended 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 10-2014]
All applications for licenses to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption
on the premises shall be to the Michigan Liquor Control Commission in
accordance with that body's rules and regulations, and shall be
accompanied by a recommendation for approval from the Cascade Charter
Township Board in the form of a resolution passed by that Board. In
considering such approval the Board may require of the applicant such
statements and consents as it considers to be within the scope of this
chapter. The Township Board shall have the right to solicit the
recommendation and comments of the Kent County Sheriff or other law
enforcement authorities as to the suitability of the applicant. A
recommendation against the application can be made for any reason which
the Township Board judges to be adequate within the scope of this chapter.
(1) The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual; or, in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to
share in the profits thereof; in the case of a corporation, the objects
for which organized and the names and addresses of the officers,
directors and stockholders of the corporation holding more than
5% of the stock of such corporation.
(2) The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth, and, if a
naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization.
(3) The length of time said applicant has been in business of that
character, or, in the case of a corporation, the date when it was
incorporated.
(4) The location and description of the premises or place of business
which is to be operated under such license.
(5) A statement whether the applicant has made application for a
similar or other license on premises other than described in this
application, and the disposition of such application.
(6) A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of a felony
and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter
contained in this chapter or the laws of the State of Michigan.
(7) A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the
State of Michigan or of the United States or any ordinances of the
Township in the conduct of its business.
B. The application shall be accompanied by a building and a site plan
showing the entire structure and premises and, in particular, the
specific areas where the license is to be utilized. The plans shall
demonstrate adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal
facilities and, where appropriate, adequate plans for screening and
noise control in accordance with all applicable Township ordinances.
§ 245-3 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 245-5
1:110
§ 245-5. Qualifications of applicant. [Amended 11-10-2014 by Ord.
No. 10-2014]
Factors which the Township Board will consider when passing on an
application for a license or renewal are:
A. A conviction of three or more liquor violations or a felony in any court or
before the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, within a period of five
years preceding the receipt of the application.
B. A license which, under this chapter, has been revoked for cause.
C. Whether all of the members of such copartnership shall qualify to
obtain a license.
D. With respect to a corporation, whether any officer, manager or director
thereof, or a stock owner or stockholders owning in the aggregate more
than 5% of the stock of such corporation, is not eligible to receive a
license hereunder for any reason.
E. Whether the business is conducted by a manager or agent unless such
manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee.
F. A conviction of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture,
possession or sale of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance.
G. Whether the applicant owns the premises for which a license is sought
or does not have lease therefor for the full period for which the license
is issued, or a person, corporation or copartnership that does not have
sufficient financial assets to carry on or maintain the business.
H. Whether the applicant is a law enforcement public official or a member
of the Township Board, and whether such official is interested in any
way, either directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or
distribution of alcoholic liquor.
I. Whether there exists a violation of the applicable building, electrical,
mechanical, plumbing or fire codes, applicable zoning regulations,
applicable public health regulations, or any other applicable Township
ordinance.
J. Whether, for any new license or for the transfer of any existing license,
the sale of beer, wine or spirits is shown to be an accessory use to other
permitted business uses upon the site, such as but not limited to food
sales, motel operations, or recreational activities.
K. Whether the premises does not or will not soon after commencement of
operations have adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal
facilities, screening, noise, or nuisance control or where a nuisance
does or will exist.
§ 245-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-5
1:111
§ 245-6. Location requirements. [Amended 11-10-2014 by Ord. No.
10-2014]
Alcoholic beverages may not be sold for consumption on premises which
are:
§ 245-7. Restrictions on license. [Amended 11-10-2014 by Ord. No.
10-201462]
§ 245-8. Township Board rights; public hearing. [Amended
11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 10-2014]
L. With respect to a person whose license is in escrow, whether owners of
the escrowed license are in violation of any provision of this chapter,
state law, other local ordinance or rule of the Michigan Liquor Control
Commission, or if the license is held in escrow for more than one year.
A. Not in compliance with additional Township ordinances or regulations.
(See Zoning Ordinance.61)
B. In any residential zone. Golf courses, country clubs and other public or
private outdoor recreational uses in any residential zone may sell
alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises only.
C. At any place where in the judgment of the Township Board the proposed
use is likely to create a traffic, safety, or health hazard.
A. The owner or owners, as well as agents, servants or employees of a
place licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the
premises, shall at all times be responsible for the conduct of occupants
and patrons.
B. No disorderly, loud, or boisterous conduct shall be permitted, nor shall
entertainment be given or permitted which is offensive or indecent in
its nature.
C. No booths shall be permitted which are completely enclosed or capable
of being temporarily completely enclosed or with permanent dividers or
partitions more than four feet from the floor.
A. No applicant shall receive a favorable recommendation while such
person or his predecessor or transferor shall be in default to Cascade
Charter Township or Kent County in connection with any tax or other
obligation.
B. No such applicant for a liquor license has the right to the issuance of
such license to him, her or it, and the Township Board reserves the right
to exercise reasonable discretion to determine who, if anyone shall be
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 400, Zoning.
62.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 245-7, Additional requirements by
type of liquor license, and redesignated former §§ 245-8 through 245-13 as §§ 245-7
through 245-12, respectively.
§ 245-5 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 245-8
1:112
§ 245-9. Objections to renewal and request for revocation.
[Amended 3-27-2002 by Ord. No. 3-2002; 11-10-2014 by Ord. No.
10-2014]
entitled to the issuance of such license. Additionally, no applicant for
a liquor license has the right to have such application processed, and
the Township Board further reserves the right to take no action with
respect to any application filed with the Township Board. The Township
Board further reserves the right to maintain a list of all applicants
and to review the same when, in its discretion, it determines that the
issuance of an additional liquor license is in the best interests of the
Township at large and for the needs and convenience of its citizens.
C. The Township Board shall grant a public hearing upon the license
application when, in its discretion, the Board determines that the
issuance of an additional liquor license is in the best interests of the
Township at large and for the needs and convenience of its citizens.
Following such hearing, the Board shall submit to the applicant a
written statement of its findings and determination. The Board's
determination shall be based upon satisfactory compliance with the
restrictions set forth in this chapter.
A. Procedure.
(1) Before filing an objection to renew or a request for revocation of a
license with the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, the
Township Board shall serve the license holder, by first-class mail,
mailed not less than 10 days prior to the hearing, with a notice. The
notice shall contain the following:
(a) A statement introducing the proposed action.
(b) Reasons for the proposed action.
(c) A statement specifying the date, time and location of the
hearing.
(d) A statement showing that the license holder may present
evidence and testimony on his behalf.
(2) Following the hearing, the Township Board shall submit to the
license holder and the Liquor Control Commission a written
statement of its findings and determination.
B. Criteria for nonrenewal or revocation. The Township Board may
recommend nonrenewal or revocation of a license upon a determination
by it that, based upon a preponderance of evidence presented at a
hearing, the applicant or the licensee has engaged in, or has permitted
to occur on or involving a licensed premises, any one or more of the
following:
§ 245-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-9
1:113
(1) Violation of any of the restrictions on the license set forth in § 245-7
above.
(2) Maintenance of a nuisance upon the premises.
(3) Fraudulent information provided upon original application or
application renewal.
(4) The consumption of spirits, if licensed to sell only beer or wine or
both beer and wine.
(5) Dancing or live entertainment open to the public, with or without
an admission charge, unless holding a valid dance or dancing
entertainment permit.
(6) Any disorderly conduct or action which disturbs the peace and
good order of the neighborhood.
(7) Any incidents of prostitution, solicitation for prostitution, or
larceny.
(8) Any gambling activity or the placing or using of any gambling
apparatus or paraphernalia therein.
(9) Any unlawful possession, sale or use of any controlled substance.
(10) Use of interior lighting which is insufficient to enable a person with
average vision to clearly see all persons within the premises.
(11) Any violation of any other provisions of the Township Code or any
violation of Michigan or federal law which is designed to protect
the public health, safety or welfare, or any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant to any such provision of this Code or of such
Michigan or federal law.
(12) Any violation of the Michigan Liquor Control Act.63
(13) Nonpayment of any federal, State of Michigan or local tax or
special assessment.
(14) Nonpayment of bills outstanding and owing to Cascade Charter
Township.
(15) Any failure by the licensee or the licensee's agent or employee to
fully cooperate with any federal, state, county or Township official.
(16) Any failure by the licensee or the licensee's agent or employee to
fully cooperate with the Kent County Sheriff, or any deputy sheriff,
police officer or state police officer.
63.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 436.1101 et seq. or any rule or regulation promulgated by the
Michigan Liquor Control Commission.
§ 245-9 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 245-10
1:114
§ 245-10. Sunday sales of alcoholic beverages. [Amended
11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 10-2014]
Alcoholic beverages, including beer and wine, may be sold on Sunday for
consumption on the premises in duly licensed establishments in Cascade
Charter Township and for consumption off the premises by duly licensed
establishments in Cascade Charter Township. In all other respects, the sale
of alcoholic beverages in Cascade Charter Township shall be provided by
state law.
§ 245-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-24-2012 by Ord.
No. 7-2012; 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 10-2014]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be responsible
for a criminal misdemeanor, subject to the penalties in Chapter 40, Article
IV, Penalties for Misdemeanors and Municipal Civil Infractions.
§ 245-12. Previously licensed establishments. [Amended 11-10-2014
by Ord. No. 10-2014]
Licensed establishments in operation at the time of the effective date of
this chapter which do not meet the requirements hereof may be renewed
at intervals required by the Liquor Control Commission, provided that the
renewal is limited to the premises previously licensed. No such premises
may be enlarged, without receiving the required approval (e.g., zoning,
building construction permits, etc.) from the Township.
Chapter 251
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult businesses — See Ch. 85.
§ 245-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-12
1:115

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 251-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
EMPLOYEE — Any myomassologist or any employee or manager of a
massage establishment.
MANAGER — Each person who is responsible for the daily operation of the
massage establishment.
MASSAGE — An alcohol rub, fomentation, bath, common massage,
magnetic massage procedure, manual manipulation of the body or any
method treating external parts of the body for remedial or hygienic
purposes, consisting of rubbing, stroking, kneading, adjusting or tapping
with the hand, elbow, fingers or any instrument, electric, magnetic or
otherwise, with or without supplementary aids.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any building, Turkish bath parlor, steam
bath, sauna bath, room, premises, place, institution or establishment where
body massage is regularly practiced on the human body, to club members or
to the general public for a charge or consideration, but the term "massage
establishment" shall not include licensed hospitals, nursing homes, medical
clinics, office of a physician, surgeon, osteopath or chiropractor.
MYOMASSOLOGIST — Any person who offers his/her services for hire or
consideration in the practice of massage or administers a massage for hire
or consideration, but shall not include health professionals licensed under
the Public Health Code of Michigan.
TOWNSHIP — Cascade Charter Township, Kent County, Michigan.
TOWNSHIP BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Township Building Inspector
or Acting Building Inspector of Cascade Charter Township, Kent County,
Michigan.
TOWNSHIP CLERK — The Township Clerk or Acting Clerk of Cascade
Charter Township, Kent County, Michigan.
TOWNSHIP MANAGER — The Township Manager or Acting Manager of
Cascade Charter Township, Kent County, Michigan.
§ 251-2. License required.
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or entity shall operate a massage
establishment, and no person shall act as a myomassologist, without first
obtaining a license to do so from the Township. Furthermore, no person
shall act as a myomassologist or operate a massage establishment without
maintaining in effect a current and valid license as required by this chapter.
§ 251-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 251-2
1:117

ARTICLE II
Massage Establishment Licenses
§ 251-3. Application requirements; fee.
A. An application to operate a massage establishment shall be made to the
Township Clerk. The application shall be made and signed under oath
stating that the information contained in the application is true and
accurate and upon a form provided by the Township Clerk. Any false
statement set forth in an application shall be a violation of this chapter.
The license fee must be paid at the time of application, and the license
shall not be processed until the following information has been supplied
to the Township Clerk:
(1) The full name, residential address, business address and telephone
numbers of each applicant, owner and each manager. If the
applicant or owner is a corporation, the names and residential
addresses of each of the officers and directors of the corporation
and each shareholder owning a ten-percent interest or more in the
corporation, either directly or beneficially, shall also be given. If the
applicant or owner is a partnership, the names and residential
addresses of each general partner shall also be given.
(2) A description of the services to be provided.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
building where the business will be conducted; also the name,
address and telephone number of the building manager if different
from the owner.
(4) The two previous addresses and telephone numbers immediately
prior to the present address of each applicant, owner and all
managers.
(5) The location, mailing address and all telephone numbers where the
business is to be conducted.
(6) Written proof that the applicant (if individual or partnership) and
all managers are at least 18 years of age.
(7) A copy of identification from each manager, owner and from each
applicant such as driver's license (if an individual), partnership
agreement and certificate (if a partnership) or certificate of good
standing from the State of Michigan (if a corporation).
(8) Two identical photographs and a set of fingerprints of each
individual applicant, each owner, each manager, each general
partner of a partnership applicant, and each officer and managing
agent of a corporate applicant. All photos and fingerprints shall be
taken by the Kent County Sheriffs Department or by another
governmental agency deemed acceptable to the Kent County
Sheriff's Department.
§ 251-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 251-3
1:119
(9) The business, occupation or employment of each applicant, owner
and manager for three years immediately preceding the date of the
application.
(10) The business history of the applicant and owner for the five years
prior to the date of application, including all individuals identified
in Subsection A(1) above; whether each such applicant and owner,
including all individuals identified in Subsection A(1) above, in
previously operating in this or another city or state has had a
business, massage or myomassologist license denied, revoked or
suspended, the reason for each such denial, revocation or
suspension, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to
the denial, revocation or suspension.
(11) All criminal pleas or convictions of the individuals identified in
Subsection A(1) above, including the dates of each plea or
conviction, nature of the crime and place convicted.
(12) The name and address of any other massage business or
establishment owned (partially or wholly) or operated by any
person identified in Subsection A(1) above.
(13) A description of any other business to be operated on the same
premises or on an adjoining premises owned or controlled by the
applicant, owner or manager.
(14) The name and address of each myomassologist and other
employees who are or will be employed in or by the massage
establishment.
(15) Authorization for the Township, its agents and employees to seek
information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the
statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the
applicant for the license.
(16) Such other identification and information necessary to verify the
truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application.
(17) A certification by the Township's Building Inspector that the
physical standards for the establishment set forth herein and any
other relevant standards of this chapter have been met. Prior to
issuing such certification, the Township Building Inspector shall
obtain prior approval of all appropriate Township departments,
including but not limited to the Cascade Charter Township Fire
Department.
(18) The annual license fee for each massage establishment which shall
be established from time to time by resolution of the Cascade
Charter Township Board of Trustees.
§ 251-3 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 251-3
1:120
§ 251-4. Sale or transfer; license void.
Upon the sale or transfer of any interest in a massage establishment, the
license therefor shall be null and void. A new application shall be made by
any person, entity, corporation or partnership desiring to own or operate
the massage establishment in accordance with § 251-3 of this chapter.
§ 251-5. Name of business.
No massage establishment licensed pursuant to this chapter shall operate
under any name or conduct its business under any designation not specified
in the license.
§ 251-6. Change or expansion of location.
A license for a massage establishment shall not be transferable to a new
location. A massage establishment shall not change its location or expand
its floor area without first obtaining a license for such new location or
expanded floor area in accordance with the procedures in § 251-3 of this
chapter.
B. The applicant or holder of a license shall notify the Township Clerk in
writing of each change in any of the data required to be furnished by
this section within 10 days after such change occurs.
C. The license granted hereunder shall be for a one-year period beginning
July 1 of each year. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or entity
currently operating a massage establishment required to be licensed
hereunder shall obtain a license by July 1, 1988.
D. Each employee of a massage establishment licensed hereunder and
each myomassologist shall be issued an identification card containing
such information as the Township shall specify thereon; such card shall
be carried by such employee or myomassologist at all times while on
the licensed premises.
§ 251-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 251-6
1:121

ARTICLE III
Myomassologist Licenses
§ 251-7. Application; fee.
A. An application for a myomassologist's license shall be made to the
Township Clerk. The application shall be made and signed under oath
stating that the information contained in the application is true and
accurate and upon a form provided by the Township Clerk. Any false
statement set forth in an application shall be a violation of this chapter.
The license fee must be paid at the time of application and the license
shall not be processed until the following information has been supplied
to the Township Clerk:
(1) The full name, residential address and telephone number of the
applicant.
(2) The two previous addresses and telephone numbers immediately
prior to the present address of the applicant.
(3) The name of the massage establishment, street address, mailing
address (if different from street address) and telephone number
where applicant shall practice massage.
(4) Written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age.
(5) A copy of identification such as a driver's license.
(6) Two identical photographs and a set of fingerprints of the applicant
which shall be taken by the Kent County Sheriff's Department or by
another governmental agency deemed acceptable to the Kent
County Sheriff's Department.
(7) Business or occupation history of the applicant for the three years
immediately preceding the date of application.
(8) Place or places of employment and experience for the five years
prior to the date of application, including but not limited to,
whether the applicant has had a license or permit denied, revoked
or suspended, and the reasons for each such denial, revocation or
suspension, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to
the denial, revocation or suspension.
(9) All criminal pleas or convictions of the applicant, including the
dates of each criminal plea or conviction, nature of the crime and
place convicted.
(10) A medical certificate signed by a physician or osteopath, licensed
to practice in Michigan, within 14 days of the application. The
certificate shall state that the applicant (by full name) was
examined by the certifying physician or osteopath and that the
applicant is free of communicable or contagious disease as defined
by the Public Health Code of Michigan.
§ 251-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 251-7
1:123
§ 251-8. Compliance with state requirements.
Every myomassologist shall obtain any and all licenses, certificates and
permits required by the State of Michigan and shall comply with all
applicable State of Michigan statutory and regulatory requirements.
§ 251-9. Responsibility of massage establishment to ensure
licensing of myomassologist.
It shall be the responsibility of an owner, operator, manager or licensee
hereunder in charge of or in control of a massage establishment to ensure
that each person employed or engaged in said business as a myomassologist
shall have first obtained a valid myomassologist license pursuant to this
chapter. Any owner, operator, manager or licensee in charge of or in control
of a massage establishment who employs or allows a person who is not
in possession of a valid myomassologist license to perform, operate, or
practice as a myomassologist shall be in violation of this chapter.
(11) Authorization for the Township, its agents and employees to seek
information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the
statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the
applicant for the permit.
(12) Such other identification and information necessary to verify the
truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application.
(13) The annual license fee for a myomassologist which shall be
established from time to time by resolution of the Cascade Charter
Township Board of Trustees.
B. The applicant or holder of a license shall notify the Township Clerk in
writing of each change in any of the data required to be furnished by
this section within 10 days after such change occurs.
C. The license granted hereunder shall be for a one-year period beginning
July 1 of each year. Any myomassologist required to be licensed
hereunder shall obtain a license by July 1, 1988.
D. Each myomassologist licensed hereunder shall be issued an
identification card containing such information as the Township shall
specify thereon which card shall be carried by such person at all times
while engaged in the practice of massage.
§ 251-7 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 251-9
1:124
ARTICLE IV
Rules and Regulations
§ 251-10. Minimum age for licensing.
No person shall be issued a massage establishment license or
myomassologist license unless such person is at least 18 years of age.
§ 251-11. Annual licenses.
Massage establishment licenses and myomassologist licenses shall be
annual licenses and shall be valid only from the date of issuance to the
following June 30 (unless earlier revoked or suspended). In the event that a
licensee wishes to obtain a license for an ensuing year, such licensee shall
file its application in accordance with § 251-3 or 251-7 of this chapter, as the
case may be, at least 15 days before the expiration of the current license.
If the applicant fails to comply with this requirement, the Township Clerk
shall not be required to grant or deny the license before expiration of the
current license.
§ 251-12. Display of license; employee register.
§ 251-13. Physical establishment standards. [Amended 2-6-1991 by
Ord. No. 3-1991]
Each massage establishment and myomassologist shall comply with the
following standards:
A. Every person, association, firm or corporation to whom or for which a
license for a massage establishment has been granted shall:
(1) Display the license in a conspicuous place so that it may be readily
seen by persons entering the massage establishment; and
(2) Maintain at the massage establishment a register including the
names and employment dates of all persons employed as
myomassologists currently and within the last 12 months.
B. The massage establishment shall make its license and its employee
register available to law enforcement personnel or to the Township
Building Inspector during normal business hours.
A. All tables, tubs, shower stalls, toilets and floors (except reception and
administrative areas) shall be made of nonporous materials which may
be readily disinfected.
B. Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of clean
linen, towels and other materials used in connection with administering
massages.
C. Closed containers shall be provided for soiled linen, towels and waste
material.
§ 251-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 251-13
1:125
§ 251-14. Sanitation standards.
Each massage establishment and myomassologist shall comply with the
following standards:
D. Separate toilet, lavatory facilities shall be supplied for patrons and
personnel of the establishment. A sufficient number of shower stalls
shall be provided to adequately serve patrons. No more than one person
shall use a shower stall at the same time. Shower stalls need not be
provided. Each area in which massage is practiced shall be equipped
with a working hand lavatory. No toilet, lavatory facility or shower stall
used by massage patrons shall be used in conjunction with any other
business unless the massage operations are clearly ancillary, incidental
and subordinate to another business being lawfully conducted on the
premises. All toilets, lavatories and shower stalls shall be located and
maintained so as to ensure privacy between the massage establishment
and any other business or use.64
E. All equipment, shower stalls, toilets, lavatories and any other such
accoutrements shall be regularly treated with disinfectants and shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times.
F. No part of the premises shall be used for or connected with any
bedroom or sleeping quarters, nor shall any person sleep in a massage
establishment except for a limited period incidental to and directly
related to a massage or bath.
G. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, toilets, bathtubs, steam rooms
and all other physical facilities for the massage establishment must be
in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet
and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, steam or vapor cabinets,
shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned
each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs and/or showers shall be
thoroughly cleaned after each use.
A. No patron shall be serviced who is infected with any fungus or other
skin infection; nor shall any service be performed on a patron exhibiting
skin inflammation or eruptions or having any contagious or
communicable disease.
B. All personnel and employees shall wash his or her hands in hot water
with soap before giving any service or treatment to each separate
patron.
C. All towels, tissues, sheets or other coverings shall be used singularly for
each patron and discarded for laundry or disposal immediately after
use.
D. Nondisposable tools of the trade shall be disinfected after each use
upon a patron.
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 251-13 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 251-14
1:126
§ 251-15. Alcoholic beverages prohibited.
No person shall sell, permit, consume, give, or provide, or cause to be sold,
given, or provided, any alcoholic beverage on the premises of any massage
establishment unless licensed to do so by the Michigan Liquor Control
Commission.
§ 251-16. Medical treatment prohibited.
No medical treatment shall be given or dispensed by a myomassologist or
at a massage establishment.
§ 251-17. Advertising.
No massage establishment or myomassologist granted a license under the
provisions of this chapter shall place, publish or distribute, or cause to be
placed, published or distributed, any advertisement, picture or statement
which is known or through the exercise of reasonable care should be
known to be false, deceptive or misleading in order to induce any person to
purchase or utilize any professional massage service or massage for hire or
consideration.
§ 251-18. Patronage of massage business by minors.
No massage establishment and no myomassologist shall massage or service
any person under the age of 17 except when such person is accompanied by
a parent or legal guardian or under written order by a licensed physician,
osteopath or registered physical therapist, such order being dated and in
the possession of the myomassologist giving the massage.
§ 251-19. Communicable diseases.
All individuals engaged or involved in the business of a massage
establishment or a myomassologist, including but not limited to, individuals
responsible for the management and operation of the massage
establishment, myomassologists, and other employees, shall be free of all
contagious diseases and communicable diseases, including but not limited
to, sexually transmitted diseases.
§ 251-20. Semiannual medical certificate.
All myomassologists shall, not less than five months and not more than six
months following the issuance of a myomassologist license, file with the
E. All employees shall, at all times, wear clean outer garments whose use
is restricted to the massage establishment. The garments shall be
nontransparent and shall cover the torso and the sexual and genital
parts of the employee's body.
F. Employees shall not attend to a patron if the employee has any
contagious or communicable disease.
§ 251-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 251-20
1:127
Township Clerk a statement from a licensed medical doctor or osteopath
certifying or recertifying that such person (by full name) has been examined
within the 30 days immediately prior thereto and has been found to be free
from all communicable or contagious diseases, including but not limited to
sexually transmitted diseases. Failure to comply with this requirement shall
be a violation of this chapter and shall constitute grounds for revocation
or suspension of a massage establishment license and/or a myomassologist
license.
§ 251-21. Inspection of premises.
The premises of each massage establishment shall be open to inspection
by the Township at all reasonable times to ensure compliance with this
chapter. The refusal to permit such an inspection shall be a sufficient
reason for revocation or suspension of a massage establishment license.
Notwithstanding § 251-25 hereof, the refusal to permit such inspection shall
not be subject to criminal prosecution.
§ 251-22. Prohibited sexual activities.
It shall be unlawful for any massage establishment to offer or for any
myomassologist or any other employee to offer or to engage in any of the
following acts or conducts: adamitism, anilingus, cunnilingus, coprophilia,
fellation, flagellation, frontage, masturbation, sadism, sexual intercourse,
sodomy, urolagnia or any intentional stimulation or manipulation of the
sexual or genital parts of the human body. Appendix A to this chapter
defines the above-mentioned acts for purposes of this chapter.65
§ 251-23. Denial or revocation of license.
A. Any application for a license hereunder may be denied by the Township
Clerk if there are any false statements set forth in the application, and
any license granted herein may be revoked or suspended by the
Cascade Charter Township Board of Trustees for violation of any
provisions of this chapter or any other Township ordinance or state
statute, or upon a determination that the continued operation under an
existing license shall be contrary to the public health, safety or welfare.
Appeal of the denial of a license by the Township Clerk shall be made to
the Township Board of Trustees. Except as set forth in Subsection B
below, before the Township Board of Trustees revokes or suspends a
license issued herein or upon appeal from the denial of a license by the
Township Clerk, the Township Board of Trustees shall cause a written
notice to be sent by certified mail to the licensee or applicant affected,
at the address stated in the license or application, informing such
person of the right to a hearing upon request. If the licensee does not
request a hearing thereon in writing within 10 days of the date said
notice was sent, the license may be forthwith revoked or suspended or
the denial of the application affirmed. If the licensee requests a hearing
65.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 251-20 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 251-23
1:128
§ 251-24. Nuisance.
Any violation of this chapter is a public nuisance per se.
before the Township Board of Trustees in regard to said proposed
revocation, suspension or denial, said hearing shall be held within 21
days after the date of the written request. If the licensee or applicant
is a massage establishment, the owner of the premises according to the
license application shall also be sent a notice of the hearing by certified
mail.
B. Any license issued by the Township may be immediately suspended or
revoked by the Township Manager if the Township Manager determines
that the licensee has violated or someone at or upon the licensed
location has violated any Township ordinance or state law and that
continued operation under the license is contrary to the public health,
safety or welfare. A licensee shall have the right to a hearing before the
Township Board of Trustees on any license suspension or revocation by
the Township Manager. The Township Manager shall cause a written
notice to be personally delivered or sent by certified mail to the
licensee, at the address stated in the license or application, informing
the licensee of the suspension or revocation and the licensee's right to a
hearing upon request. If the licensee does not file a written request
within 10 days after receipt of the notice, the Township Board of
Trustees may forthwith confirm such suspension or revocation or
reinstate the license. If the licensee requests a hearing in writing before
the Township Board of Trustees, the hearing shall be held within 21
days after the date of the written request. Notice of the hearing shall be
sent to the licensee by certified mail at the address stated in the license
or application.
C. Both the Township and the licensee shall be afforded a reasonable
opportunity to present evidence on the issues at the hearing. In the
event a license is revoked or suspended herein, the licensee or a
substantially similar or related licensee shall not be granted a new
license nor shall a license be granted for the same premises for a period
of three years from the date of the revocation or suspension. Upon
suspension or revocation of any license or permit, the fee therefor shall
not be refunded. The action taken by the Township Board of Trustees
shall be final.
§ 251-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 251-24
1:129

ARTICLE V
Enforcement
§ 251-25. Violations and penalties.66
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be responsible
for a criminal misdemeanor, subject to the penalties in Chapter 40, Article
IV, Penalties for Misdemeanors and Municipal Civil Infractions.
§ 251-26. Other remedies.
In addition to the remedies and penalties provided herein, the Township
through its appropriate officers, may seek injunctive relief to abate and
permanently enjoin any violation of this chapter.
§ 251-27. Conflict with other Township ordinances.
In the case of conflict between any provision of this chapter and any other
Township ordinance, the more stringent shall prevail.
§ 251-28. Effective date.
§ 251-29. Exemptions. [Added 8-10-1994 by Ord. No. 19-1994]
This chapter shall not apply to:
A. Subject to Subsection B below, this chapter shall take effect upon
publication in a newspaper generally circulated within Cascade Charter
Township.
B. Except as otherwise provided in this section, all provisions of this
chapter shall apply to all massage establishments currently operating
within the Township on the effective date of this chapter. Any massage
establishment or myomassologist operating on the effective date of this
chapter shall file an application for a license in accordance with § 251-3
or 251-7 hereof, as the case may be, on or before June 30, 1988. Failure
to file such application shall constitute a violation of this chapter. No
massage establishment or myomassologist operating within the
Township on the effective date of this chapter shall continue to operate
after June 30, 1988, without having first obtained the license(s)
required by this chapter.
A. Physicians, surgeons, chiropractics, osteopaths, psychiatrists,
psychologists, physical therapists, physical therapist assistants, clinical
social workers, hospitals, nursing homes, family counselors and
clergypersons who are licensed to practice their respective professions
in the State of Michigan, or who are permitted to practice temporarily
under the auspices of an associate or establishment duly licensed in the
State of Michigan.
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 251-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 251-29
1:131
B. Nurses who are registered under the laws of this state and who
administer a massage in the normal course of nursing duties.
C. A trainer who administers a massage in the normal course of training
duties and who has either been certified by the National Athletic
Trainers Association or who is employed by one of the public schools or
state approved nonpublic schools (as those terms are used in MCLA
§ 380.1561; MSA § 15.41561) and who is performing massage on school
premises.
D. Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of this
state and who administer a massage in the normal course of their
duties.
E. Persons who currently hold a certificate of professional membership in,
and are currently members in good standing of, the American Massage
Therapy Association (or other nationally recognized massage therapy
organization with similar certification requirements), provided that all
of the following requirements are met:
(1) Evidence of such certificate and membership in good standing is
maintained on file with the Township Clerk;
(2) The person practices massage as part of a comprehensive program
of wellness under the sponsorship of a multidisciplinary health care
organization (for purposes of this subsection, a multidisciplinary
health care organization shall mean a professional organization
which fosters human wellness through holistic and integrative
medical techniques and programs and which offers evaluation and
treatment services for a variety of physical and psychological
problems such as stress, anxiety, depression, marital and family
issues, eating disorders, and addictions), or alternately, the person
practices massage in conjunction with and at a location at which a
person who is exempted from this chapter under Subsection A of
this section regularly maintains a full-time professional practice or
alternately, the person who practices massage receives a
substantial number of referrals from one of the professionals listed
in Subsection A above; and
(3) Proof of graduation from a school of massage licensed by the State
of Michigan, or graduation from a school of massage licensed by
another state if the school has been accredited by the American
Massage Therapy Association (or other nationally recognized
massage therapy organization with similar certification
requirements), or current licensure by another state with
equivalent standards of 500 class hours of education from a state
licensed school in the United States.
F. Any duly licensed establishment in which the above-described persons
practice their respective professions.
§ 251-29 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 251-29
1:132
G. Myomassologist who meets all of the following criteria: [Added
8-27-2003 by Ord. No. 12-2003]
(1) Proof of graduation from a massage school or school of massage
licensed by the state or licensed by another state in the United
States. A completion of a minimum of 500 hours of massage
education is preferred. For purposes of this article, graduation
from a correspondence school shall not meet or satisfy the
graduation requirements.
(2) Licensure by the state in the manner and to the extent required by
the laws of the state.
(3) Professional certification by and membership in good standing in
the American Massage Therapy Association (AMTA), Associated
Bodywork and Massage Professionals (ABMP), American Medical
Massage Association (AMMA) or other nationally recognized
massage therapy organization with similar certification
requirements.
§ 251-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 251-29
1:133
Chapter 258
MULTICHANNEL VIDEO PROVIDERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Right-of-way management — See Ch. 342,
Arts. I and II.
Franchises — See Ch. A410.
§ 258-1. Consent agreement or franchise required.
All multichannel video providers shall obtain a consent agreement or
franchise from the Charter Township of Cascade prior to providing service
to any resident, business or person within the Township, and shall have a
consent agreement or franchise in full force and effect at all times while
such service is being provided.
§ 258-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MULTICHANNEL VIDEO PROVIDER — A person or entity who meets one
or more of the following tests:
The provider is a cable operator as such term is defined in the Federal
Cable Act, being Title VI of the Federal Communications Act of 1934,
47 U.S.C. §§ 521 and following, as amended, or is otherwise required to
obtain a franchise as such term is defined in such Act.
A.
The provider is an operator of an open video system as such term is
defined in Title VI of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, and
implementing regulations, as amended.
B.
Any person or entity who provides multichannel video service to a
resident, business or person within the Township, where such service
is transmitted in whole or in part via wires or lines that are in or cross
any public right-of-way within the Township. The preceding sentence
shall apply whether the provider owns, leases or otherwise obtains
the right to use such wires or lines, including wires or lines of a
telecommunications provider used pursuant to tariff or otherwise for
such purpose. "Multichannel video service" as used herein shall mean
multiple channels of video programming where the individual video
channels are generally considered comparable to programming
provided by a television broadcast station or by a direct home satellite
service.
C.
A person or entity providing multichannel video service is otherwise
required to obtain a franchise or consent agreement under applicable
law.
D.
§ 251-29 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 258-3
1:134
§ 258-3. Violations and penalties.67
Chapter 264
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise control at outdoor assemblies — See
Ch. 103.
Noise control at premises selling liquor — See
Ch. 245.
§ 264-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AIRPORT — An area of land that is lawfully used for or incidental to the
landing, take off and parking of aircraft, including buildings and facilities.
COMMERCIAL — A use of property for purposes other than residential.
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial
repair, alteration or similar action, for or of public or private rights-of-way,
structures, utilities or similar property.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE, MACHINERY OR ALARM — Any machinery,
vehicle or alarm used, employed, performed or operated in an effort to
protect or restore safe conditions in the community or for the citizenry or
work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work performed for the purpose of preventing
or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused
by an emergency or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility
services.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, association, partnership, joint venture,
corporation, limited liability company or other entity.
PROPERTY LINE — The imaginary line which represents the legal limits
of property, including an apartment, condominium, room or other dwelling
unit, owned, leased, or otherwise occupied by a person, business,
corporation or institution. In cases involving sound from an activity on a
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to the penalties in
Chapter 40, Article IV, Penalties for Misdemeanors and Municipal Civil
Infractions.
B. The rights and remedies provided for in this section are cumulative and
in addition to any other remedies provided by law or equity.
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 258-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 264-1
1:135
public street or other public right-of-way, the property line shall be the
nearest boundary of the public right-of-way.
SOLID WASTE — Any garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator ash, incinerator
residue, street cleanings, municipal and industrial sludges, solid
commercial and solid industrial waste, and animal waste; provided,
however, that this definitions shall not include hazardous waste, siteseparated
materials, source-separated materials, human body waste, liquid
or other waste regulated by statute, ferrous and nonferrous scrap directed
to a scrap metal processor or to a reuser of ferrous or nonferrous products,
and slag or slag products directed to a slag processor or to a reuser of slag
or slag products.[Amended by Ord. No. 4-2005]
SOURCE-SEPARATED MATERIALS — Any recyclable materials, including
but not limited to bottles, cans, newspapers, corrugated containers, metals,
grass, leaves, brush and yard trimmings that are separated from solid waste
prior to the collection of solid waste from a site of generation.[Amended by
Ord. No. 4-2005]
TOWNSHIP MANAGER — The Township Manager of Cascade Charter
Township.
§ 264-2. Prohibited noises.
A. General regulation. It shall be unlawful for any person to make,
continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unreasonable,
unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys,
disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or
safety of any other person, resident or property owner within the
Township.
B. Specific prohibitions. The following activities and noises are prohibited
if they produce clearly audible sound beyond the property line of the
property on which they are conducted. These regulations apply to
commercial properties, activities or uses between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. and residential properties between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. [Amended by Ord. No. 4-2005]
(1) The operation of power tools or equipment.
(2) The sounding of any bell, chime, siren, whistle or similar device,
except:
(a) To alert persons to the existence of an emergency, danger or
attempted crime; or
(b) As provided in § 264-3.
(3) The operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph,
audio equipment, drum or musical instrument; also, the creation or
activity of music.
§ 264-1 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 264-2
1:136
§ 264-3. Exemptions.
The following activities and noises are exempted from the requirements of
§ 264-2:
§ 264-4. Application for license to exceed noise limits.
(4) Construction, repair, remodeling, demolition, drilling or excavation
work Monday through Sunday, except as permitted in § 264-3.
(5) The operation or use of any loudspeaker, sound amplifier, public
address system or similar device used to amplify sounds indoors or
outside the premises.
(6) The creation of any loud, unnecessary noise in connection with the
loading or unloading of any vehicle or the opening and closing or
destruction of bales, boxes, crates or other containers.
(7) The use of any drums, loudspeakers, musical devices or other
instruments or devices for the purposes of attracting attention by
the creation of noise to any performance, show or sale or display of
merchandise.
(8) The collection of solid waste and source-separated materials on any
property that has a commercial and/or industrial use that is
adjacent to a residential use.
C. Special prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, harbor
or keep any dog which shall cause annoyance or disturbance at any
time (24 hours a day) to people in the neighborhood or people on the
streets of the neighborhood by loud or frequent or habitual barking,
howling or yelping. [Amended by Ord. No. 7-2003]
A. Otherwise lawful regular or permitted activities or operations of
governmental units or agencies.
B. Emergency work necessary to restore property to a safe condition
following a fire, accident or natural disaster or to restore public
utilities, or to protect persons or property from an imminent danger.
C. Devices or activity creating sound made to alert persons to the
existence of an emergency, danger or attempted crime.
D. Regular activities or operations of an airport.
E. Any vehicle or equipment designed and used for the purpose of snow
and/or ice removal when in use for such purposes. [Amended by Ord.
No. 4-2005]
F. Other activities as approved by the Township as specified in § 264-4.
A. An application for a license to engage in any activity, noise or use which
would otherwise violate § 264-2 of this chapter must be made in writing
§ 264-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 264-4
1:137
§ 264-5. Complaints; violations and penalties.68
and submitted to the Township Clerk. Application shall be made at least
30 days prior to the date of the proposed use or event. The applicant
requesting the license must be the taxpayer of record for the property
on which the use or event will take place. The application shall contain
all of the following information:
(1) Name and mailing address of the person making the application.
(2) A statement of the type of event to take place which will require the
license.
(3) The address and legal description of the property the event is to be
held on.
(4) The date and hours during which the event will be conducted.
(5) An estimate of the maximum number of attendants expected at the
event.
B. Upon receipt of the application by the Township Clerk, copies of the
application shall be forwarded to the Kent County Sheriff's Department
and the Fire Chief serving the subject area, and to such other
appropriate agencies as the Township Clerk shall deem necessary. Such
officers and officials shall review matters relevant to the application,
and, within 10 days of receipt thereof, shall report their findings and
recommendations to the Township Manager.
C. Within 20 days of the filing of the application, the Township Manager
shall issue or deny a license. The Township Manager may attach
reasonable conditions to the issuance of a license. Where conditions are
imposed as prerequisite to the issuance of a license, or where a license
is denied, within five days of such action, notice thereof must be mailed
to the applicant, and in the case of denial, the reasons therefor shall be
stated in the notice. A denial (or condition attached to an approval) may
be appealed to the Township Board if the applicant files a written notice
of appeal with the Township Clerk within 10 days of the date of the
Township Manager's decision.
A. Complaints. Complaints by a resident or property owner in the
Township regarding any violations of this chapter shall be filed with the
Township Manager or his/her designee. Complaints may be
investigated after two complaints for the same violation on the same
date are filed from residents who reside at different households.
B. Violations and penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to
the penalties in Chapter 40, Article IV, Penalties for Misdemeanors and
Municipal Civil Infractions.
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 264-4 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 264-5
1:138
Chapter 277
PARKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking of nonemergency vehicles in fire
lanes — See Ch. 194.
Traffic control in Township parks — See Ch.
282.
§ 264-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 264-5
1:139

ARTICLE I
Parking and Storage of Commercial and Recreational Vehicles
[Adopted 1-4-1989 by Ord. No. 1-1989 (Part 33 of the 1991
Compilation of Ordinances)]
§ 277-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Cascade Charter
Township Commercial and Recreational Vehicle Parking and Storage
Ordinance."
§ 277-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to regulate the parking and storage of
trucks and recreational vehicles in Cascade Charter Township. This article
recognizes that there is a need to regulate parking of such vehicles in order
to enhance the value of residential districts, protect property values, reduce
hazards to motorists and pedestrians, and to promote the public safety and
general welfare.
§ 277-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle designed or used primarily
for transportation of persons or property for, or in connection with, a
business.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle or piece of equipment intended
for recreational use, including but not limited to airplanes, boats, floats,
camping or travel trailers, motor homes, detachable travel equipment of
a type adaptable to light-duty trucks, boat trailers, utility trailers,
snowmobiles, and other equipment or vehicles of a similar nature.
§ 277-4. Compliance required. [Amended 9-26-1990 by Ord. No.
16-1990; 10-14-1992 by Ord. No. 13-1992]
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to store or park a truck or
recreational vehicle in Cascade Charter Township except in accordance
with the provisions of this article:
A. Parking and storage of noncommercial trucks and recreational vehicles.
The outdoor storage or parking of recreational vehicles or
noncommercial trucks rated at more than 3/4 ton shall be prohibited in
all residential districts for more than a total of 72 hours during any
thirty-day period and for more than 36 consecutive hours except where
the primary use of such vehicles is for the personal transportation of the
owner of the vehicles or as otherwise permitted by this article, unless
the following conditions are met:
§ 277-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 277-4
1:141
§ 277-5. Violations and penalties.70
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be responsible for
a municipal civil infraction, subject to the penalties in Chapter 40, Article
IV, Penalties for Misdemeanors and Municipal Civil Infractions.
§ 277-6. Conflict with other ordinances.
To the extent that any other ordinance regulates the subject matter
regulated by this article, the ordinances shall be construed together, if
possible, and the remedies of the ordinances shall be cumulative. Where the
provisions of any other ordinance conflict with the provisions of this article,
the more specific and restrictive ordinance shall prevail and its terms shall
control. If any part of this article conflicts with any other part, it shall be
administratively appealed to the Township Board for a final determination
of intent. The remainder of the article shall remain in full force and effect.
(1) All such vehicles and equipment shall be placed within a completely
enclosed building or located behind the furthest front face of the
main building, as measured from the front property line or front
right-of-way line and no closer than five feet to any side or rear lot
line. No storage of such vehicle or equipment shall be permitted on
a corner lot in the front yard setback space required by the Zoning
Ordinance69 for the yards adjacent to the streets.
(2) Storage or parking shall be limited to a parcel of land upon which is
located an inhabited dwelling unit, and the vehicle or equipment so
stored or parked shall be owned by the occupant of that unit.
(3) All such vehicles and equipment stored or parked outside shall be
in good repair and in sightly condition.
(4) The time limitations contained in this section shall be suspended
from May 15 through November 30 each year, except that the fivefoot
side or rear yard setback requirement, as contained in
Subsection A(1) above will remain in force.
B. Parking and storage of commercial vehicles. The outdoor parking or
storage of commercial vehicles, including truck tractors and
semitrailers, is prohibited in R-1 and R-2 Residential Districts;
provided, however, that this restriction shall not be deemed to prevent
temporary location of any such vehicle in said districts when engaged in
delivery, pickup, or service to the premises where located.
69.Editor's Note: See Ch. 400, Zoning.
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 277-4 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 277-6
1:142
Chapter 282
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animal control — See Ch. 99, Art. I. Open burning — See Ch. 129.
§ 277-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 277-6
1:143

ARTICLE I
Township Park
[Adopted 7-24-2002 by Ord. No. 13-2002]
§ 282-1. Park activities.
§ 282-2. Preservation of property and natural features.
§ 282-3. Molesting wildlife; firearms and other explosives.
§ 282-4. General conduct.
A. Both active and passive recreational activities are permitted in the
parks within designated areas. This shall include tennis in the tennis
courts only, field sports in the ball fields area; playground activities in
the playground area; picnics and gatherings in the pavilion areas,
hiking and other events as approved or specifically permitted by the
Township Park and Recreation Committee.
B. The Committee may designate from time to time portions of the park for
specific uses. Specific uses may be prohibited by the Committee.
Notices of prohibited uses shall be posted.
C. Certain facilities within the park, such as the ball fields, pavilions,
tennis courts and picnic tables may be reserved for use by individuals
or organizations by permit from Cascade Charter Township
("Township"). Such actions shall be subject to fee and other specific
rules and regulations adopted by the Township. These facilities, when
reserved, are closed to the general public.
A. No person shall injure, deface, disturb or befoul any part of the park nor
any building, sign, equipment or other property found therein; nor shall
any tree, shrub, rock or other mineral be removed, injured or
destroyed.
B. No person shall deposit, permit or suffer to be deposited, in any part of
any park, any garbage, ashes, sewage, refuse, waste or other noxious
material, otherwise than in receptacles or pits provided for such
purposes, nor dump any earth within the park without a specific written
permit from the Township Board.
A. No person within the confines of any park, unless authorized by written
permit of the Township Board, shall hunt, pursue with dogs, trap or in
any other way molest any wild bird or animal found within the confines
of the park, or therein rob or molest any bird nest or take the eggs of
any bird. No person shall fish in any waters in the park in any manner.
B. Except as provided by law, no person shall possess or discharge any
firearms, fireworks, explosive substances or air rifles within the park
without a specific permit from the Township. [Amended 6-9-2010 by
Ord. No. 9-2010]
§ 282-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-4
1:145
§ 282-5. Animal control.
§ 282-6. Traffic control.
A. No person shall, either by work or act, engage in any noisy, boisterous,
disorderly or indecent conduct, or in any manner disturb the peace or
good order of the community within the park; nor shall any person play
at games of chance, or do any indecent, lascivious, lewd or improper act
therein.
B. No person intoxicated by alcohol or under the influence of alcohol,
narcotic drugs or opiates shall enter or remain within the park, nor
shall any person bring into the park any alcohol, narcotic drugs or
opiates.
C. No person shall remain within the a park who does not abide by
conditions adopted and posted by the Township for the preservation of
good order and the protection of property within the park, and no
person shall remain within the a park who does not abide by the
instructions and directions of duly authorized police officers or agents
of the Township in the lawful performance of their duties. Any person
directed by a police officer or agent of the Township to leave the park
shall do so promptly and peaceably. No person shall resist or obstruct,
or be abusive of or address in a profane or obscene manner, any police
officer or agent of the Township.
D. The use of loud speakers, public address systems, or sound-amplifying
equipment is prohibited without a permit. Excessively loud radios,
televisions or similar deices are also prohibited.
E. No person shall enter a rest room set apart for the opposite sex.
A. All dogs shall be controlled and on a chain or retractable leash not
exceeding 20 feet in length. Cats shall also be under direct control and
leash. No controlled animal shall be destructive to other birds and
animals.
B. The riding of horses or other animals is prohibited.
A. No persons shall drive, propel or cause to be driven, along or over any
road within the park, any vehicle at a rate of speed greater than 15
miles per hour; nor shall any motor vehicle be driven in a reckless
manner or in a manner to endanger the life, limb or property of
pedestrians, or the drivers or occupants of other vehicles, or any other
person.
B. No vehicle, including off-road-type vehicles, shall be driven in the park
except upon roads or trails for that purpose.
C. No person shall park or store any car, motorcycle, bicycle, wagon or
other vehicle within the park, except in places designated by the
Township for such purposes.
§ 282-4 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 282-6
1:146
§ 282-7. General regulations.
§ 282-8. Park hours.
D. The state laws relating to lights on vehicles shall apply to vehicles
within the park, including off-road vehicles.
A. Camping. No person shall establish or maintain any camp or other
temporary lodging place in the park, without a specific written permit
from the Township.
B. Fire. No person shall start a fire in the park, except small fires for
cooking purposes in designated places unless otherwise provided by
the Township Board. All fires shall be put out by the person or persons
starting or using the same before leaving the immediate vicinity of the
fire.
C. Commercial activities. No person shall sell or offer for sale any article,
thing, privilege or service within the park without a permit from the
Township, and no person shall do any begging, peddling or soliciting
therein. Further, no person shall expose, distribute or place any sign,
advertisement, circular, notice or statement, or display any banner,
emblem or design, within the park, without specific permit from the
Township.
D. Swimming and ice skating. Swimming in the park pond is prohibited.
Ice skating is permitted at one's own risk.
E. Picnic tables. The moving of picnic tables, grills and other pieces of
park equipment is prohibited unless specifically approved by park
personnel.
F. Tennis courts.
(1) Use of the tennis courts are on a first-come-first-served basis. The
party using the court shall only be permitted one hour's use if
others are waiting for the courts.
(2) In-line skates (e.g., Rollerblades), roller skates, roller blades,
skateboards and other similar devices are prohibited from use on
the tennis court surfaces.
G. Golf. The use of the park for the hitting of golf balls is prohibited.
A. The parks shall close at dark, but no later than 10:00 p.m. All park users
must leave at closing time unless a written permit for later hours has
been issued by the Township. Upon the park's so closing, it shall be
unlawful for anyone to enter upon or occupy the parks without said
permit.
B. The park or portion thereof may be closed entirely or closed to certain
uses during any specified period of time by officers of the Township
where it is determined that the physical condition of the park or portion
§ 282-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-8
1:147
§ 282-9. Violations and penalties.71
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be responsible for
a criminal misdemeanor, subject to the penalties in Chapter 40, Article IV,
Penalties for Misdemeanors and Municipal Civil Infractions.
thereof is such that intended use of the park or portion thereof would
cause damage and deterioration to the park or portion thereof in a
degree greater than ordinary park wear and tear, or that the intended
use of the park or portion thereof would create a health hazard or safety
hazard to the proposed user or other citizens. During such period of
time as the park or portions thereof are closed, these closings shall
be prominently posted, and it shall be unlawful for anyone to enter
upon or occupy such park or portions thereof contrary to the posted
regulations.
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 282-8 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 282-9
1:148
ARTICLE II
Leslie E. Tassell Park
[Adopted 7-24-2002 by Ord. No. 14-2002]
§ 282-10. Park activities.
§ 282-11. Preservation of property and natural features.
§ 282-12. Molesting wildlife; firearms and other explosives.
A. Both active and passive recreational activities are permitted in the park
within designated areas. This shall include picnics and gatherings in the
pavilion areas, hiking, fishing and other events as approved or
specifically permitted by the Township Park and Recreation Committee.
B. The Committee may designate from time to time portions of the park for
specific uses. Specific uses may be prohibited by the Committee.
Notices of prohibited uses shall be posted.
C. Only the Wisner Pavilion, together with the Lower Terrace area, may be
reserved for use by individuals or organizations by permit from Cascade
Charter Township ("Township").
(1) The reservation of the pavilion and terrace area shall be limited to
the following:
(a) Groups of no more than 50 people.
(b) No more than four hours.
(2) The Township will only allow the pavilion to be rented twice a
month.
D. The reservation shall be subject to fee and other specific rules and
regulations adopted by the Township. Only the pavilion and terrace
area, when reserved, are closed to the general public.
A. No person shall injure, deface, disturb or befoul any part of the park nor
any building, sign, sculpture, equipment or other property found
therein; nor shall any tree, shrub, rock or other mineral be removed,
injured or destroyed.
B. No person shall deposit, permit or suffer to be deposited, in any part of
any park, any garbage, ashes, sewage, refuse, waste or other noxious
material, otherwise than in receptacles or pits provided for such
purposes, nor dump any earth within the park without a specific written
permit from the Township Board.
A. No person within the confines of the park, unless authorized by written
permit of the Township Board, shall hunt, pursue with dogs, trap or in
any other way molest any wild bird or animal found within the confines
§ 282-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-12
1:149
§ 282-13. General conduct.
§ 282-14. Animal control.
All dogs shall be controlled and on a chain or retractable leash not
exceeding 20 feet in length. Cats shall also be under direct control and
leash. No controlled animal shall be destructive to other birds and animals.
§ 282-15. Traffic control.
of the park, or therein rob or molest any bird nest or take the eggs of
any bird. Fishing is permitted in the park.
B. Except as provided by law, no person shall possess or discharge any
firearms, fireworks, explosive substances or air rifles within the park
without a specific permit from the Township. [Amended 6-9-2010 by
Ord. No. 9-2010]
A. No person shall, either by work or act, indulge in any noisy, boisterous,
disorderly or indecent conduct, or in any manner disturb the peace or
good order of the community within the park; nor shall any person play
at games of chance, or do any indecent, lascivious, lewd or improper act
therein.
B. No person intoxicated by alcohol or under the influence of alcohol,
narcotic drugs or opiates shall enter or remain within the park, nor
shall any person bring into the park any alcohol, narcotic drugs or
opiates.
C. No person shall remain within the park who does not abide by
conditions adopted and posted by the Township for the preservation of
good order and the protection of property within the park, and no
person shall remain within the park who does not abide by the
instructions and directions of duly authorized police officers or agents
of the Township in the lawful performance of their duties. Any person
directed by a police officer or agent of the Township to leave the park
shall do so promptly and peaceably. No person shall resist or obstruct,
or be abusive of or address in a profane or obscene manner, any police
officer or agent of the Township.
D. The use of loud speakers, public address systems, or sound-amplifying
equipment is prohibited without a permit. Excessively loud radios,
televisions or similar devices are also prohibited.
E. No person shall enter a rest room set apart for the opposite sex.
A. No persons shall drive any motor vehicle, propel or cause to be driven
any motor vehicle, along or over any road within the park, nor shall any
motor vehicle be driven in a reckless manner or in a manner to
endanger the life, limb or property of pedestrians, or the drivers or
occupants of other vehicles, or any other person.
§ 282-12 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 282-15
1:150
§ 282-16. General regulations.
§ 282-17. Park hours.
B. No vehicle, including off-road-type vehicles (except authorized
Township vehicles and any vehicle needed for handicapped persons)
shall be driven in the park except the parking lot areas.
C. No person shall park or store any car, motorcycle, bicycle, wagon or
other vehicle within the park, except in places designated by the
Township for such purposes, nor shall any person park a car,
motorcycle, bicycle, wagon or other vehicle in the park overnight or for
periods of longer than 15 hours.
D. The state laws relating to lights on vehicles shall apply to vehicles
within the park, including off-road vehicles.
E. No trailer or other loading vehicle shall be brought into the park unless
permitted as part of an activity or event that has received permission
from the Township.
F. Nothing in this section shall apply to any Township maintenance vehicle
or equipment or any emergency vehicle or equipment.
A. Camping. No person shall establish or maintain any camp or other
temporary lodging place in the park.
B. Fire. Fires are only permitted in the designated Community Fire Ring
area as shown on Leslie E. Tassell Park Plan. All fires shall be put out by
the person or persons starting or using the same before leaving the
immediate vicinity of the fire.
C. Commercial activities. No person shall sell or offer for sale any article,
thing, privilege or service within the park without a permit from the
Township, and no person shall do any begging, peddling or soliciting
therein. Further, no person shall expose, distribute or place any sign,
advertisement, circular, notice or statement, or display any banner,
emblem or design, within the park, without specific permit from the
Township.
D. Swimming. Swimming in the Thornapple River is permitted at one's
own risk.
E. Picnic tables. The moving of picnic tables and other pieces of park
equipment is prohibited unless specifically approved by park personnel.
F. Rollerblades .In-line skates (e.g., Rollerblades), roller skates, roller
blades, skateboards and other similar devices are prohibited from use
in the park.
G. Golf. The use of the park for the hitting of golf balls is prohibited.
§ 282-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-17
1:151
§ 282-18. Violations and penalties.72
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be responsible for
a criminal misdemeanor, subject to the penalties in Chapter 40, Article IV,
Penalties for Misdemeanors and Municipal Civil Infractions.
A. The parks shall open at 8:00 a.m. and close at dark, but no later than
11:00 p.m. All park users must leave at closing time unless a written
permit for later hours has been issued by the Township. Upon the park's
so closing, it shall be unlawful for anyone to enter upon or occupy the
parks without said permit.
B. The park or portion thereof may be closed entirely or closed to certain
uses during any specified period of time by officers of the Township
where it is determined that the physical condition of the park or portion
thereof is such that intended use of the park or portion thereof would
cause damage and deterioration to the park or portion thereof in a
degree greater than ordinary park wear and tear, or that the intended
use of the park or portion thereof would create a health hazard or safety
hazard to the proposed user or other citizens. During such period of
time as the park or portions thereof are closed, these closings shall be
prominently posted, and it shall be unlawful for anyone to enter upon or
occupy such park or portions thereof contrary to the posted
regulations.
72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 282-17 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 282-18
1:152
ARTICLE III
Cascade Peace Park
[Adopted 3-10-2010 by Ord. No. 2-2010]
§ 282-19. Purpose and intent.
This article governs uses, activities, and structures within the Cascade
Peace Park located within Cascade Charter Township. The Township Board
finds that this article and the rules and regulations contained herein are
essential for the health, safety, and welfare of persons using the park, as
well as the owners and occupants of adjoining residential properties. This
article is also intended to protect the natural beauty and environmental
features of the park.
§ 282-20. Definitions and applicability.
§ 282-21. Park activities.
§ 282-22. Preservation of property and natural features.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP PARK AND RECREATION
COMMITTEE (also referred to in this article as the "COMMITTEE") —
The committee appointed by the Cascade Charter Township Board from
time to time and which is given the duties, powers, and responsibilities
specified in this article. The Township Board may also delegate to the
Committee the authority to issue permits and approvals as mentioned
in this article.
CASCADE PEACE PARK — Located at 8900 Grand River Drive, being
approximately 198± acres in size (also known as Permanent Parcel No.
41-19-11-200-021); also referred to in this article as the "park."
B. This article applies to activities, vehicles, items, and uses within the
Cascade Peace Park.
A. Only passive recreational (e.g., hiking, walking, cross-country skiing)
activities are permitted in the park. Other uses and events as approved
or specifically permitted by the Cascade Charter Township Park and
Recreation Committee or the Township Board may be allowed within
the park. No other uses or activities shall occur in the park.
B. The Committee or the Township Board may designate from time to time
portions of the park for specific uses. Specific uses may also be
prohibited by the Committee or the Township Board.
A. No person shall injure, deface, disturb or befoul any part of the park nor
any building, sign, sculpture, equipment or other property within the
park. No tree, shrub, rock or other mineral within the park shall be
removed, injured or destroyed.
§ 282-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-22
1:153
§ 282-23. Molesting wildlife; firearms and other explosives.
§ 282-24. Hunting.
The following shall apply within the park:
B. No person shall deposit, permit or suffer to be deposited any garbage,
ashes, sewage, refuse, waste, or other noxious material within the park,
except in receptacles provided by the Township for such purposes.
Where trash receptacles are not provided by the Township, all such
materials shall be carried out of the park by the person responsible for
its presence.
C. No person shall dump any earth, tree limbs, leaves, grass clippings, or
compost materials within the park without first obtaining a specific
written permit from the Township Board.
A. Except for lawful hunting, no person within the confines of the park
shall molest, harm, or kill any wild bird or animal found within the
confines of the park, or rob or molest any bird nest or take the eggs of
any bird within the park.
B. Except as provided by law, no person shall possess or discharge any
firearms, fireworks, explosive substances or air rifles within the park
without a specific permit from the Township. [Amended 6-9-2010 by
Ord. No. 9-2010]
A. Only bow hunting or hunting with a crossbow shall be permitted.
Firearm hunting is prohibited.
B. No person shall hunt within the park unless he/she has first obtained a
hunting permit from the Township. In order to receive a hunting permit,
an applicant must fill out a hunting permit application form, file it with
the Township, and present a valid State of Michigan hunting license to
the Township.
C. All state hunting laws and regulations must be followed.
D. A maximum of 15 hunting permits will be issued by the Township per
year for the park, and such permits are issued on a first-come-firstserved
basis. No applications will be accepted by the Township until
your state hunting license has been issued for the following November
hunting season.
E. Hunting will only be permitted from November 1 to November 21.
F. No equipment may be left in the park. Anything found left in the park
will be removed and confiscated by the Township (and will become
Township property).
G. Only portable blinds or portable tree stands are permitted.
H. Target practice is prohibited.
§ 282-22 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 282-24
1:154
§ 282-25. General conduct.
The following shall apply within the park:
I. Baiting and littering are prohibited.
J. No motorized vehicles are allowed beyond designated areas.
K. No snowmobile, ATV, UTV, four-wheeler, off-road motorcycle, or similar
off-road vehicle shall be used or driven in the park.
L. The park will be open to nonhunters during hunting season.
M. Hunters under 17 years of age must be accompanied by an adult. A
school identification card, birth certificate, or other identification card
is required to be carried by any hunter under 17 years of age while in
the park.
N. The Township retains the ability to revoke a hunting permit based on a
trespass or the violation of any park rules or this article.
O. Every hunter must comply with all rules and regulations of the
Township that are applicable within the park.
A. No person shall, either by work or act, indulge in any noisy, boisterous,
disorderly or indecent conduct, or in any manner disturb the peace,
quiet, or good order within the park or of the residents of any property
adjoining the park. No person shall play at games of chance, or engage
in any indecent, lascivious, lewd, sexual, or improper act or behavior.
B. No person intoxicated by alcohol or under the influence of alcohol,
narcotic drugs or opiates shall enter or remain within the park. No
person shall bring into the park any alcohol, liquor, narcotic drugs, or
opiates.
C. No person shall remain within the park who does not abide by the rules
and regulations adopted by the Township for the park. No person shall
remain within the park who does not abide by the instructions and
directions of a duly authorized police officer or agent of the Township in
the lawful performance of their duties. Any person directed by a police
officer or agent of the Township to leave the park shall do so promptly
and peaceably. No person shall resist, obstruct, interfere with, be
abusive of, or address in a profane or obscene manner, any police officer
or agent of the Township.
D. The use of a loud speaker, public address system, or sound-amplifying
equipment is prohibited within the park without a permit from the
Township. Excessively loud radios or similar devices are also
prohibited.
E. No person shall start, fly, or use any fuel- or battery-powered model
aircraft, vehicle, or similar device within the park.
§ 282-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-25
1:155
§ 282-26. Animal control.
§ 282-27. Traffic control.
Within the park:
§ 282-28. General regulations.
The following apply in the park:
F. No person shall urinate or defecate in the park, except in such facilities
as are provided by the Township and intended for such activities.
G. Smoking is prohibited in the park.
H. No person shall operate a bicycle within the park.
I. Use of paintball equipment and supplies within the park is prohibited.
J. No application of graffiti or similar activity shall occur within the park.
A. Within the park, all dogs shall be controlled and on a chain or leash not
exceeding more than six feet in length. Cats shall also be under direct
control and leashed. No controlled animal shall be allowed to be
destructive to other animals and birds.
B. The riding of horses or other animals is prohibited.
A. No person shall drive any motor vehicle or propel or cause to be driven
any motor vehicle along or over any road within the park in such a
manner as to endanger the life, limb, or property of pedestrians, the
drivers or occupants of other vehicles, or any other person, nor shall
any motor vehicle be driven in a careless or reckless manner.
B. No vehicle shall be driven or parked in the park except on designated
drives and parking lot areas (except for an authorized Township vehicle
and any vehicle needed for handicapped persons).
C. No person shall park or store any car, motorcycle, bicycle, wagon,
trailer, or other vehicle within the park, except for short-term parking in
places expressly designated by the Township for parking, nor shall any
person park a car, motorcycle, bicycle, wagon, trailer, or other vehicle
in the park overnight or for periods of longer than 15 hours.
D. No trailer or other loading vehicle shall be brought into the park unless
permitted as part of an activity or event that has received permission
from the Township.
A. Camping. No person shall establish or maintain any camp or other
temporary lodging place in the park. No camping shall occur within the
park.
B. Fire. Fires are not permitted in the park.
§ 282-25 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 282-28
1:156
§ 282-29. Park hours.
The following applies within the park:
§ 282-30. Exemptions.
This article and any prohibitions contained herein shall not apply to any
Township official or officer, or any Township Fire Department employee or
official, or to any police officer, engaged in the performance of his or her
official duties as a Township official, employee, or agent, or as a police
officer. Furthermore, this article shall not apply to any use, activity, vehicle,
or other item specifically approved by the Township or used by the Township
(or any of its employees, officers, officials, or agents) or any police agency
in the maintenance or upkeep of the park or for emergency rescue, firefighting,
or emergency purposes.
C. Commercial activities. No person shall sell or offer for sale any article,
thing, privilege or service within the park without a permit from the
Township, and no person shall do any begging, peddling or soliciting in
the park. Further, no person shall expose, distribute, display, post, or
place any sign, advertisement, circular, notice, or statement, or display
any banner, emblem, or design, within the park, without a specific
permit from the Township.
D. Golf. The use of the park for playing golf or the hitting of golf balls is
prohibited.
E. Events. No organized event, festival, party, or similar activity shall
occur within the park unless a permit has first been issued by the
Township for such event or activity.
A. The park shall open at 7:00 a.m. and close at dark, but no later than
10:00 p.m. (Permitted hunters shall be allowed to enter the park one
hour early during the allowed hunting season at Cascade Peace Park.)
All park users must leave at the closing time unless a permit for later
hours has been issued by the Township. Upon the park's so closing, it
shall be unlawful for anyone to enter upon or occupy the park without a
Township permit.
B. The park (or any portion thereof) may be closed entirely or closed to
certain uses during any specified period of time by the Township where
it is determined that the physical condition of the park (or any portion
thereof) is such that the intended use of the park (or portion thereof)
would cause damage or deterioration to the park (or portion thereof) to
a degree greater than ordinary park wear and tear, or that the intended
use of the park (or portion thereof) would create a health or safety
hazard to the proposed user or other citizens. During such period of
time as the park (or portion thereof) is closed, any such closing shall be
prominently posted, and it shall be unlawful for anyone to enter upon or
occupy the park (or portion thereof) contrary to the posted regulations.
§ 282-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-31
1:157
§ 282-31. Rules and regulations.
The Township Board may, from time to time by resolution, adopt rules
and regulations to implement this article including to regulate uses and
activities within the park. Violation of any such rule or regulation adopted
by the Township Board for the park shall be deemed to be a violation of this
article.
§ 282-32. Violations and penalties.73
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be responsible for
a criminal misdemeanor, subject to the penalties in Chapter 40, Article IV,
Penalties for Misdemeanors and Municipal Civil Infractions.
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 282-31 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 282-32
1:158
ARTICLE IV
Cascade Burton Park
[Adopted 6-9-2010 by Ord. No. 8-2010]
§ 282-33. Purpose and intent.
This article governs uses, activities, and structures within the Cascade
Burton Park located within Cascade Charter Township. The Township Board
finds that this article and the rules and regulations contained herein are
essential for the health, safety, and welfare of persons using the park, as
well as the owners and occupants of adjoining residential properties. This
article is also intended to protect the natural beauty and environmental
features of the park.
§ 282-34. Definitions and applicability.
§ 282-35. Park activities.
§ 282-36. Preservation of property and natural features.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CASCADE BURTON PARK — Located at 6805 Burton Street, being
approximately 80± acres in size (also known as Permanent Parcel No.
41-19-09-201-008); also referred to in this article as the "park."
CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP PARK AND RECREATION
COMMITTEE (also referred to in this article as the "COMMITTEE") —
The committee appointed by the Cascade Charter Township Board from
time to time and which is given the duties, powers, and responsibilities
specified in this article. The Township Board may also delegate to the
Committee the authority to issue permits and approvals as mentioned
in this article.
B. This article applies to activities, vehicles, items, and uses within the
Cascade Burton Park.
A. Only passive recreational (e.g., hiking, walking, cross-country skiing)
activities are permitted in the park. Other uses and events as approved
or specifically permitted by the Cascade Charter Township Park and
Recreation Committee or the Township Board may be allowed within
the park. No other uses or activities shall occur in the park.
B. The Committee or the Township Board may designate from time to time
portions of the park for specific uses. Specific uses may also be
prohibited by the Committee or the Township Board.
A. No person shall injure, deface, disturb or befoul any part of the park nor
any building, sign, sculpture, equipment or other property within the
park. No tree, shrub, rock or other mineral within the park shall be
removed, injured or destroyed.
§ 282-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-36
1:159
§ 282-37. Molesting wildlife; firearms and other explosives.
§ 282-38. General conduct.
The following shall apply within the park:
B. No person shall deposit, permit or suffer to be deposited any garbage,
ashes, sewage, refuse, waste, or other noxious material within the park,
except in receptacles provided by the Township for such purposes.
Where trash receptacles are not provided by the Township, all such
materials shall be carried out of the park by the person responsible for
its presence.
C. No person shall dump any earth, tree limbs, leaves, grass clippings, or
compost materials within the park without first obtaining a specific
written permit from the Township Board.
A. No person within the confines of the park shall molest, harm, or kill any
wild bird or animal found within the confines of the park, or rob or
molest any bird nest or take the eggs of any bird within the park.
B. Except as provided by law, no person shall possess or discharge any
firearms, fireworks, explosive substances or air rifles within the park
without a specific permit from the Township.
A. No person shall, either by work or act, indulge in any noisy, boisterous,
disorderly or indecent conduct, or in any manner disturb the peace,
quiet, or good order within the park or of the residents of any property
adjoining the park. No person shall play at games of chance, or engage
in any indecent, lascivious, lewd, sexual, or improper act or behavior.
B. No person intoxicated by alcohol or under the influence of alcohol,
narcotic drugs or opiates shall enter or remain within the park. No
person shall bring into the park any alcohol, liquor, narcotic drugs, or
opiates.
C. No person shall remain within the park who does not abide by the rules
and regulations adopted by the Township for the park. No person shall
remain within the park who does not abide by the instructions and
directions of a duly authorized police officer or agent of the Township in
the lawful performance of their duties. Any person directed by a police
officer or agent of the Township to leave the park shall do so promptly
and peaceably. No person shall resist, obstruct, interfere with, be
abusive of, or address in a profane or obscene manner, any police officer
or agent of the Township.
D. The use of a loud speaker, public address system, or sound-amplifying
equipment is prohibited within the park. Excessively loud radios or
similar devices are also prohibited.
E. No person shall start, fly, or use any fuel- or battery-powered model
aircraft, vehicle, or similar device within the park.
§ 282-36 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 282-38
1:160
§ 282-39. Animal control.
§ 282-40. Traffic control.
Within the park:
§ 282-41. General regulations.
The following applies in the park:
F. No person shall urinate or defecate in the park, except in such facilities
as are provided by the Township and intended for such activities.
G. Smoking is prohibited in the park.
H. All bicycles must remain on paved surfaces at all times. [Amended
10-23-2013 by Ord. No. 5-2013]
I. 74Use of paintball equipment and supplies within the park is prohibited.
J. No application of graffiti or similar activity shall occur within the park.
A. Within the park, all dogs shall be controlled and on a chain or leash not
exceeding more than six feet in length. Cats shall also be under direct
control and leashed. No controlled animal shall be allowed to be
destructive to other animals and birds.
B. The riding of horses or other animals is prohibited.
A. No person shall drive any motor vehicle or propel or cause to be driven
any motor vehicle along or over any road within the park in such a
manner as to endanger the life, limb, or property of pedestrians, the
drivers or occupants of other vehicles, or any other person, nor shall
any motor vehicle be driven in a careless or reckless manner.
B. No vehicle shall be driven or parked in the park except on designated
drives and parking lot areas (except for an authorized Township
vehicles and any vehicle needed for handicapped persons).
C. No person shall park or store any car, motorcycle, bicycle, wagon,
trailer, or other vehicle within the park, except for short-term parking in
places expressly designated by the Township for parking, nor shall any
person park a car, motorcycle, bicycle, wagon, trailer, or other vehicle
in the park overnight or for periods of longer than 15 hours.
D. No trailer or other loading vehicle shall be brought into the park unless
permitted as part of an activity or event that has received permission
from the Township.
74.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection I, regarding in-line skates and similar devices, was
repealed 10-23-2013 by Ord. No. 5-2013, which ordinance also redesignated former
Subsections J and K as Subsections I and J, respectively.
§ 282-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-41
1:161
§ 282-42. Park hours.
The following applies within the park:
§ 282-43. Exemptions.
This article and any prohibitions contained herein shall not apply to any
Township official or officer, or any Township Fire Department employee or
official, or to any police officer, engaged in the performance of his or her
official duties as a Township official, employee, or agent, or as a police
officer. Furthermore, this article shall not apply to any use, activity, vehicle,
or other item specifically approved by the Township or used by the Township
(or any of its employees, officers, officials, or agents) or any police agency
A. Camping. No person shall establish or maintain any camp or other
temporary lodging place in the park. No camping shall occur within the
park.
B. Fire. Fires are not permitted in the park.
C. Commercial activities. No person shall sell or offer for sale any article,
thing, privilege or service within the park without a permit from the
Township, and no person shall do any begging, peddling or soliciting in
the park. Further, no person shall expose, distribute, display, post, or
place any sign, advertisement, circular, notice, or statement, or display
any banner, emblem, or design, within the park, without a specific
permit from the Township.
D. Golf. The use of the park for playing golf or the hitting of golf balls is
prohibited.
E. Events. No organized event, festival, party, or similar activity shall
occur within the park unless a permit has first been issued by the
Township for such event or activity.
A. The park shall open at 7:00 a.m. and close at dark, but no later than
10:00 p.m. All park users must leave at the closing time unless a permit
for later hours has been issued by the Township. Upon the park's so
closing, it shall be unlawful for anyone to enter upon or occupy the park
without a Township permit.
B. The park (or any portion thereof) may be closed entirely or closed to
certain uses during any specified period of time by the Township where
it is determined that the physical condition of the park (or any portion
thereof) is such that the intended use of the park (or portion thereof)
would cause damage or deterioration to the park (or portion thereof) to
a degree greater than ordinary park wear and tear, or that the intended
use of the park (or portion thereof) would create a health or safety
hazard to the proposed user or other citizens. During such period of
time as the park (or portion thereof) is closed, any such closing shall be
prominently posted, and it shall be unlawful for anyone to enter upon or
occupy the park (or portion thereof) contrary to the posted regulations.
§ 282-41 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 282-43
1:162
in the maintenance or upkeep of the park or for emergency rescue, firefighting,
or emergency purposes.
§ 282-44. Rules and regulations.
The Township Board may, from time to time by resolution, adopt rules
and regulations to implement this article including to regulate uses and
activities within the park. Violation of any such rule or regulation adopted
by the Township Board for the park shall be deemed to be a violation of this
article.
§ 282-45. Violations and penalties.75
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be responsible for
a criminal misdemeanor, subject to the penalties in Chapter 40, Article IV,
Penalties for Misdemeanors and Municipal Civil Infractions.
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 282-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-45
1:163
Chapter 287
PEDESTRIAN PATHWAYS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 287-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and referred to as the "Cascade Charter
Township Pedestrian Pathway and Sidewalk System Opening Ordinance."
§ 287-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDESTRIAN PATH or SIDEWALK — The area operated, maintained,
constructed, required to have been constructed or paid for by the Township.
§ 287-3. Pedestrian path and sidewalk openings.
No person shall make any alteration, excavation or opening in, to, upon or
under the pedestrian path and/or sidewalk (or any portion thereof) without
first obtaining a written permit from the Township, with the exception of
those listed in §§ 287-42 and 287-43 of this chapter. No permit shall be
granted until the applicant has done all of the following:
§ 287-4. Time limit.
For all projects that will take longer than 10 business days to completely
restore the path or sidewalk, the applicant must also specify how the
path or sidewalk will remain safe, usable and in working order during the
duration of the construction activity. This plan shall include the signage
plan for informing pedestrians about the project and warning them of the
disturbance as well as a daily restoration plan to ensure that at the end of
the construction day that the path or sidewalk will be free from dirt and
debris.
§ 287-5. Reconstruction.
A. Fully filled out the application form required by the Township and filed
the same with the Township;
B. Posted the appropriate letter of credit, cash or bond as required by the
Township; and
C. Provided proof of insurance as required by the Township.
A. The disturbed path must be restored within 10 business days of the
initial disturbance unless a longer time is approved by the Township
Manager. For an extension of the 10 days the Township Manager shall
take into consideration the following:
(1) The scale of the project.
§ 282-45 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 287-5
1:164
§ 287-6. Exemption.
This chapter shall not apply to work to the pedestrian path or sidewalk (or
affecting the same) being done by the Township.
§ 287-7. Utility companies.
Public utility companies are required to obtain a permit within five business
days of the start of the work. They are not required to submit a performance
bond for the restoration but must meet the pathway or sidewalk restoration
standards of this chapter.
§ 287-8. Compliance with Township standards and requirements.
§ 287-9. Obstructions.
No person shall obstruct or occupy (except temporarily for walking or
bicycling uses) the pedestrian path or sidewalk (or any portion thereof)
(2) How the path or sidewalk is intended to remain open.
(3) What materials are being used for any temporary path or sidewalk.
(4) The public interest in providing a longer time to restore the path or
sidewalk.
B. The Township may also require other reasonable means of ensuring
that the path or sidewalk remains safe, unobstructed and open during
the entire project. These items will also need to be made a part of the
reconstruction plan.
C. If the required work is not performed within the specified time period,
the Township may contract this work with an agent of its choosing. The
cost for said repair work and administration shall be the responsibility
of the entity responsible for the original disturbance.
D. When doing any work to or under a pedestrian path or sidewalk, the
applicant shall fully comply with this chapter and all requirements of
the permit.
A. Any person doing any work in, to, on or under the pedestrian path
pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter shall fully comply with
any and all applicable Township standards and requirements as
contained in Attachment A of this chapter and, when finished, shall
return the pedestrian path to its former state.76
B. Any person doing any work in, to, on or under the Sidewalk pursuant to
a permit issued under this chapter shall fully restore the sidewalk, with
concrete, to its former state.
76.Editor's Note: Attachment A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 287-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 287-9
1:165
unless done pursuant to and in compliance with a validly issued permit from
the Township.
§ 287-10. Damage to pedestrian path or sidewalk.
Any person who shall damage the pedestrian path or sidewalk (or any
portion thereof) in any way shall be responsible for returning the pedestrian
path or sidewalk to its state prior to such damage. At the Township's option,
the Township may either repair the damage caused by such person and such
person shall be responsible for reimbursing the Township for such repair
work, or, alternately, the Township may require that the person who caused
the damage repair the pedestrian path or sidewalk to its prior state within
30 days of the date of the damage.
§ 287-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for
a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less
than $50 or more than $500, plus costs and other sanctions, for each
infraction. Every day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense. Repeat offenses under this chapter shall be subject to increased
fines as provided below. As used herein, "repeat offense" means a second (or
any subsequent) municipal civil infraction violation of any provision of this
chapter committed by a person within any one-year period and for which
the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. The
increased fines for repeat offenses shall be as follows:
Chapter 299
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grass, weeds and noxious vegetation — See
Ch. 216.
Junked vehicles — See Ch. 375.
Sale and display of vehicles — See Ch. 380.
A. The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall not be less
than $500, plus costs.
B. The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense shall be not
less than $1,000, plus costs.
C. The fine for any offense which is a third repeat offense or any
subsequent repeat offense shall be not less than $5,000, plus costs.
§ 287-9 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 287-11
1:166
ARTICLE I
Accumulation of Trash
[Adopted 5-14-1973 by Ord. No. 2-1973 (Part 67 of the 1991
Compilation of Ordinances)]
§ 299-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes any person, firm or corporation.
TRASH and JUNK — Used synonymously and each as herein used shall
include the following: used articles or used pieces of iron, scrap metal,
automobile bodies or parts of machinery or junked or discarded machinery,
used lumber which may be used as a harborage for rats, ashes, garbage,
industrial by-products or waste, empty cans, food containers, bottles,
crockery, utensils of any kind, boxes, barrels, and all other articles
customarily considered trash or junk and which are not housed in a
building.
§ 299-2. Accumulation prohibited; exception.
It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate, place, or allow or permit
the accumulation or placing of trash or junk on any premises in said
Township, except in a sanitary landfill licensed by the State of Michigan or
in a junkyard duly licensed by the Township.
§ 299-3. Violations and penalties.77
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be responsible for
a municipal civil infraction, subject to the penalties in Chapter 40, Article
IV, Penalties for Misdemeanors and Municipal Civil Infractions.
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 299-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-3
1:167

ARTICLE II
Property Maintenance Code
[Adopted 2-23-2005 by Ord. No. 1-2005]
§ 299-4. Adoption of standards by reference.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Clerk of Cascade Charter Township, being marked and designated as the
International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 Edition, as published by
the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of Cascade Charter Township, in the State of Michigan
for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all
property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied
utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to
ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and
the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy
and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms
of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of Cascade Charter
Township are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully
set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes,
if any, prescribed in § 299-5 of this article.
Chapter 1. Administration
Section 101 General
Section 102 Applicability
Section 103 Department of Property
Maintenance Inspection
Section 104 Duties and Powers of the Code
Official
Section 105 Approval
Section 106 Violations
Section 107 Notices and Orders
Section 108 Unsafe Structures and Equipment
Section 109 Emergency Measures
Section 110 Demolition
Section 111 Means of Appeal
Chapter 2. Definitions
Section 201 General
Section 202 General Definitions
Chapter 3. General Requirements
Section 301 General
Section 302 Exterior Property Areas
§ 299-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-4
1:169
Section 303 Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot
Tubs
Section 304 Exterior Structure
Section 305 Interior Structure
Section 306 Handrails and Guardrails
Section 307 Rubbish and Garbage
Section 308 Extermination
Chapter 4. Light, Ventilation and
Occupancy Limitations
Section 401 General
Section 402 Light
Section 403 Ventilation
Section 404 Occupancy Limitations
Chapter 5. Plumbing Facilities and
Fixture Requirements
Section 501 General
Section 502 Required Facilities
Section 503 Toilet Rooms
Section 504 Plumbing Systems and Fixtures
Section 505 Water Systems
Section 506 Sanitary Drainage System
Section 507 Storm Drainage
Chapter 6. Mechanical and Electrical
Requirements
Section 601 General
Section 602 Heating Facilities
Section 603 Mechanical Equipment
Section 604 Electrical Facilities
Section 605 Electrical Equipment
Section 606 Elevators, Escalators and
Dumbwaiters
Section 607 Duct Systems
Chapter 7. Fire Safety Requirements
Section 701 General
Section 702 Means of Egress
Section 703 Fire-Resistance Ratings
Section 704 Fire Protection Systems
Chapter 8. Referenced Standards
§ 299-4 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 299-4
1:170
Index
§ 299-5. Amendments.
The following sections are hereby revised:
§ 299-6. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this article or in the Property Maintenance Code hereby adopted
shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court,
or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed, nor shall
any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or
affected by this article.
A. Section 101.1: Cascade Charter Township.
B. Section 103.5: not applicable.
C. Section 302.4: 8 inches.
D. Section 304.14: January 1 to December 31.
E. Section 602.3: January 1 to December 31.
F. Section 602.4: January 1 to December 31.
§ 299-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-6
1:171
Chapter 313
SEWERS AND WATER
§ 299-6 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 299-6
1:172
Part 1
[Adopted 9-23-1C9o8ll5ecBtyioOnr Od.f NDoe.l i1n0qAu-e1n9t8 C5h(aPragrets 82 Of The 1991
Compilation Of Ordinances)]
ARTICLE I
Collection Procedure; Remedies
§ 313-1. Title.
This Part 1 may be cited and referred to as the "Cascade Charter Township
Collection of Delinquent Sewer and Water Charges Ordinance."
§ 313-2. Delinquent accounts assigned to Township.
By contract between the Township and the City of Grand Rapids dated
May 13, 1967, as amended, the City certifies and assigns to the Township
delinquent accounts for sewer and/or water service or connection charges
for collection.
§ 313-3. Lien.
Upon such assignment, the same shall constitute a lien against the
premises, as provided in Act 94 of Public Acts of 1933, as amended.78
§ 313-4. Delinquent charges to become lien. [Amended 8-14-1989
by Ord. No. 11-1989]
Any such charges, together with any charges for which a lien arises
pursuant to Act 178 of Public Acts of Michigan of 1939, as amended ("Act
178"),79 delinquent for six months or more, together with the interest and
penalties thereon remaining unpaid on the first day of September following
the date when such charges are assigned to the Township by the City of
Grand Rapids or arise under Act 178, shall be certified by the Township
Treasurer to the tax assessing officer of the Township who shall enter
the delinquent charges, interest, and penalties upon the next tax roll as a
charge against the premises affected, and such charge shall be collected
and the lien thereon enforced in the same manner as ad valorem property
taxes levied against such premises.
§ 313-5. Remedies.
The Township may also exercise and avail itself of any other remedies
provided by law to collect such delinquent charges.
§ 313-6. Other remedies. [Added 8-14-1989 by Ord. No. 11-1989]
A. If charges are delinquent, the Township, pursuant to Act 178 of the
Public Acts of Michigan of 1939, as amended, may:
78.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 141.101 et seq.
79.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 123.161 et seq.
§ 313-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-6
1:173
(1) Discontinue the service provided by the system by disconnecting
the sewer service or water service, and the service so disconnected
shall not be reinstated until all sums then due and owing, including
penalties, interest and all expenses incurred by the Township of
shutting off and turning on the service, shall be paid to the
Township;
(2) Institute an action in any court of competent jurisdiction of the
collection of the amounts unpaid, including penalties, interest and
reasonable attorney fees; or
(3) Enforce the lien in the manner provided in § 313-4.
B. These remedies shall be cumulative and shall be in addition to any other
remedy provided in this Part 1 or now or hereafter existing at law or in
equity.
C. Under no circumstances shall action taken by the Township to collect
unpaid charges, penalties, and interest, invalidate or waive the lien
created by this Part 1 or Act 178.
§ 313-6 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-6
1:174
Part 2
[Adopted 4-14-1G9r8a6nBd yROarpdid. sN Soe. r1v-i1c9e8 D6is(Ptrairctt 79 Of The 1991
Compilation Of Ordinances); Amended In Its Entirety 10-9-2013 By
Ord. No. 4-2013]
ARTICLE II
Findings; Purpose; Word Usage
§ 313-7. Findings.
The Cascade Charter Township Board hereby finds the following:
§ 313-8. Purposes and objectives.
The purpose of this Part 2 is to establish standards, rules and regulations,
with respect to the use of the POTW, to provide for rates and charges for
connection to and use of the system, to establish limits for the discharge of
pollutants into the system and to prevent the pollution of the environment.
A. That there is a need to assure the quality of the wastewater discharged
by the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) to prevent the
degradation of the Grand River;
B. That there is a need to protect the biological systems, operation and
infrastructure through the regulation of discharge into the POTW;
C. That there is a need for the City to enhance its ability to regulate the
discharge of wastewater to the POTW consistent with local, state and
federal laws.
A. This Part 2 sets forth requirements for dischargers into the Grand
Rapids wastewater collection and treatment systems, and enables the
Grand Rapids system to protect the public health and environment in
conformity with all applicable state and federal laws relating thereto.
B. The objectives of this Part 2 are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which
interfere with the normal operation of the system or contaminate
the resulting sludge.
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which do
not receive adequate treatment in the POTW and which will pass
through the system into receiving waters or the atmosphere or
otherwise be incompatible with the system.
(3) To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and
sludge from the system.
C. This Part 2 provides for the issuance of permits, and discharge
authorizations, for the regulation of discharges into the POTW.
§ 313-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-9
1:175
§ 313-9. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Part 2, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section unless the
context in which they are used specifically indicates otherwise:
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE — In general, as described in 40 CFR
403.12(l)(1), (2), (3), and (4). See below for details in regard to specific
situations.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPS — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to implement the prohibitions listed in § 313-18. BMPs include
treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control
plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage
from raw materials storage.
BOD — An empirical test in which standardized laboratory procedures
are used to determine the relative oxygen requirements of wastewaters,
effluents and polluted water. The approved laboratory procedures are listed
in Title 40, Part 136, of the Code of Federal Regulations, specifically in the
method for the five-day BOD test.
BUILDING INSPECTIONS — The Building Inspections Division of the Grand
Rapids Department of Neighborhood Improvement.
BYPASS — The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of
an industrial user's treatment facility.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — National pretreatment
standards specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant
properties which may be discharged or introduced into a POTW by specific
industrial dischargers.
CITY — The City of Grand Rapids.
In the case of a corporation, a president, secretary, treasurer or vice
president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function,
or any other person who performs similar policy or decisionmaking
functions for the corporation; or
A.
In the case of a limited liability company a principal managing member
or the member in charge of the principal business functions;
B.
In the case of a partnership or proprietorship, a general partner or
proprietor; and
C.
An authorized representative of the individual designated above if:
Such a representative is responsible for the overall operation of the
facilities from which the discharge into the POTW originates;
(1)
(2) The authorization is in writing; and
(3) The written authorization is submitted to the POTW.
D.
§ 313-9 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-9
1:176
CITY MANAGER — The City Manager of the City of Grand Rapids and
any persons designated to act on behalf of the City Manager in the
administration or enforcement of this Part 2.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq., as amended and applicable regulations promulgated
thereunder.
COMBINED SEWER — Any sewer designed or intended to receive both
stormwater and sewage.
COMBINED WASTE STREAM FORMULA — The waste stream at industrial
facilities where regulated process effluent is mixed prior to treatment with
wastewaters other than those generated by the regulated process. Where
required by federal or state law, and only to the extent required by federal
or state law, the combined waste stream formula provided in 40 CFR
403.6(e) and Rule 323.2311(7) MAC will apply to the limits applicable to a
combined waste stream.
COMMERCIAL USER — A person or entity whose premises are used to
offer services and/or products such as retail and wholesale stores, gasoline
stations, restaurants, schools, churches, hotels, motels, nursing homes,
hospitals, warehouses, private clubs, theaters and governmental buildings.
However, some commercial users may also be designated as significant
industrial users (SIU) should they meet the criteria established in 40 CFR
403.3(v), Rule 323.2302(cc) of the MAC and the definition of "significant
industrial user" in this section.
COMMODITY RATE — A variable unit charge payable by a user based on
metered water consumption.
COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE — A schedule consisting of one or more
milestone dates required for corrections, additions or modifications of
treatment systems or related pollution prevention or control activities as
a result of enforcement actions, expansions or changes in operations or
changes in local or categorical treatment standards. Compliance schedules
do not preclude additional enforcement actions due to violations of
requirements of this Part 2.
CONFINED SPACE, PERMIT REQUIRED — Space defined by reference to
Part 90 of Act No. 154 of the Public Acts of 1974, as amended, § 408.1001
of the Michigan Compiled Laws.
CROSS-MEDIA ELECTRONIC REPORTING REGULATION (CROMMERR)
— An Environmental Protection Agency approved system allowing states,
tribes, and local governments that receive or plan to begin receiving
electronic documents in lieu of paper documents to satisfy regulations
under an authorized program.
DISCHARGE AUTHORIZATION — Written authorization provided by the
City Manager specifying the conditions for discharge of a one-time or shortterm
duration discharge, or other discharges not meeting the definition
of "significant industrial user," including, but not limited to, cooling tower
water and silver recovery unit discharges.
§ 313-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-9
1:177
DISCHARGER — Any person or entity owning, controlling or operating any
real property which directly or indirectly utilizes the POTW. "Discharger"
also means any employee, officer, director, partner, member, contractor or
other person who participates in, or is legally or factually responsible for,
any act or omission which is a violation of this Part 2 or which results in a
violation of this Part 2. This definition shall be interpreted broadly to include
any person or entity who participates in an act or omission that results in a
violation of this Part 2.
DOMESTIC USER — A person or entity whose premises are domiciles for
single- or multiple-family use.
EFFLUENT — Waste material (as smoke, liquid, industrial refuse or sewage)
discharged into the POTW.
ENFORCEMENT ACTION — Action taken by the City to return a user into a
state of compliance with the standards established in this Part 2 of this Part
2. This may include, but is not limited to, fines, penalties and compliance
schedules.
GARBAGE — Animal and plant waste resulting from the handling,
preparation and cooking of foods.
INDUSTRIAL EFFLUENT — Waste matter or material discharged into the
POTW from any nondomestic source subject to regulation under Section
307(b), (c), or (d) of the Clean Water Act.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any person or entity that discharges into the POTW
from any nondomestic source subject to regulation under Section 307(b),
(c), or (d) of the Clean Water Act.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Solid, liquid or gaseous waste resulting from any
industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or from the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources.
INFILTRATION — The water entering a sewer system, including sewer
service connections, from the ground, through such manner as, but not
limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls.
Infiltration does not include, and is distinguished from, inflow.
INFLOW — The water discharged into a sewer system, including service
connections from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar,
yard and area drains, foundation drains, cooling water discharges, drains
from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections from
storm drains and combined sewers, catch basins, stormwater, surface runoff,
street wash waters or drainage. Inflow does not include, and is
distinguished from, infiltration.
INTERCEPTOR SEWER LINES — Those lines whose basic function is to
collect wastewater from two or more separate trunk sewer lines and to
transport such wastewater to the sewage treatment plant.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge, which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW
collection, treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes or
§ 313-9 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-9
1:178
operations, use, disposal, and causes a violation of any requirement of the
POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration
of the violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal
in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or
permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations:
Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA)
[including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act (RCRA)], and including state regulations contained in any
state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid
Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act and
the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
LATERAL SEWER LINE — A sewer pipe beginning at the local collector
sewer or other connection point and extending to the premises actually
served. The lateral sewer includes the stub to which a user connects.
MAHL — The maximum allowable headworks loading expressed in pounds
per day that the POTW can accept without experiencing fire or explosion
hazards, fume toxicity, pass-through, sludge quality impairment, treatment
inhibition or cause a violation of state water quality standards.
MEDICAL WASTE — Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and
blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and
dialysis wastes.
MONTHLY SERVICE CHARGE — A fixed monthly charge payable by a user
based on the size of the water meter servicing the user.
NEW SOURCE — Any building, structure, facility or installation of which the
construction commenced after the publication of the proposed pretreatment
standards under Section 307(c) (33 U.S.C.) which will be applicable to such
source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with
that Section, provided that:
NORTH AMERICAN INDUSTRY CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM (NAICS) — A
six-digit code used by business and government to classify and measure
economic activity.
NPDES — National Pollution Discharge Elimination system, a permit issued
pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (U.S.C. § 1342), as amended.
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation
A. The construction is a site at which no other source is located; or
The process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source is totally replaced; or
B.
The production or wastewater generating processes are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. Reference 40 CFR
403.3(m)(2) to (3) or Rule 323.2302(r) of the Michigan Administrative
Code for further information.
C.
§ 313-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-9
1:179
of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase of
the magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERSON OR ENTITY — An individual, firm, partnership, association, public
or private corporation, limited liability company or public agency or
instrumentality.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions expressed in moles per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT — The term includes, but is not limited to, any dredged spoil,
solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials,
heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and
industrial, municipal, commercial and agricultural waste or any other
contaminant or other substance defined as a pollutant under the Clean
Water Act.
POTW (PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS) — A treatment works
as defined by Section 212 of the Clean Water Act, including any devices
and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of
municipal sewage and industrial waste. The systems include sewers, pipes
and equipment used to convey wastewater to the treatment facility. The
term also includes the municipality as defined in Section 502(4) of the Clean
Water Act which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the
discharges from such treatment works.
PREMISES — Each lot or parcel of land or building having any connection
to the POTW of the City.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction in the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to, or in lieu of,
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The
reduction or alteration can be physical, chemical or biological processes,
process changes or by other means. Dilution is not considered pretreatment
unless expressly authorized by an applicable national pretreatment
standard for a particular industrial category.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment
standard, imposed on an industrial user.
PROPERTY OWNER — Any person having legal or equitable title to real
property or any person having or exercising care, custody or control over
any real property.
PUBLIC SEWER — Local collector, trunk and interceptor sewer lines
including lift stations and all appurtenances that are owned or controlled by
the POTW.
SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE — Substantial physical damage to property,
damage to the treatment facilities of a user which causes them to become
all or partially inoperable or substantial and permanent loss of natural
resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a
§ 313-9 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-9
1:180
bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by
delays in production.
SEWAGE — Any liquid or water carried waste received from domestic,
commercial and industrial customers, including any infiltration or inflow as
may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
SEWER — Any pipe or conduit for the conveyance of sewage.
SIGNIFICANT CHANGE — Any change in a discharger's effluent which
causes the constituents of the discharge to be different and/or increases in
the concentration or flow by 20% over those reported on the discharger's
permit application.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU) —
Any discharger to the POTW who:
Has an average discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more of process
wastewater per day (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and
boiler blowdown wastewater) or contributes a process waste
stream which makes up 5% or more of the average dry weather
hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW, or as determined by
the City Manager under authority of 40 CFR 403.12(a) and in Rule
323.2302 of the Michigan Administrative Code on the basis that the
industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting
the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard
or requirement [in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6) and Rule
323.2306(h) of the Michigan Administrative Code];
(1)
Is found by the City Manager, the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality (MDEQ) or the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) to have significant impact, either singly
or in combination with other contributing users, on the wastewater
treatment system the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality
or air emissions generated by the system; or
(2)
Is subject to federal categorical pretreatment standards under 40
CFR 403.6 and Rule 323.2311 of the Michigan Administrative Code
and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N.
(3)
A.
Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting criteria in Subsection
A(1) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment
standard or requirement, the City Manager may at any time, on his/her
own initiative, or in response to a petition received from an industrial
user or the POTW, and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6) and Rule
323.2306(h) of the Michigan Administrative Code, determine that such
industrial user is not a significant industrial user.
B.
§ 313-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-9
1:181
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — Any industrial user with a violation
that meets one or more of the following criteria:
SLUG DISCHARGE — A slug discharge is any discharge of a nonroutine,
episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or
noncustomary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause
Interference or pass-through, or in any other way violate the POTW's
regulations, local limits, or permit conditions.
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those
in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken during a sixmonth
period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit,
instantaneous limit, or the average limit for the same pollutant
parameter;
A.
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant
parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product
of the daily maximum limit, instantaneous limit, or the average limit
multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and
grease and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH).
B.
Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or
longer term average) that the City Manager determines has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or passthrough
(including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the
general public);
C.
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the
POTW's exercise of its emergency authority under § 313-35 of this Part
2 to halt or prevent such a discharge;
D.
Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction
or attaining final compliance;
E.
Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports,
ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports and
reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
F.
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
Any violation or group of violations, which the City Manager determines
will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program. As required by federal regulations, the City
shall at least annually publish a list of industrial users which during the
previous 12 months were in significant noncompliance with applicable
standards or pretreatment requirements; or
H.
I. Failure to meet BMP requirements.
§ 313-9 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-9
1:182
STORM DRAIN — Any underground pipe or any facility intended to convey
only stormwater runoff, street wash waters, groundwater and drainage.
This term also includes discharges allowed by state or federal discharge
permits.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — All matter existing in nonliquid state which is
removable by filtration in accordance with 40 CFR 136 referenced as
"residue, non-filterable," or an alternative method approved by the EPA
Administrator in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(b)(5)(vi) and Rule
323.2310(e)(vi) of the Michigan Administrative Code.
SYSTEM — Refers to the POTW.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307 of
the Clean Water Act, or pursuant to Part 31 of the Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, as amended, or pursuant to any
other applicable laws or regulations.
UNCONTAMINATED INDUSTRIAL EFFLUENTS — Water which has not
come into contact with any substance used in, or incidental to, industrial
processing operations, such as noncontact cooling water and to which no
deleterious or toxic substance has been added.
UPSET — An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards (or
other limits of this Part 2) because of factors beyond the reasonable control
of the industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the
extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment
facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, and lack of preventive
maintenance or careless or improper operation.
USER CLASS — Either a domestic, commercial or industrial group of users.
WASTEWATER — Water, or any liquid, whether or not containing pollutants,
which is discharged or permitted to be discharged into the sanitary sewer
system.
WATER BUSINESS OFFICE — The Division of the Grand Rapids City Water
Department system that is responsible for the reading of meters, submitting
bills for water and/or sewer service, collection of payment for bills and
the preparation and maintenance of the customer accounts, including
applications for service.
§ 313-10. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
BTEX Benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylene
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
EPA United States Environmental Protection Agency
MTBE Methyl tertiary butyl ether
MAC Michigan Administrative Code
§ 313-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-10
1:183
mg/L Milligrams per liter
TSS Total suspended solids
MAHL Maximum allowable headworks loading
§ 313-10 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-10
1:184
ARTICLE III
Sewer Use
§ 313-11. Management of POTW.
The POTW shall be and remain under the management, supervision and
control of the City Manager. The City Manager may make such rules,
orders or regulations as are deemed advisable and necessary to assure the
efficient management and operation of the system, subject, however, to the
rights, powers and duties with respect thereto which are reserved by law to
Cascade Charter Township.
§ 313-12. City Manager's emergency authority.
When a necessary or advisable emergency protective measure or action
is required, the City Manager is authorized to cause such measures and
actions to be taken as authorized by law. The cost of such protective
measures or actions shall be at the expense of the property owner
responsible for such measure or action. Failure to pay such cost will
constitute a lien upon the property as provided for by law or in the City
Charter.
§ 313-13. Inspection.
§ 313-14. Standards, rules and regulations.
The standards, rules and regulations established in, or pursuant to, this Part
2 are deemed to be the absolute minimum consistent with the preservation
of the public health, safety and welfare, to prevent pollution of the
environment and to fulfill the obligations of the City with respect to state
and federal law, including all rules and regulations adopted in conformance
thereto. All such additional standards, rules and regulations not contained
in this Part 2 shall be approved by the Cascade Charter Township Board.
A. Under current federal and state laws, rules and regulations, the City is
held responsible for the discharge of wastewater into the POTW;
therefore, the City has the right and obligation to inspect connections
and discharges to its system in order to confirm compliance with state
and federal laws and provisions of this Part 2.
B. The City Manager and other duly authorized employees of the City
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter upon all properties at reasonable times for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in
accordance with the provisions of this Part 2. Any person who uses,
applies for use and/or is connected to the POTW under this Part 2 shall
be deemed to have consented to inspections pursuant to this section,
including entrance upon that person's property at reasonable times to
make inspections. In the event that a violation of this Part 2 is
identified, the property owner shall be responsible for all costs of
inspection and remediation if necessary.
§ 313-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-14
1:185
The discharge into the POTW of any substance which exceeds the
pretreatment requirements contained herein, or in any manner fails to
conform hereto, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a violation
of the Code.
§ 313-15. Use of POTW.
Any person or entity conforming to the standards, rules and regulations
established in, or pursuant to, this Part 2 shall be permitted to discharge
effluent into the POTW provided adequate sewer service is available to
which he/she can connect.
§ 313-16. Use of Plainfield sanitary sewer system.
In addition to complying with the provision of this Part 2, any user or
potential user located within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City who
uses or desires to use the Plainfield Charter Township sanitary sewer
system for the transport of sewage for treatment and disposal by the
North Kent Sewer Authority POTW pursuant to a sewer service agreement
effective October 28, 2008, between the City, Plainfield Charter Township
and the North Kent Sewer Authority, as may from time to time be amended,
shall comply with the provisions of the North Kent Sewer Authority Rules
and Regulations and with the provisions of Chapter 38, Article III, Division
2, of the Code of Ordinances of Plainfield Charter Township, both as may
be amended from time, all of which are incorporated in this Part 2 by
reference. In the case of a conflict between any other provision of this Part 2
and any provision of the North Kent Sewer Authority Rules and Regulations
and/or the Code of Ordinances of Plainfield Charter Township adopted
by reference pursuant to this § 313-16, the North Kent Sewer Authority
Rules and Regulations and/or the Code of Ordinances of Plainfield Charter
Township shall control.
§ 313-17. Enforcement of sewer use requirements and limitations of
Plainfield system.
The City Manager or his/her designee shall be responsible for the
administration and enforcement of the rules and regulations and ordinance
provisions adopted by reference pursuant to § 313-16 of this Part 2. As
contemplated in the sewer service agreement effective October 28, 2008,
between the City, Plainfield Charter Township and the North Kent Sewer
Authority, as may be amended from time to time, the City may designate
the Director of the North Kent Sewer Authority POTW and/or the Public
Utilities Director of Plainfield Charter Township as his/her representative(s)
for purposes of administration and enforcement of the rules and regulations
and ordinance provisions adopted by reference in § 313-16.
§ 313-14 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-17
1:186
ARTICLE IV
Regulations
§ 313-18. General discharge conditions and prohibitions.
A. All premises connected to the POTW shall meet the following
requirements:
(1) Minimum size of the building drain/sewer, including required
cleanouts, shall be four inches or greater in diameter;
(2) A grease interceptor, with a maintenance cleaning schedule
appropriate for its intended use, shall be required to receive the
drainage from fixtures and equipment having grease-laden waste,
located in food preparation areas such as in restaurants,
commercial kitchens, bars, clubs or similar facilities. The grease
interceptor shall not be less than a three-compartment, onethousand-
gallon system, or equivalent, unless the City Manager
approves an alternative system. Food waste grinders shall not
discharge to the building drainage system through the grease
interceptor, unless the interceptor is appropriately sized to handle
the solids loading and approved by the plumbing code. Food waste
grinders shall not discharge to the building drainage system
through the grease interceptor. Grease interceptors shall be
cleaned and maintained in accordance with BMP. At no time shall
the level of grease and sludge in any compartment of the trap be
greater than 25% of the tank liquid level. Proof of maintenance and
cleaning shall be available for review upon request.
(3) Sand traps and similar interceptors for removal of heavy solids by
commercial users, as determined by the City Manager, shall be
designed and installed, according to the City Sand Trap for
Garages design specifications. They shall be located as to be
readily accessible for cleaning and shall have a water seal of not
less than six inches. Sand traps and similar interceptors shall be
cleaned and maintained in accordance with BMP. Proof of
maintenance and cleaning shall be available for review upon
request.
(4) Oil/water separators are required at repair garages, gasoline
stations with grease racks, grease pits or work racks and at
factories, or other facilities, where oily and flammable liquid wastes
are produced. Separators shall be installed into which all oilbearing,
grease-bearing or flammable wastes shall be discharged
before emptying in the building drainage system or other point of
disposal. Oil separators shall have a depth of not less than two feet
below the invert of the discharge drain. The outlet opening of the
separator shall not have less than an eighteen-inch water seal. An
alternative design may be approved by the Plumbing Inspector, as
provided for by the Plumbing Code. Oil/water separators shall be
cleaned and maintained in accordance with BMP. Proof of
§ 313-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-18
1:187
maintenance and cleaning shall be available for review upon
request.
B. No discharger shall introduce into the POTW any pollutant(s) which
cause pass-through or interference. The following general and specific
prohibitions of this section apply to each discharger introducing
pollutants into the POTW whether or not the discharger is subject to
any national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall
not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be
discharged to the POTW.
(1) Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup
flashpoint of less than 140° F. or 60° C. using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
(2) Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts that will cause obstruction to
the flow in the POTW or results in interference.
(3) Pollutants which cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW,
but in no case discharges with a pH lower than 5.0 or a pH greater
than 10.5. These pH limits will be evaluated annually as part of the
rate study and the limits set forth in this section will be revised as
deemed necessary.
(4) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction, to injure or interfere with any
wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals or exceed the limitations set forth in a categorical
pretreatment standard.
(5) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either
singly, or by interaction, are capable of creating a public nuisance
or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers
for maintenance and repair.
(6) Any substance which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, may cause a violation of the POTW's
NPDES permit or any applicable state or federal water quality
standards or interferes with any treatment process, or causes
treatment residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for
reclamation or reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process.
In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the
POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria,
guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Clean
Water Act, any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge
use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act,
the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or state
standards applicable to the sludge management method being
used.
§ 313-18 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-18
1:188
(7) Any substance with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions.
(8) Heat in amounts that will inhibit biological activity in the POTW
resulting in interference, but, in no case heat in such quantities
that the temperature at the headworks of the POTW exceeds 40° C.
(104° F.) unless the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality
(MDEQ), upon the request of the POTW, approves the alternative
temperature limits.
(9) Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which will cause interference with the POTW.
(10) Any unpolluted water including, but not limited to, noncontact
cooling water, unless a discharge authorization is approved by the
City Manager.
(11) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such half-life or concentration except as set forth in 10 CFR Part
20. Introduction of radioactive wastes that interfere with the
operation of the POTW including, but not limited to, the use and
disposal of sludge, the recycling of any and all waste products, or if
the discharge causes the POTW to violate any local, State or
Federal laws.
(12) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems.
(13) Any discharge of petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil,
animal fat, vegetable fat, oil, grease, products of mineral oil or any
combination thereof at a concentration of greater than 100
milligrams per liter, unless it can be demonstrated that matrix
interference is responsible for levels greater than this amount, but,
in no case in amounts that will cause an obstruction, interference
or pass-through in the POTW.
(14) Any substances not identified in Subsection B(13) above, that will
become solid or viscous after entering the POTW.
(15) Any effluent having an average daily flow greater than 2% of the
POTW's average daily flow. The City Manager, upon review, may
approve greater discharges subject to conditions as authorized by
this Part 2 or special conditions he/she deems necessary in order to
preserve and protect public health, safety and welfare, subject to
conformance with the applicable state and federal law.
(16) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the City Manager.
§ 313-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-18
1:189
(17) Any detectable level of mercury using EPA Method 245.1 or 245.2
with a detection limit not to exceed 0.2 µg/l unless the user can
demonstrate that matrix interference prevents the attainment of
this level. Mercury sampling procedures, preservation and
handling, and analytical protocol for compliance monitoring shall
be in accordance with U.S. EPA Method 245.1 or 245.2. In the event
that mercury is detected, the user shall develop and implement a
mercury elimination plan including elements deemed necessary by
the City Manager to progress toward the goal of no detectable
discharge of mercury. For users whose operation and discharge
characteristics are substantially similar, a group mercury
elimination plan may be acceptable. Dental facilities shall comply
with Public Act 503 of 2008, MCLA § 333.16631, and all best
management practices promulgated by the Michigan Department
of Community Health in conjunction with the Michigan Department
of Environmental Quality.
(18) There shall be no discharge to the POTW of groundwater that has
been contaminated with gasoline and related petroleum products
that would qualify for a State of Michigan general discharge permit
for gasoline and related petroleum products in accordance with
Rule 2191 promulgated pursuant to Act 451 of the Public Acts of
Michigan of 1994, as amended, Part 31, except where no other
discharge option exists. If discharge to the POTW is desired under
these conditions, the discharger must submit a wastewater
discharge permit application as specified in § 313-20 which may be
approved by the City Manager. Upon approval a permit will be
issued with appropriate conditions as set forth in § 313-24. The
total BTEX concentration shall not exceed 20 micrograms per liter
and the MTBE concentration shall not exceed 20 micrograms per
liter.
(19) Disposal of septage waste into the POTW is prohibited, except as in
accordance with the septage waste receiving plan; the City
Manager may authorize disposal of portable containers of domestic
waste, including waste from recreational vehicles. Septage wastes
are to be discharged only at designated locations in accordance
with the septage waste receiving plan.
(20) Sludge from an industrial or commercial pretreatment system shall
not be placed into the POTW. Such sludge shall be disposed of by a
licensed hauler in a site approved by the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality (MDEQ).
(21) Any substance that causes excessive foaming in the POTW.
(22) Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized according to Part
138, Medical Waste Regulatory Act of the Michigan Public Health
Code, 1978 PA 368, as amended.
§ 313-18 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-18
1:190
(23) Any detectable level of PCB using EPA Method 608 with a detection
limit not to exceed 0.1 µg/l unless the user can demonstrate that
matrix interference prevents the attainment of this level. PCB
sampling procedures, preservation and handling, and analytical
protocol for compliance monitoring shall be in accordance with
U.S. EPA Method 608.
(24) Bacteriological, chemical or enzymatic products shall not be added
to facility discharge or be used to maintain or clean grease
interceptors or grease traps, unless approved by the City Manager.
C. Bypass is prohibited, except in cases where the bypass was unavoidable
to prevent a loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage, and
where there are no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use
of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This
condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have
been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to
prevent a bypass that occurred during normal periods of equipment
downtime or preventive maintenance. In cases where a bypass may
occur, it would be subject to the following conditions:
(1) Anticipated bypass. If an industrial user knows in advance of the
need for a bypass, the user shall submit prior notice to the POTW, if
possible, at least 10 days before the date of the bypass. Upon
notification, the City Manager shall make a determination whether
to allow the discharge.
(2) Unanticipated bypass. An industrial user shall immediately notify
the City Manager of the occurrence of any unanticipated bypass.
The City Manager shall make a determination whether to allow the
discharge to continue. A written submission shall also be provided
within five days of becoming aware of the bypass. The written
submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause,
the dates and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated
time it is expected to continue, and steps taken or planned to
reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the bypass.
D. Any discharger shall have an affirmative defense in any action brought
against it alleging a violation of the general and specific prohibitions
established in § 313-18B(2), (8), (9), and (13), where the discharger can
demonstrate that:
(1) It did not know or have reason to know that its discharge, alone or
in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources,
would cause pass-through or interference and;
(2) Either:
(a) A local limit designed to prevent pass-through or interference
was developed for each pollutant in the user's discharge that
caused pass-through or interference and the user was in
§ 313-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-18
1:191
§ 313-19. Limitations on wastewater strength.
compliance with each such local limit immediately before and
during the pass-through or interference; or
(b) A local limit was not applicable and immediately before and
during the pass-through or interference the user's discharge
did not substantially change in volume or constituents from the
user's previous discharges when the POTW was regularly in
compliance with its NPDES permit and, in the case of
interference, all applicable requirements for sludge use or
disposal.
A. Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment
standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard,
if more stringent than limitations imposed under this Part 2 for sources
in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations
imposed under this Part 2. Compliance by existing sources with
categorical pretreatment standards shall be within three years of the
date the standard is effective unless a shorter compliance time is
specified in the appropriate subpart of 40 CFR Chapter I, Subpart N. A
new source shall install, and have in operation at start-up, all pollution
control equipment required to meet applicable categorical
pretreatment standards before beginning discharge. When the
applicable categorical pretreatment standards are expressed in terms
of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the City Manager may
convert these limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as a mass
of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes
of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial
users as set forth in 40 CFR 403.6(c)(2) to (7) and Rule 323.2311(5) of
the MAC. In situations in which nonregulated waste streams are
intermixed with the regulated waste stream, the City Manager may use
the combined waste stream formula to develop equivalent discharge
limits. Whenever equivalent limits are used, they shall be deemed
pretreatment standards in determining compliance with the standards.
The City Manager shall notify all affected users of the applicable
reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12 and Rule 323.2310 of the
MAC. An application for modification of the categorical pretreatment
standards may be considered for submittal to the Regional
Administrator of EPA by the City Manager when the system achieves
consistent removal of the pollutants as defined by 40 CFR 403.7 and
Rule 323.2313 of the MAC.
B. No industrial user shall increase the use of water or dilute a discharge
as a substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a
pretreatment standard or requirement.
C. Supplementary limitations.
(1) Supplementary limits were established in accordance with EPA
guidance and the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality
§ 313-18 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-19
1:192
(MDEQ) approval criteria. Specific permit limits for BOD, total
suspended solids, total phosphorus, and ammonia as NH3-N, are
specified by individual discharge permits and were derived from
the industrial allocable portion of the MAHLs listed in Table 1.
Table 1. Maximum Allowable Headworks Loadings
Materials
Loading
(pounds/day)
Biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD)
160,800
Total suspended solids (TSS) 141,300
Total phosphorus (TP) 6,990
Ammonia nitrogen (NH3-N) 15,100
(2) Table 2 contains a list of technically based local limits derived from
the industrial allocable portion of the noncompatible pollutant
MAHLs limits for toxic pollutants. For users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards, which include the following parameters,
the following limits, if more restrictive, shall apply, both to the
categorically regulated process flow as well as any other flows not
specifically regulated by categorical pretreatment standards. For
all other dischargers, these limits shall apply to the total flow from
each connection to the POTW, except silver which is a process
discharge limit as noted. All measurements to determine
compliance with these limits shall be performed in accordance with
EPA approved methods found in 40 CFR 136. The monthly average
shall be the average of all samples analyzed by EPA approved
methods during a calendar month.
Table 2
Local Limits
Inorganic
Daily Maximum
(mg/L)
Monthly Average
(mg/L)
Total arsenic 1.46 NA
Total cadmium 0.817 NA
Total chromium 4.0 NA
Hexavalent
chromium
0.72 NA
Total copper 1.5 NA
Total cyanide 1.0 NA
Total lead 1.5 NA
Total mercury ND1 NA
Total molybdenum 3.4 NA
§ 313-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-19
1:193
Table 2
Local Limits
Inorganic
Daily Maximum
(mg/L)
Monthly Average
(mg/L)
Total nickel 1.5 1.1
Total selenium 2.3 1.67
Total silver 6202 NA
Total zinc 2.6 2.0
Organic
Daily Maximum
(mg/L)
Monthly Average
(mg/L)
Total phenols 3.26 NA
Polychlorinated
biphenyls
ND3 NA
Tetrachloroethylene 0.25 NA
Trichloroethylene 0.16 NA
MTBE 0.02 NA
NA Not applicable
(1) Nondetectable or as specified in § 313-18B(17)
(2) Process discharge limit for photo processors and x-ray
machines sampled from discharge of silver recovery unit.
The analysis of these sample matrixes, photo processing and
x-ray machine wastes for silver shall be performed on an
unpreserved and undigested sample or an alternative
preservation and analytical method that does not interfere
with the measurement of silver.
(3) Nondetectable per EPA Method 608 with a detection limit
not to exceed 0.1 µg/l unless higher levels are appropriate
due to matrix interference
(3) For compatible pollutants, the City Manager shall establish specific
concentration limits, when necessary, that are adequate to insure
that the industrial allocable portion of the MAHL listed herein is
not exceeded. Any requests for specific limits must be made at the
time of permit application or renewal and such a determination will
be made solely by the City Manager. The establishment of any such
limits shall not create any vested right or property rights for the
user. Accordingly, no right of appeal from such a determination will
exist and the approval may be terminated, modified or subjected to
special condition either at time of approval or thereafter, at the
discretion of the City Manager.
§ 313-19 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-19
1:194
(4) The City Manager may implement a system for setting special
alternative specific limits for batch discharges.
(a) Special alternative specific limits may be approved when all of
the following conditions are met:
[1] The user requests a special alternative specific limit
through the special alternative limit process.
[2] The City Manager makes a determination that adequate
treatment capacity exists to allow this special alternative
specific limit consistent with the MAHL for those
pollutants present.
(b) In no event shall a special discharge permit be granted or
effective which authorizes a discharge in excess of the
limitations imposed by any applicable final federal or state
pretreatment standard or discharge limit. In addition, the City
Manager shall not consider any request for an increase above
any limits that were calculated based on health or safety
criteria.
(5) The City Manager may develop BMPs by ordinance or in individual
wastewater discharge permits to implement local limits and the
requirements of § 313-18.
D. Accidental discharges.
(1) Prevention plan.
(a) Industrial and commercial users shall provide protection from
accidental discharge of materials which may interfere with the
POTW by developing spill prevention plans. If the materials of
concern are listed in Table 1 of Rule 324.2009 of the MAC, as
amended, a pollution incident prevention plan (PIPP) pursuant
to Part 31 of the Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act, Act 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994,
as amended (MCLA § 324-3101 et seq.), and Rule 324.2006 of
the MAC, as amended, shall be developed and maintained. A
copy of the PIPP must be made available upon request of the
City Manager. Facilities necessary to implement these plans
shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or industrial
or commercial user's expense.
(b) Industrial and commercial users who store hazardous
substances shall not discharge to the POTW after the effective
date of this Part 2 until a State of Michigan required PIPP has
been submitted. Receipt of such plan shall not relieve the
industrial or commercial user from complying with all other
laws and regulations governing the use, storage and
transportation of hazardous substances.
§ 313-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-19
1:195
(2) The City Manager shall evaluate each significant industrial user at
least once every two years, and other industrial users as necessary,
to determine whether such user needs a plan to control slug
discharges. If the City Manager decides that a slug control plan is
needed, the plan shall contain at a minimum the following
elements:
(a) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
(b) Description of stored chemicals;
(c) Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of slug
discharges, including any discharge that would violate a
prohibition under §§ 313-18 and 313-19, with procedures for
follow-up written notification within five days;
(d) When deemed necessary, procedures to prevent adverse
impact from accidental spills, including inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant
site runoff, worker training, building containment structures or
equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants
and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.
(3) Any upset or accidental discharge shall be reported to the City
Manager immediately upon occurrence. A detailed report shall be
filed within five days. The report shall include location of the upset
or discharge, date and time thereof, type of waste, concentration,
volume and corrective actions. Failure to file a report shall be a
separate violation of this Part 2.
(4) Signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places on
discharger's premises, advising employees whom to call in the
event of a slug, upset or accidental discharge. Employers shall
instruct all employees who may cause, or discover such upset or
discharge, with respect to emergency notification procedure.
(5) Significant industrial users are required to notify the City Manager
prior to any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug
discharge.
§ 313-19 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-19
1:196
ARTICLE V
Discharge Permits
§ 313-20. Permit application.
A. All new nondomestic users connecting to, or discharging to, the POTW,
and all existing nondomestic users connected to, or discharging to, the
POTW, shall complete a wastewater discharge survey to establish
whether a nondomestic user should be classified as a significant
industrial user or require a discharge authorization as defined in
§ 313-9 and require a discharge permit. New water service will not be
initiated until a complete survey is submitted. In the case of a transfer
account, water service will be disconnected if a complete survey is not
submitted within 10 days of the transfer. If, upon review, the City
Manager determines a permit may be required, the nondomestic user
shall file a permit application which may include, but not be limited to,
the following information:
(1) Name, address and location of the discharger;
(2) North American Industry Classification system (NAICS) number(s)
according to the North American Industry Classification system
manual, Office of Management and Budget, 1997, as amended;
(3) Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including, but not
limited to, toxic pollutants as determined by bona fide chemical and
biological analyses. Sampling and analyses shall be performed in
accordance with procedures established by the EPA and contained
in 40 CFR Part 136, as amended;
(4) Time and duration of discharges;
(5) Average daily and maximum daily wastewater flow rates in gallons
per day, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any. All
flows shall be measured, unless other verifiable techniques are
approved by the City Manager;
(6) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details
to show all sanitary and storm drain systems, sewer connections,
inspection manholes, sampling chambers and appurtenances by
size, location and elevation;
(7) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises including all materials which are, or may be, discharged
to the POTW;
(8) The nature and concentration of any pollutants or materials
prohibited by this Part 2 in the discharge, together with a
statement regarding whether or not compliance is being achieved
with this Part 2 on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional
operation and maintenance activities and/or additional
§ 313-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-20
1:197
pretreatment is required for the discharger to comply with this Part
2;
(9) Where additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance
activities will be required to comply with this Part 2 by an existing
source, the discharger shall enter into a consent agreement
consistent with the law, and approved by the City Manager, of the
shortest schedule by which the discharger will provide such
additional pretreatment and/or implementation of additional
operational and maintenance activities. The compliance date for
such a schedule shall not be later than the compliance date for any
applicable standard. A new source [40 CFR 403.3(k) and Rule
323.2302(r) of the Michigan Administrative Code], or an expansion
of an existing source, must have in place all necessary equipment
to abate pollution. For a new source, this will be prior to the
commencement of the discharge. For an expansion of an existing
source, this shall be before any additional wastewater is introduced
to the system.
(a) The schedule shall contain milestone dates for the
commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment
required for the discharger to comply with the requirements of
this Part 2 including, but not limited to, dates related to hiring
a Michigan licensed professional engineer, completing
preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract
for major components, commencing construction, completing
construction and all other acts necessary to achieve
compliance with this Part 2.
(b) Under no circumstance shall the City Manager permit a time
increment for any single step directed toward compliance
which exceeds six months.
(c) Not later than 14 days following each milestone date in the
schedule and the final date for compliance, the discharger shall
submit a progress report to the City Manager, including a
statement as to whether or not they complied with the
increment of progress represented by that milestone date and,
if not, the date on which they expect to comply with this
increment of progress, the reason for delay and the steps being
taken by the discharger to return the construction to the
approved schedule.
(10) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and
rate of production;
(11) The type and amount of raw materials utilized;
(12) All permit applications shall be signed by an authorized
representative of the discharger, and a Michigan licensed
professional engineer, where pretreatment facilities are required;
§ 313-20 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-20
1:198
§ 313-21. Notification of substantial changes.
All industrial users shall promptly notify the control authority (and the
POTW if the POTW is not the control authority) in advance of any substantial
change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including
the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the industrial user
has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12(p) and Chapter 27,
Sec. 2.75(4), of the City of Grand Rapids Code.
§ 313-22. Permit issuance (significant industrial users).
The City Manager will evaluate the completed application and data
furnished by the discharger and may require additional information. Within
30 days after full evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the
City Manager shall make a determination as to whether the applicant is a
significant industrial user or will need a discharge authorization. For every
applicant, the City Manager shall issue or deny a discharge permit subject
to terms and conditions provided herein.
§ 313-23. Permit modifications.
The City Manager shall have the right to amend any discharge permit issued
hereunder in order to assure compliance by the POTW with applicable
laws and regulations and prevent a violation of any NPDES limit, water
quality standards or interference with residuals management as specified in
§ 313-18B(6). Upon the promulgation of a federal categorical pretreatment
standard, the significant industrial user discharge permit of each discharger
subject to such standards will be revised to comply with such standards.
Where a discharger, subject to a federal categorical pretreatment standard,
has not previously submitted an application for a significant industrial
user discharge permit as required by § 313-20, the discharger shall apply
for a significant industrial user discharge permit from the City Manager
within 30 days after the promulgation of the applicable federal categorical
pretreatment standard and provide the information required. The
discharger shall be informed of any proposed changes in the discharger's
permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes
or new conditions in the permit may include a reasonable time schedule for
(13) When required by the City Manager, the discharger shall provide
an inspection and sampling manhole(s) or structure(s),
nonpermitted confined space where feasible, with an opening of no
less than 24 inches diameter and an internal diameter of no less
than 36 inches containing flow measuring, recording and sampling
equipment as required by the City Manager to assure compliance
with this Part 2.
B. Nondomestic users who have previously submitted a survey, as
prescribed in this section, are also required to complete a wastewater
discharge survey periodically, at a frequency to be determined by the
City Manager.
§ 313-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-23
1:199
compliance, which does not exceed any compliance dates set by 40 CFR
403.6(b) and Rule 323.2311(3) of the Michigan Administrative Code.
§ 313-24. Permit conditions.
Significant industrial user discharge permits shall specify the following:
A. Statement of duration (not more than five years) including issuance and
expiration dates;
B. Effluent limitations based on the more stringent of categorical
pretreatment standards, BMPs, or local limits as established by this
Part 2 and state law;
C. General and specific discharge prohibitions as established by §§ 313-18
and 313-19 of this Part 2;
D. Requirements and specifications for monitoring programs including
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedule;
E. Requirements for collecting, retaining and providing access to plant
records relating to the user's discharge and for providing entry for
sampling and inspection;
F. Requirements for notification of spills, bypass or potential problems to
the POTW including slug loadings, upsets or violations;
G. Requirements to develop and implement spill and slug control plans;
H. Requirements for notification and approval of changes prior to
discharge. The POTW shall be notified of any proposed substantial
change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge,
including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the
industrial user has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR
403.12(p) and Rule 323.2310(15) of the Michigan Administrative Code
and operational shift changes of greater than four hours;
I. Special conditions as the City Manager may reasonably require under
particular circumstances of a given discharge to ensure compliance
with this Part 2 and state and federal pretreatment standards and
requirements;
J. Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of
pretreatment standards and requirements;
K. Statement of non-transferability;
L. Conditions for modification or revocation of permit;
M. Schedule of fees and charges;
§ 313-23 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-24
1:200
§ 313-25. Permits duration.
All discharge permits shall be issued for up to five years, subject to
amendment or revocation as provided in this Part 2.
§ 313-26. Permit changes.
§ 313-27. Baseline monitoring report.
N. Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics, including BMP: based on applicable pretreatment
standards or local limits;
O. Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge and/or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization;
P. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities;
Q. Compliance schedules;
R. Requirements for submission of special technical reports, discharge
reports or certification statements. These include any reporting
requirements contained in a federal categorical standard or
pretreatment requirements.
A. Permit transfer.
(1) Individual discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or
operator only if the permittee gives at least 30 days' advance notice
to the City Manager and the City Manager approves the individual
discharge permit transfer. The notice to the City Manager must
include a written certification by the new owner or operator which:
(a) States that the new owner and/or operator have no immediate
intent to change the facility's operations and processes;
(b) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur;
(c) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the
existing individual wastewater discharge permit; and
(d) Includes all modifications.
(2) Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the
individual wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of
facility transfer.
B. Permit renewal/reissuance. SIUs with an expiring wastewater
discharge permit shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit
reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance
with § 313-20 of this Part 2, a minimum of 60 days prior to the
expiration of the SIU's existing wastewater discharge permit.
§ 313-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-27
1:201
A. Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment
standard, or 180 days after the final administrative decision made upon
a category determination request, or 90 days prior to the
commencement of discharge in the case of a new source, the industrial
user shall submit a baseline monitoring report, in accordance with 40
CFR 403.12(b) and Rule 323.2310(2) MAC, for any discharge subject to
federal categorical pretreatment standards and requirements signed by
an authorized representative.
B. Ninety-day report on compliance with federal categorical standards.
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
federal categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new
source following the commencement of the introduction of wastewater
into the POTW, any discharger subject to federal categorical
pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit a report in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(d) and Rule 323.2310(3) MAC signed
by an authorized representative.
C. Significant noncategorical user compliance report. For dischargers who
are not subject to categorical pretreatment standards, but discharge or
have the potential to discharge substances which could adversely affect
the POTW's operation, or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement, a report is to be submitted 30 days following the
commencement of discharge and every six months thereafter to the
City Manager. The report shall specify the nature and concentration of
all prohibited or regulated substances contained in their discharge as
set forth in 40 CFR 403.12(h) and Rule 323.2310(7) MAC and the
average and maximum daily flow in gallons. The report shall state
whether the requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if
additional pretreatment is necessary, to bring the discharge into
compliance with the requirements. This statement shall be signed by an
authorized representative, as set forth in 40 CFR 403.12(1) and Rule
323.2310(11) MAC, of the discharger and certified to by a Michigan
licensed professional engineer.
D. Hazardous waste notification.
(1) Any industrial or commercial user, except as specified in
Subsection D(5) below, who discharges any substance to the POTW
which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a listed or characteristic
hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261, shall notify the POTW, the
EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director and the state
hazardous waste authorities as set forth in 40 CFR 403.12(p) and
Rule 323.2310(15) of the Michigan Administrative Code in writing
of such discharge.
(2) All hazardous waste notifications shall include:
(a) The name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part
261;
(b) The EPA hazardous waste number;
§ 313-27 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-27
1:202
§ 313-28. Periodic compliance reports.
(c) The type of discharge (continuous, batch or other); and
(d) A certification that the user has a program in place to reduce
the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the
degree it has determined to be economically practical.
(3) In addition to the information submitted in § 313-27D(2), the
reports from industrial and commercial users discharging more
than 100 kilograms of hazardous waste per calendar month to the
POTW shall contain the following information:
(a) An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
waste;
(b) An estimation of the mass and concentration of such
constituents in the waste stream discharged during that
calendar month;
(c) An estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream
expected to be discharged during the following 12 months.
(4) Hazardous waste notifications shall be submitted no later than 30
days after the effective date of this Part 2 or prior to the discharge
of listed or characteristic hazardous waste for discharges
commencing after the effective date of this Part 2, as required in
§ 313-21. Any notification under this provision need be submitted
only once for each hazardous waste discharged, although
notifications of changed discharge must be submitted under
§ 313-21 of this Part 2. This section does not apply to pollutants
already reported as part of a significant industrial user discharge
permit self-monitoring requirement.
(5) Industrial and commercial users are exempt from the hazardous
waste notification requirement when they discharge 15 kilograms
or less of non-acute hazardous wastes per calendar month.
Discharge of any quantity of acutely hazardous waste as specified
in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e) requires a one-time notification.
(6) In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act identifying additional
characteristics of hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify
the POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director,
and the state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such
substance within 90 days of the effective date of the regulations.
A. Reporting requirements.
(1) Significant industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards shall submit to the City Manager a report, as required in
40 CFR 403.12(e), indicating the nature and concentration of
§ 313-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-28
1:203
§ 313-29. Inspection, sampling and analysis.
prohibited or regulated substances in the effluent. The reports shall
be submitted for the six-month periods of January through June
and July through December. Reports are due within 30 days of the
end of the reporting period. If the sampling performed indicates a
violation, the user shall notify the City Manager immediately upon
becoming aware of the violation. At a minimum, the SIU shall also
repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the
repeat analysis to the City Manager within 30 days after becoming
aware of the violation. In cases where the pretreatment standard
requires compliance with a best management practice or pollution
prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation
required by the City Manager or the pretreatment standard
necessary to determine the compliance status of the SIU. In
addition, this report shall include a record of all measured or
estimated average and maximum daily flows which during the
reporting period exceeded the average daily flow reported in
§ 313-20A(5) hereof. Flows shall be reported on the basis of actual
measurement; provided, however, where cost or feasibility
considerations justify, the City Manager may accept reports of
average and maximum flows estimated by verifiable techniques.
The City Manager, for good cause shown, considering such factors
as local high- or low-flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, or other
extenuating factors, may authorize the submission of said reports
on months other than those specified above.
(2) Significant industrial users with discharges that are not subject to
federal categorical pretreatment Standards but are subject to local
limits shall follow the same sampling and reporting requirements
as in Subsection A(1) above.
B. Reports of permittees shall contain all results of sampling and analysis
of the discharge, including the flow, nature, concentration, production
and/or mass, where required by the City Manager. Reports required in
discharge permits will be accepted in an electronically submitted
format only through an Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
approved Cross Media Electronic Reporting Regulation (CROMERR)
system compliant with the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, Part 3.
CROMERR is an EPA approved system allowing states, tribes, and local
governments that receive or plan to begin receiving electronic
documents in lieu of paper documents to satisfy regulations under an
authorized program.
A. The City Manager may inspect the monitoring facilities of any
discharger to determine compliance with the requirements of this Part
2. The discharger shall allow the City Manager to enter upon the
premises of the discharger at all hours, for the purposes of inspection,
sampling or records examination. The City Manager shall have the right
to set up on the discharger's property such devices as are necessary to
§ 313-28 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-29
1:204
conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering
operations and have access to examine and copy any records. All costs
associated with this monitoring requirement shall be borne by the
discharger.
B. The reports required by §§ 313-27 and 313-28 of this Part 2 shall be
based on sampling and analysis performed in the period covered by the
report and performed in accordance with the techniques described in
40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto or as specified in the
applicable categorical pretreatment standard.
C. The frequency of monitoring shall be specified by the City Manager to
assess compliance by industrial and commercial users with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements in accordance with 40 CFR
403.12(g)(3) and Rule 323.2310(6)(d) MAC. Where EPA, 40 CFR Part
136, does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the
pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed in
accordance with the procedure set forth in the EPA publication,
Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents
for Priority Pollutants, April, 1977, and amendments thereto or with any
other sampling and analytical procedures approved by the
Administrator of the EPA. Where the POTW performs all the required
sampling and analyses and collects all the information required for the
reports required in §§ 313-27 and 313-28 of this Part 2, the SIU will not
be required to submit the report.
D. If sampling performed by an SIU indicates a violation, the user shall
notify the City Manager within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
violation. At a minimum, the user is required to resample and analyze
within 30 days of becoming aware of the violation. The City Manager
may, with the issuance of a modified permit, require more frequent
sampling and analysis. Resampling by the SIU is not required if the City
performs sampling at the user's facility between the time when the
initial sampling was conducted and the time when the SIU or City
receives the results of this sampling, or if the City has performed the
sampling and analysis in lieu of the SIU.
E. If an SIU, subject to the reporting requirement in §§ 313-27 and 313-28,
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW,
using the procedures prescribed in this section, the results of this
monitoring shall be included in the report.
F. The reports required by §§ 313-27 and 313-28 of this Part 2 shall
include the following certification statement:
§ 313-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-29
1:205
"I certify under penalty of the law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in
accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel
properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my
inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those
persons directly responsible for gathering the information submitted,
it is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and
complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of penalty and
imprisonment for knowing violations."
(1) Signatory requirements for industrial user reports. The reports
required by §§ 313-27 and 313-28 of this Part 2 shall include the
certification statement as set forth in § 313-29F, and shall be
signed as follows:
(a) By a responsible corporate officer, if the industrial user
submitting the reports required by §§ 313-27 and 313-28 of this
Part 2 is a corporation. For the purpose of this subsection, a
responsible corporate officer means:
[1] A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or
any other person who performs similar policy-making or
decisionmaking functions for the corporation; or
[2] The manager of one or more manufacturing, production,
or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized
to make management decisions which govern the
operation of the regulated facility, including having the
explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other
comprehensive measures to assure long-term
environmental compliance with environmental laws and
regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are
established or actions taken to gather complete and
accurate information for control mechanism requirements;
and where authority to sign documents has been assigned
or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate
procedures.
(b) By a general partner or proprietor if the industrial user
submitting the reports required by §§ 313-27 and 313-28 of this
Part 2 is a partnership or sole proprietorship, respectively.
(c) By a duly authorized representative of the individual
designated in Subsection F(1)(a) or (b) of this section if:
[1] The authorization is made in writing by the individual
described in Subsection F(1)(a) or (b);
§ 313-29 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-29
1:206
§ 313-30. Monitoring facilities.
§ 313-31. Confidential information.
[2] The authorization specifies either an individual or a
position having responsibility for the overall operation of
the facility from which the industrial discharge originates,
such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well,
or well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent
responsibility, or having overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company; and
[3] The written authorization is submitted to the City
Manager.
(d) If an authorization under Subsection F(1)(c) of this section is
no longer accurate because a different individual or position
has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the
company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of
Subsection F(1)(c) of this section must be submitted to the City
Manager prior to or together with any reports to be signed by
an authorized representative.
A. When deemed necessary by the City Manager, each discharger shall
provide and operate, at the discharger's own expense, a monitoring
facility to allow inspection, representative sampling and flow
measurement of each discharge to the POTW. Sampling requirement
shall be flow proportional unless time proportional composite sampling
is authorized by the control authority. Each monitoring facility shall be
situated on the discharger's premises; except where such a location
would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the discharger, the
City Manager may concur with the facility being constructed in the
public right-of-way, providing that the facility is located so that it will
not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. Upon appropriate
notice by the City Manager for monitoring facilities, a compliance
schedule may be issued as a permit condition.
B. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling facilities to allow
accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility,
sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a
safe and proper operating condition, at the expense of the discharger.
C. All required monitoring facilities shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with all applicable local construction standards and
specifications (nonpermitted confined space structure where feasible).
A. Information and data furnished to the City Manager with respect to the
nature and frequency of discharge shall be available to the public or
other governmental agencies without restriction. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential
§ 313-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-31
1:207
information. When requested by a discharger furnishing a report, the
portions of a report which may disclose trade secrets or secret
processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public
unless required by law, but shall be made available upon written
request to governmental agencies for uses related to this Part 2, the
NPDES permit, and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however,
that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state
or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings
involving the discharger furnishing the report.
B. Where a discharger has mass-based limits as allowed by federal
categorical pretreatment standards on a production basis, the
production data necessary to determine compliance shall also be
available to the public. Where application of the combined waste
stream formula is necessary to apply federal categorical pretreatment
standards to a discharger, the flow measurements and other data used
in the calculation shall be available to the public.
§ 313-31 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-31
1:208
ARTICLE VI
Enforcement and Administration
§ 313-32. Enforcement.
Any discharger who is found to have violated an order of the City Manager,
or who has failed to comply with any provision of this Part 2 (or permits
issued hereunder), and the regulations or rules of the City, promulgated
pursuant to this Part 2, shall be guilty of a violation of the City Code.
Whenever the City Manager finds that any user has violated, or is violating,
this Part 2, a significant industrial user discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the City Manager may
serve upon said user a written notice of violation. Within 10 days of the
receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for
satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required
actions, shall be submitted by the user to the City Manager. Submission of
this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violation occurring
before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section
shall limit the authority of the City to take any action, including emergency
actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of
violation.
§ 313-33. Recovery of costs incurred by City.
Any discharger violating any of the provisions of this Part 2, or who
discharges or causes a discharge producing a deposit or obstruction, or
causes damage to or impairs the City's POTW, shall be liable to the City for
any expense, loss or damage caused by such violation or discharge. This
shall include, but not be limited to, penalties levied upon the City by the
EPA or Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) for violation
of its NPDES permit caused by any violation by a discharger, including all
actual costs, court, attorney and other related legal fees plus an additional
charge of 100% of the total costs and/or penalties.
§ 313-34. Falsifying information.
Any person or entity who knowingly makes any false statement,
representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or
other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this Part 2, or
who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring
device or method required under this Part 2, shall, upon conviction, be
punished as provided for in § 313-42 of this Part 2.
§ 313-35. Emergency suspension of service and discharge permits.
The City Manager may for good cause shown, suspend the sewage disposal
system service and/or the discharge permit of a discharger when it appears
that an actual or impending discharge presents or threatens an imminent or
substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons or the environment,
interferes with the operation of the POTW, violates any pretreatment limits
§ 313-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-35
1:209
or conditions imposed by this Part 2 or any discharge permit issued
pursuant to this Part 2. Any discharger notified of the suspension of sewage
disposal system service and/or the discharger's discharge permit, shall
cease all discharges immediately upon notification or as directed by the City
Manager. In the event of failure of the discharger to comply voluntarily with
the suspension order within the specified time, the City Manager may take
whatever steps are deemed necessary to eliminate the discharge, including
cessation of City water service and/or shall commence judicial proceedings
for injunctive relief immediately thereafter to compel the discharger's
compliance with such order. The City Manager may reinstate the discharge
permit and/or sewage disposal system service and terminate judicial
proceeding upon presentation of proof by the discharger of the elimination
of the noncomplying discharge or conditions creating the threat of
imminent or substantial danger as set forth above.
§ 313-36. Administrative orders.
Whenever the City Manager determines that any discharger has violated
this Part 2, or any other applicable laws or regulations which the City is
authorized to enforce, the City Manager may issue administrative orders
of the type listed below, as deemed appropriate under the circumstances.
Multiple orders may be issued simultaneously or in combination as a single
order with respect to a single discharger.
A. Cease and desist order. A cease and desist order directs the
noncomplying user to cease illegal or unauthorized discharges
immediately or to terminate its discharge altogether. Any person who
uses, applied for use and/or is connected to the POTW under this Part 2
shall be deemed to have consented to inspection pursuant to this
section, including entrance upon that person's property by the City
Manager to take such steps as are necessary to eliminate the discharge
should the discharger fail to comply with such order. Such order shall
be final and in effect until a hearing, if requested by the user, is
conducted and a final decision is made by the City Manager. A written
request for such hearing shall be made within 10 calendar days after
receiving the order.
B. Consent order. An agreement between the City Manager and the user
which may contain compliance schedules, requirements for
reimbursement of the City for damages and costs incurred or remedial
actions, fines and administrative penalties and signatures of the City
Manager and the authorized representative. A consent order shall
address every identified and potential deficiency in the user's
compliance status at the time of the order.
C. Show-cause order. Where the violation is not corrected by timely
compliance, the City Manager may order any discharger who causes or
allows prohibited conduct, to show cause before the City Manager why
a proposed permit revocation action should not be taken. A written
notice shall be served on the discharger by personal service, or by
certified mail, return receipt requested, specifying the time and place of
§ 313-35 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-36
1:210
§ 313-37. Publication of noncompliance list.
A list of all dischargers in significant noncompliance for the NPDES
Industrial Pretreatment Program annual reporting period shall be published
by the City in The Grand Rapids Press by the date specified in the City's
NPDES permit.
§ 313-38. Performance bond or liability insurance.
Pursuant to the City Manager's authority to issue administrative orders,
the City Manager may require a noncomplying industrial or commercial
user to post a performance bond sufficient to cover expenses which might
reasonably be incurred as a result of future violations. Industrial or
commercial users who have, in the prior two years, been responsible for
causing an upset at the POTW, may be required to obtain liability insurance
sufficient to cover the reasonable costs of restoring the POTW in the event
of another such incident. These requirements may be made conditions of
the significant industrial user discharge permit.
§ 313-39. Judicial proceedings.
Following the entry of any order by the City Manager with respect to
the conduct of a discharger contrary to the provision of this Part 2, the
attorney for the City or his/her designee may, following the authorization of
such actions by the City Manager, commence a civil infraction or criminal
action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the court of competent
a hearing to be held by the City Manager regarding the violations,
the reasons why the enforcement action is to be taken, the proposed
enforcement action and directing the discharger to show cause before
the City Manager why the proposed enforcement action should not
be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served no less than 10
days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent, officer
or authorized representative of the discharger. The proceedings at the
hearing shall be considered by the City Manager who shall then enter
appropriate orders with respect to the alleged improper activities of
the discharger. Appeal of such order may be taken by the discharger in
accordance with applicable state law.
D. Compliance order. A compliance order directs the discharger to achieve
compliance by a date specified in the order. Compliance orders require
industrial users to develop management practices, spill prevention
programs and related POTW industrial pretreatment program
requirements.
E. Stop-work order. Where there is work in progress that constitutes
causes or is causing a violation of any provision of this Part 2, the City
Manager may issue a stop-work order to prevent further violations or
damage.
F. Administrative fines, as specified in § 313-42 of this Part 2.
§ 313-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-39
1:211
jurisdiction. Such relief may include, but is not limited to, the following:
injunctive relief against an industrial user for failure to comply with
pretreatment standards and requirements; suit for damages and costs to
the City, including legal expense; municipal civil infraction actions and
criminal prosecution seeking fines and imprisonment as permitted by
§ 313-42 of this Part 2 and state law.
§ 313-40. Right of appeal.
Any discharger shall have the right to request, in writing, an interpretation
or ruling by the City Manager on any matter covered by this Part 2 and shall
be entitled to a prompt written reply.
§ 313-41. Operating upsets.
A. Any discharger experiencing an upset in operations which places the
discharger in a temporary state of noncompliance with this Part 2, or a
discharge permit issued pursuant hereto, shall inform the City Manager
immediately upon becoming aware of the upset. The City Manager shall
make a determination whether this discharge can continue. Upon the
City Manager allowing the discharge to continue, a written follow-up
report thereof shall be filed by the discharger with the City Manager
within five days. The report shall include:
(1) A description of the upset, the cause thereof and the upset's impact
on a discharger's compliance status;
(2) The duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and time of
noncompliance, and, if noncompliance continues, the time by which
compliance is reasonably expected to occur; and
(3) All steps taken, or to be taken, to reduce, eliminate and prevent
recurrence of such upset or other conditions of noncompliance.
B. A documented and verified operating upset shall be an affirmative
defense to any enforcement action brought by the City Manager against
a discharger for any noncompliance with this Part 2 or any discharge
permit issued pursuant hereto, which arises out of violations alleged to
have occurred during the period of the upset. It will not, however, be a
defense to an action for damages to the POTW or to persons, property
or natural resources caused by the upset. An upset will be considered
"documented and bona fide" only if the discharger complies with
§ 313-41A and with 40 CFR 403.16(c) and Rule 323.2315 of the MAC. In
any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
C. The user shall have controlled production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility, until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This
requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the
§ 313-39 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-41
1:212
primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or
fails.
D. Conditions necessary for the demonstration of a bona fide upset. A user
who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of an operating upset
shall demonstrate through properly signed, contemporaneous
operating logs or other relevant evidence that:
(1) An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause of the upset;
(2) The facility was, at the time, being operated in a prudent and
appropriate manner and in compliance with applicable operation
and maintenance procedures;
(3) The user notified the City Manager immediately upon becoming
aware of the upset; and
(4) A written submission, containing the following information, was
provided within five days of commencement of the upset:
(a) A description of the discharge and cause of noncompliance;
(b) The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance
was expected to continue; and
(c) Steps taken to reduce eliminate and prevent recurrence of the
noncompliance.
§ 313-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-41
1:213

ARTICLE VII
Violations and Penalties
§ 313-42. Criminal and civil liability.
A. Any person in violation of this Part 2, or of any permit issued pursuant
hereto, or standards, rules and regulations, any order of the City
Manager issued pursuant to those rules and regulations or this Part 2,
shall be: a) subject to the municipal civil infractions provisions of
Chapter 170 of the City Code, which the City Manager is authorized to
enforce citations pursuant thereto; and b) for such violations not
covered by the civil infractions provisions of Chapter 170 of the City
Code, shall, if convicted, be subject to a criminal penalty of up to $500
per day or imprisonment for 90 days or both such penalty and
imprisonment. Each act of violation and every day upon which any
violation is permitted or suffered to exist shall constitute a separate
violation and shall be subject to a separate penalty. The City Manager
may issue a notice of violation calling for corrective action prior to
issuing a citation pursuant to Chapter 170 of the Code. In the case of a
conviction pursuant to this section of a discharger who is not a natural
person, any officer or director of a corporation, any officer or partner of
a partnership, or any member of a limited liability company, or any
officer or owner of a proprietorship is hereby deemed to be a proper
person to serve any term of imprisonment imposed by the court as a
result of the conviction.
B. In addition to, and expressly not in lieu of the foregoing, any discharger
who violates this Part 2, or any permit issued pursuant hereto, or the
standards, rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this Part 2, or any
order of the City Manager issued pursuant to this Part 2, shall be
subject to civil penalties, and to the payment of any damages and costs
which may be awarded, by any court of competent jurisdiction.
C. In addition to any applicable state and federal penalties:
(1) Any person who:
(a) At the time of a violation knew or should have known that a
pollutant or substance was discharged contrary to any
provision of this Part 2, or contrary to any notice, order, permit,
decision or determination promulgated, issued or made by the
City Manager under this Part 2; or
(b) Intentionally makes a false statement, representation, or
certification in an application for, or form pertaining to, a
permit, or in a notice, report, or record required by this Part 2,
or in any other correspondence or communication, written or
oral, with the POTW regarding matters regulated by this Part
2; or
§ 313-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-42
1:215
(c) Intentionally falsifies, tampers with, or renders inaccurate any
sampling or monitoring device or record required to be
maintained by this Part 2; or
(d) Commits any other act that is punishable under state law by
imprisonment for more than 90 days;
(2) Shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a
fine of $500 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for up to 90
days, or both at the discretion of the court.
§ 313-42 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-42
1:216
ARTICLE VIII
Records Retention
§ 313-43. Retention required; period of retention.
A. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this Part 2 shall retain,
and make available for inspection and copying, all records of
information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by
this Part 2, any additional records of information obtained pursuant to
monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such
requirements, and documentation associated with BMP established
under § 313-19C(5). Records shall include the date, exact place,
method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the
samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the
analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of
such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at
least three years.
B. Any and all records which pertain to matters which are the subject of a
notice of violation, administrative order, show-cause hearing, or any
other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the City pursuant
to this Part 2, shall be retained and preserved for five years, or until all
enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with
respect to any and all appeals have expired, whichever is later.
§ 313-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-43
1:217

ARTICLE IX
Miscellaneous Credits and Adjustments
§ 313-44. Removal credits.
Where applicable, the City Manager may elect to initiate a program of
removal credits as part of this Part 2 to reflect the POTW's ability to remove
pollutants in accordance with 40 CFR 403.7 and Rule 323.2313(a) of the
MAC.
§ 313-45. Adjustment of standards.
The City Manager may elect to adjust categorical pretreatment standards
to reflect the presence of pollutants in the discharger's intake water, in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.15 and Rule 323.2313(c) of the MAC.
§ 313-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-45
1:219

ARTICLE X
User Charges
§ 313-46. Purpose of charges.
Charges for the installation of, connection to and use of the POTW are
hereby established for the purpose of recovering the cost of construction,
reconstruction, maintenance, repair, operation and replacement of the
system. Such charges shall be made in accordance with the provisions
hereinafter set forth and shall be made against all users of the system.
§ 313-47. Local collector sewer line installation charges.
A. Whenever a local collector sewer line is constructed either through a
special assessment project or as may be ordered or required by law, the
property owners for whom the line is designed to serve shall each pay
their share of the cost of installation. Similarly, any property owner
requesting service that has not previously paid his or her share of the
cost of constructing the local collector sewer shall pay those costs
before service is permitted.
B. The charge shall be known as the front foot rate and be determined by
multiplying the rate per foot by the number of feet the property owner
has fronting on the local collector sewer line from which he or she will
receive service.
(1) The front foot rate shall be as follows:
(a) Domestic user: $60.
(b) Commercial or industrial user:
[1] The same as a domestic user if the connection is made to a
local collector sewer line eight inches or less in diameter.
[2] For a line larger than eight inches diameter: $81.
(2) This charge will be annually reviewed and may change to reflect
the current average cost of installation of local collector sewer
lines.
C. If the City Commission shall determine that it is not advisable to collect
the front foot rate at the time of construction or connection (if not
previously paid at the time of construction), it may direct that the cost
be borne initially by the system and subsequently be collected from the
property owner in accordance with this section.
D. Upon completion of construction or at the time connection is requested
(if this cost has not been paid at the time of construction), the City
Engineer shall certify to the City Comptroller the cost to be charged to
the property owner. The Comptroller shall in turn certify the amount
thereof to the City Treasurer. The City Treasurer shall bill the owner of
the premises affected advising him or her that unless the amount so
§ 313-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-47
1:221
§ 313-48. Integrated sewer connection fee schedule.
billed is paid within 30 days from the date of mailing that the same
shall be presented to the City Commission at the first meeting thereof
after the expiration of 30 days for assessment against said premises
as a special assessment. In the event the bill for such installation and
connection is not paid within 30 days from the date said notice is
mailed, the City Treasurer shall report the same to the City Commission
which shall examine the same and if found by it to be correct shall
confirm it as a special assessment against the premises affected, at
which time the City Commission shall also direct the number of
installments into which the same shall be divided, and shall direct
the City Assessor to extend the same upon the tax roll as a special
assessment in the manner provided in Chapter 10 of the City Code. All
collection procedures for special assessments established in Chapter 10
of the City Code shall be applicable to assessments made hereunder.
E. In lieu of the procedure above described, such costs may be made at the
expense of the system when the owner of the premises signs a written
agreement agreeing to pay the cost upon terms agreeable to the City
Manager and that the unpaid balance shall constitute a lien upon his or
her property of the same character and subject to the same methods of
collection as prescribed for special assessments in Chapter 10 of the
City Code.
A. When a property owner or user is requested or required to connect to
the system and has not previously paid or been assessed a connection
fee, the following connection fee schedule shall apply:
2010 Integrated Sewer Connection Base Fee Schedule
Water Meter
(or equivalent) Size
(inches) Base Fees
3/4 or less $2,650
1 $4,400
1 1/2 $8,750
2 $14,050
3 $30,750
4 $55,300
6 and over $122,950
B. Except as otherwise provided in the immediately succeeding
subsection, the foregoing integrated sewer connection base fee
schedule for single-family and multifamily residential dwelling units
shall be adjusted upward and downward as follows: A single-family
residential dwelling unit located on a parcel containing 20,000 square
§ 313-47 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-48
1:222
feet shall pay the applicable integrated connection fee in accordance
with the forgoing schedule. When determining the square footage of
a residential parcel for the purposes of determining the appropriate
integrated connection fee, parcel size may be adjusted downward to
take into consideration such things as wetlands, lakes, streams and
other unusual characteristics of the parcel in accordance with policies
approved from time to time by the Utility Advisory Board. To the
extent the size of a parcel, as adjusted, is greater than or less than
20,000 square feet, 1/2 the applicable integrated connection fee will
increase or decrease by the same percentage increase or decrease in
the parcel above or below 20,000 square feet. In the case of multifamily
residential dwellings, in order to determine the size of the parcel
assigned to each dwelling unit for purposes of calculating the
integrated connection fee to be paid by each multifamily residential
dwelling unit, the total square footage of the parcel, as adjusted, on
which the multifamily residential dwelling is located shall be divided
by the total number of residential units. Notwithstanding any other
provision in this subsection, the integrated connection fee for a singlefamily
residential dwelling unit or multifamily residential dwelling unit
shall not exceed 4 1/2 times the applicable base integrated connection
fee set forth in foregoing schedule.
C. There shall be no upward adjustment in the integrated sewer service
connection fee payable for a single-family residential dwelling unit
connecting to the sewer system if: a) each of the following conditions
are met; a building permit shall have been obtained; the dwelling unit
shall have been constructed; and a certificate of occupancy shall have
been issued prior to January 1, 2000; or b) local building permit fees
have been paid to the local governmental unit prior to January 1, 2000,
for a single-family residential dwelling unit to be constructed on or after
January 1, 2000. When connecting to the sewer system, users living in
or owning such single-family residential dwelling units shall pay the
applicable base integrated connection fee set forth in the integrated
connection base fee schedule adjusted downward, if applicable, in
accordance with the immediate preceding subsection.
D. Effective January 1, 2005, and January 1 of every year thereafter, the
integrated sewer connection base fees shall be adjusted by a
percentage, which is determined by the annual change in the Consumer
Price Index (the "index") calculated as follows:
(1) The Consumer Price Index shall be that Index referred to as the
Consumer Price Index, US City Average, All Urban Consumers,
published by the United States Department of Labor-Bureau of
Statistics [(1982-84)=100]. In the event the method of determining
the index is substantially altered, the basis for determining the
annual change thereafter shall be the index which is most
comparable to the index described above.
(2) For the purpose of computing the percentage change each
calendar year, the index for the month of August for the prior
§ 313-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-48
1:223
§ 313-49. Use charges.
Rates and charges for sewage disposal service furnished by the system shall
be charged to all persons or entities within or without the City limits using
the system. Such charges shall reflect the proportionate costs of providing
the service within the City limits. For those users of the system outside the
City limits, charges shall be based on the proportionate actually incurred
costs to provide service to the users within the governmental unit in which
they reside. Each unit of government customer class in which users receive
treatment services from the system shall adopt a system of user charges in
accordance with the EPA regulations and shall incorporate such user charge
system in their appropriate ordinances or resolutions.
§ 313-50. User classes.
For the purposes of determining user charges, three user classes are
established: domestic, commercial and industrial.
§ 313-51. Determination of user charges.
The charges herein established shall be based upon the water consumption
of the user's premises, including water from public and private supplies,
as determined by this Part 2 and the standards, rules and regulations
promulgated pursuant hereto, or at the election of the user upon the actual
amount of sewage discharge into the system. However, a monthly service
charge shall be based upon the size of the water meter and as determined
by this Part 2.
calendar year shall be subtracted from the index for the
immediately preceding August. The result so obtained (if positive)
shall be divided by the index for the month of August for the prior
calendar year to obtain the percentage increase which shall be
applied to the then-current integrated sewer connection base fee
schedule to determine the new calendar year schedule.
E. The foregoing integrated connection fee is due and payable at the time
a user receives a permit to connect to the sewer system. A permit
issued by the City to connect to the sewer system shall expire 180 days
from the date the permit was issued.
F. The user receiving services who applies for a larger water meter than
the one presently in service shall pay an integrated connection fee
which is the difference in cost between the meter size in service and the
one applied for in accordance with the integrated connection fee in
effect at the time of application. No credit or rebate shall be made in the
case of application for a smaller meter size.
§ 313-48 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-51
1:224
ARTICLE XI
Rates and Charges
§ 313-52. Applicability.
§ 313-53. Rates and charges for retail users within City of Grand
Rapids.
The following rates and charges for sewage disposal service shall apply for
users within the City of Grand Rapids:
2010 Commodity Rate per 100 Cubic Feet
Domestic $3.33
Commercial $3.33
Industrial $3.33
2010 Monthly Service Charge
Water Meter Size
(inches) Charge
3/4 or less $13.70
1 21.94
1 1/4 32.54
1 1/2 45.50
2 78.48
3 172.70
4 304.61
6 or larger 681.50
§ 313-54. Surcharges and discharge authorization fees.
A. Users of the system complying with the provisions of this Part 2 shall
pay rates and charges as set forth below. Such rates and charges shall
be designed to produce revenues which are proportionate to the cost of
providing service to each user class of each customer class. Such cost
shall include, but not be limited to, operation, maintenance,
replacement, depreciation and a reasonable rate of return of the
system's investment. Any bulk user of the system must establish a
similar schedule of rates and charges to assure that its individual users
are paying proportionate share of the cost of providing service in
conformance with EPA regulations.
B. A surcharge shall also be imposed on those users who exceed normal
BOD, TSS, phosphorus and ammonia concentrations established as
provided herein.
§ 313-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-54
1:225
A. If the City Manager determines that a discharge will not cause passthrough
or interference as defined in this Part 2, industrial or
commercial users whether they are located within a retail service area
or a bulk service area shall be charged a surcharge if the concentration
of their discharge exceeds a five-day BOD of 250 mg/L, and/or TSS of
250 mg/L; or any phosphorus of 15 mg/L. That charge shall be $0.231
per pound of BOD and $0.285 per pound of TSS and $1.160 per pound
of phosphorus in excess of the above limits. In addition, all industrial or
commercial users shall be charged a surcharge for ammonia
concentrations exceeding 38 mg/L. The charge shall be $0.298 per
pound of ammonia in excess of the above limit. Discharge
concentrations of these substances and the resulting surcharge shall be
based on at least three composite samples per quarter. This sampling
shall be performed by either the City or the industrial user as
determined by the City Manager.
B. The fee for a discharge permit or discharge authorization as provided
for in § 313-22 of this Part 2 whether they are located within a retail
service area or a bulk service area shall be $400 per year and an
analytical fee based on Subsection C.
C. The following schedule of charges shall apply to any analysis which may
be required as part of a discharge permit:
Analysis
2010 Charge
(each) (except where noted
otherwise)
Metals $7
TSS $7
BOD $14
Total phosphate $13.50
pH $5
EPA 624 $60
EPA 625 $115
BTEX/MTBE $35
Sulfide $12
Oil and grease $25
Total cyanide $15
Hexavalent chromium $10
Fecal coliform $45
Labor $56.16 per hour
Sampler $35 per day
Vehicle $3.18 per hour
§ 313-54 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-54
1:226
§ 313-55. Review of rates and charges.
Annually, after the close of the fiscal year and prior to the adoption of
the system's budget, there shall be a review of rates and charges. Upon
completion of the review, a report shall be prepared and presented to the
City Commission summarizing the review and recommending rates and
charges which assure that all the costs of the system will be recovered from
customer and user classes proportionately to the cost of providing service
to them.
§ 313-56. Collection of delinquent bills.
Delinquent bills shall be collected as provided for in § 313-59 of this Part 2.
§ 313-57. Effective date.
The rates and charges set forth in §§ 313-47, 313-53 and 313-54 shall be
effective on January 1, 2010. There rates and charges are subject to annual
review.
D. These charges will be reviewed annually and may change to reflect the
current cost of providing these services.
§ 313-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-57
1:227

ARTICLE XII
Sewer Use Standards
§ 313-58. Sewer service applications and notification.
§ 313-59. Billing practices.
A. A user desiring to obtain sewer service shall make application on forms
prescribed by the City. In the event that sewer service at the premises is
continuous through a change of ownership, the new owner must file a
notification of change of ownership within 10 days. Failure to complete
an application or notification may result in discontinuance of service.
B. Whenever a condominium has a single sewer connection servicing the
premises, the account shall be made in the name of the condominium
association. Sewer service shall not be provided until the condominium
association has filed with the Water Business Office written proof that it
has the authority to enter into such an arrangement.
A. The current Water system Rules and Regulations shall be utilized for
billing practices.
B. If any meter shall fail to register properly, or if a meter reader cannot
obtain a meter reading at a premises on the regular reading date, a
billing shall be sent based upon an estimate of former consumption of
comparable quarters in preceding three years.
C. The total amount of the sewer charges shall be the amount of the bill.
The Water Business Office shall assign due dates to be no less than 15
days from the date of mailing of the bill. There shall be no discount for
early payment. In the event that the bill is not paid by the due date, a
ten-percent penalty is added to the net amount and both become due
and payable. All remittances by mail must be postmarked on or before
the due date to entitle the user to pay only the net amount. When the
due date falls on a legal holiday, Saturday or Sunday, the net amount
will be accepted on the first business day following. Failure to receive a
bill shall not entitle a customer to pay the net amount unless it can be
shown from City records that the bill was not sent.
D. If payment is not received within seven days of the due date on the bill,
a reminder notice shall be sent by first-class mail to inform the user that
the account is overdue.
E. If payment is not received or satisfactory arrangements have not been
made within 30 days of the due date on the bill, a shutoff notice will be
sent by first-class mail to inform the user that failure to respond can
result in termination of water service. This notice will also inform the
user that if he/she has a question regarding the bill he/she should
contact the Water Business Office. If payment is not received or
satisfactory arrangements have not been made within seven days after
the shutoff notice is sent to the user, the water/sewer service shall be
§ 313-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-59
1:229
shut off. No service that has been disconnected, due to nonpayment,
shall be restored until all past-due bills are paid or satisfactory
arrangements for such payment are made at the Water Business Office.
F. Whenever sewer service has been furnished to a premises and it is
determined that: i) the Water Business Office has not rendered a bill for
the service; and ii) the user has done everything normally required of
him/her, a back-bill covering the period shall be sent to the user.
However, the period covered by the back-bill shall not exceed three
years. If it is determined that the user has not done everything normally
required of him/her, a back-bill shall be sent to the owner of the
premises covering the period that service was rendered, but not to
exceed six years. The back-bill will include the monthly service charge
at the rate in effect for the period covered plus the commodity rate
times the estimated volume of sewage used based upon the best
available data. In the absence of a City water meter, the sewer volume
for domestic customers shall be the average usage per quarter for
domestic users as determined by the annual rate study. In the absence
of a City water meter, commercial and industrial customers shall be
required to install metering devices pursuant to § 313-63E of this Part
2, to accurately record waste discharge into the system. The amount of
the back-bill will be computed by using the current meter readings for
the comparable quarters.
G. When a tenant is responsible for payment of bills and a lease has been
executed containing a provision that the lessor is not liable for sewer
charges, then it shall be the responsibility of the lessor to so notify the
Water Business Office with an affidavit signed by both parties and
thereby request a waiver of the lien privilege. The affidavit must state
the pertinent provision of the lease and the expiration thereof. Upon
receipt of such notification, the POTW will waive its lien privilege and
sewer bills to the lessee within the term of the affidavit shall not be a
lien against the property. Upon expiration, a new affidavit must be
submitted to retain the lien waiver. Without such notification, sewer
bills will be a lien against the property served regardless of any lease
provisions between the parties.
H. Charges for sewage disposal service furnished to any premises within
the City shall be made pursuant to City Code and/or statute. The lien
remedy does not preclude any other remedy provided in law. Those
premises outside the City that are served by the system that have
delinquent bills will be certified to their governmental unit for
collection as provided in the contract between the City and the
governmental unit.
I. When the Water Business Office has received and approved a request
from the property owner for waiver of the lien privilege, then a cash
deposit will be required of the lessee as security for payment of all
sewer charges. Said cash deposit shall be equal to three times the
quarterly bill for sewer charges, but, in no case, less than the minimum
§ 313-59 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-59
1:230
§ 313-60. Sewer lines.
deposit schedule as referred to in Appendix I of the Water Department
Rules and Regulations.80
J. The Water Business Office shall refund a deposit and the accrued
interest thereon upon satisfactory payment by the user on or before the
due date of all proper charges for sewer service for a period of 12
successive billing quarters. For these purposes, a payment will be
considered satisfactory if made prior to the issuance of any notice of
discontinuation of service for nonpayment. Users who have established
credit by the satisfactory payment of sewer charges at one premises
shall not be required to make deposits at a subsequent premises unless
the deposit at the subsequent premises would exceed the previous one
by greater than 100%. A user who has been refunded his/her deposit
shall be required to remake a security deposit in the event that his/her
service is discontinued for nonpayment. Upon termination of service,
the deposit, with accrued interest, shall be credited to the final bill and
the balance, if any, shall be promptly returned to the user.
K. The Water Business Office will apply interest to the deposit accounts of
all users with security deposits. This interest shall be at the rate of 6%
per annum. Interest will be credited to the deposit account annually as
of June 30 and said interest will be compounded annually. Accrued
interest shall be paid at the time that the deposit is refunded. Accrued
interest shall include all annual interest credits plus interest for the
time period from the previous June 30 to the date of refund.
A. "Over sizing" shall mean the enlargement of a local collector sewer so
that the enlargement will serve as a trunk or interceptor sewer. When
the system requires a local collector sewer line to be oversized, it will
pay the cost of such over sizing as computed in the following manner:
(1) In a residential assessment district or a new residential plot, the
over-sizing share is the material difference in cost of the oversized
sewer;
(2) In a commercial, industrial or high-density residential development
assessment district, the over-sizing share is the material difference
in the cost of the oversized sewer;
(3) In cases where the larger than normal size sewer line is required
solely to provide adequate service to a local service area and is not
used as part of the larger network, then the entire cost of the
enlargement will be treated in the same manner as a normal-sized
local collector line and the system will not participate in the oversizing
cost.
80.Editor's Note: Appendix I is on file in the office of the Water Department in the City of
Grand Rapids.
§ 313-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-60
1:231
§ 313-61. Sewer laterals and appurtenances.
B. All extensions of the local collector sewer line are normally paid for by
the affected users through special assessment or front footage charges.
However, the City Commission may authorize the extension of a local
collector sewer line to serve an existing structure when the owner of
the property requests sewer service because of failure of his/her
present system causing an emergency situation and constituting a
public health hazard. The POTW, at its own expense, may extend the
sewer line to serve said properties under the following conditions:
(1) The requesting property is within 500 feet of an existing local
collector sewer line;
(2) As shown by a poll of the other properties affected by the proposed
extension, a majority of the owners having front footage are
opposed to the project;
(3) There is a reasonable expectation, as determined by the City
Commission, that newly constructed or existing properties not
presently desiring service will request such service in the
foreseeable future;
C. When an extension specified in § 313-60B is made in the instances
cited, the requesting property owner shall agree to pay the prevailing
front footage rate and other applicable charges in the City Code at such
time that the extension is made. When property owners connect who
have not shared in the expense of the sewer line extension, they shall
then pay the front footage and other applicable charges as provided in
§ 313-47 of this Part 2.
D. All new sewer lines shall conform to the City of Grand Rapids Standard
Construction Specifications and shall be a minimum of eight inches in
diameter in most residential areas and a minimum of 12 inches in
diameter in commercial, industrial or high-density residential areas.
The City Manager reserves the right to determine the minimum
acceptable sewer lateral size in those cases where drainage problems
exist.
A. The property owner shall maintain, at his/her expense, the sewer lateral
to insure continuous flow of sewage from the structure to the local
collector, trunk or interceptor sewer, and shall be responsible for
replacement of lateral sections existing between the structure and the
property line or public easement boundary. The City shall be
responsible only for the replacement of lateral sewers existing within
the street right-of-way or public easement.
B. Whenever a sewer lateral is to be extended into the premises, the
plumber or contractor may obtain location measurements from the City.
However, the City does not assume responsibility for the accuracy of
such location measurements.
§ 313-60 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-61
1:232
C. Every structure with plumbing fixtures(s) shall have an independent,
owner-maintained building sewer lateral to the local collector sewer
line when the system is available. There shall not be more than one
structure served by a single sewer lateral connection, except with
approval of the City Manager.
D. When a structure is to be demolished, satisfactory arrangements shall
be made with the City to disconnect and seal the sewer lateral at the
property line or at the point designated by the City. The lateral
disconnection shall be inspected by the City prior to sealing. Failure to
make arrangements for inspection and the proper termination of the
connection shall cause the City Manager to order excavation of the
lateral for the required inspection with all associated costs to be
assessed against the bond required by the demolition permit as
provided for in the City Code.
E. Roof drains shall not be connected to the system. The City Manager
shall order the immediate disconnection of all such connections. The
owner of the premises shall be responsible for any and all costs
associated with these disconnections and all costs including, but not
limited to, legal and inspection service required to enforce provisions of
this Part 2. Each day the owner fails to comply with such order shall
constitute a separate violation of this section. Roof drains not
disconnected shall be subject to the same monthly charge as footing
drains except the dry weather flow (DWF) and wet weather flows
(WWF) shall be calculated on an individual basis. The calculation shall
be the roof area in square feet multiplied by the normal rainfall (3.2
feet) multiplied by 7.48 gallons/cubic foot to determine the gallons per
year.
F. Footing drains shall not be connected to the system on any structure
built after 1968. The City Manager shall order the immediate
disconnection of such connections. The owner of the premises shall be
responsible for any and all costs associated with these disconnections
and all costs including, but not limited to, legal and inspection service
required to enforce provisions of this Part 2. Each day the owner fails to
comply with such order shall constitute a separate violation of this
section.
G. Basement waterproofing systems shall not be connected into the
system or discharged in such a manner as to cause a public or private
nuisance. Prior to installation of a basement waterproofing system the
property owner, or the owner's contractor, must obtain a permit from
the City. The waterproofing system must be inspected and approved by
the City prior to putting the system into operation. Given due cause, the
City Manager may order the owner to discontinue the discharge of
water from a basement waterproofing system. Each day the owner fails
to comply with such order shall constitute a separate violation of this
section.
§ 313-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-61
1:233
§ 313-62. Connection permits required.
Persons authorized shall obtain a permit for sewer lateral connection from
the City in accordance with the Plumbing Code. Said permits shall be
obtained before any such work may begin.
§ 313-63. Sewer connections.
H. Disposal of garbage into the POTW shall be permitted only after it has
been pulverized by an installed food-waste-grinder unit. Such units
shall be installed in accordance with the current Plumbing Code,
adopted by the City and enforced by the City.
I. Storm drains shall not be connected into the system or discharged in
such a manner as to cause a public or private nuisance.
A. If at any time it is found that any sewer lateral connection has been
installed contrary to or in violation of the City Code or rules or
regulations governing such installation, the City Manager shall issue an
order requiring compliance within 30 days after notification. If
compliance has not been obtained, including payment of all fees and
charges, within 30 days of the notice, the City Manager may authorize
termination of City water/sewer service until the corrections are made.
The owner or user will not have redress for any such charges occurring
because of shutoff or termination. In addition, the violator may be
subject to a municipal civil infraction action.
B. Each new sewer lateral installation, or repair of an existing sewer
lateral, shall be inspected and approved by the City prior to backfilling.
C. If a piece of property that has an existing sewer lateral serving more
than one building is subdivided into separate lots or parcels, then the
owner of the building that does not have direct sewer service must
install his/her own sewer service across his/her property or on an
easement, and the original sewer lateral to the adjoining subdivided
property must be disconnected. Any required easements shall be
recorded by the Kent County Clerk.
D. Whenever a new sewer lateral is installed or repaired by a contractor or
plumber, it shall be guaranteed to be free from any defective material or
poor workmanship, in the public right-of-way, for a period of one year
from the date of installation.
E. Wastewater metering facilities may be installed by a user or as required
by the City Manager to measure sewage discharge from the user's
premises to the sanitary sewer. All such arrangements shall be made
subject to acceptance by the City Manager, and the expense thereof,
including the installation, maintenance and operation, shall be borne by
the user. Plans and specifications for the installation of any wastewater
meter must be sealed by a Michigan licensed professional engineer and
§ 313-61 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-63
1:234
submitted to the City before actual installation begins. Such metering
facilities shall meet the following criteria:
(1) A Michigan licensed professional engineer must develop
installation plans. Drawings of the location of the primary
measuring device and the meter, the location of the meter's data
output(s) and specifications for the meter, including its
manufacturer, model and logging frequency, must be included with
the plans.
(2) A plan location map, which accurately shows where the primary
measuring device, flow meter and flow meter totalizer are located
in relation to the facility building, shall be submitted as part of the
drawings.
(3) Meter reading provisions shall be convenient meter installation
sites or any existing water meter reading location.
(4) Underground structure, and all associated piping, which contain
the primary measuring device and the meter shall be installed in
accordance with the Plumbing Code.
(5) If possible, the primary measuring device must be located in an
open or non-permitted confined space. The recording device may
not be located in a confined space.
(6) The meter must include a data logger capable of recording and
displaying continuous flow data. The data must be inspected each
business day, by the user, with documentation of the inspection in
the form of the inspector's initials, date and time. All data records
must be maintained for a minimum of three years and be available
for inspection by the City.
(7) The meter installation must be inspected and found to be
acceptable by the City Manager before any data from the meter will
be used for billing purposes.
(8) The user must maintain a meter service contract provided by the
manufacturer or the manufacturer's approved representative. The
meter shall be checked and calibrated quarterly, or as per
manufacturer's recommendation, by the service provider. All
calibration records must be maintained for a minimum of three
years and be available for inspection by the City.
(9) If failure of the meter occurs, the user must notify the City
Manager within three business days. Repairs to the meter, which
are the responsibility of the owner, must be completed within five
business days. If repairs cannot be completed within five business
days, a timetable for completion of repairs must be submitted to
the City Manager. If, as a result of failure, or suspected failure, the
sewer meter readings are in dispute, the volume of water indicated
§ 313-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-63
1:235
§ 313-63.1. When effective.
This Part 2 shall be effective 30 days after its adoption.
§ 313-63.2. Publication.
After its adoption and before its effective date, this Part 2 or a summary
thereof, as permitted by law, shall be published by the Township Clerk
in The Grand Rapids Press, a newspaper of general circulation in the
Township.
by the City's water meter during the disputed time will be used as
the wastewater volume.
(10) The City, at its discretion, must be allowed to inspect the meter and
all records pertaining to the meter. At the City Manager's
discretion, the acceptance of any wastewater metering device and/
or data may be revoked.
§ 313-63 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-63.2
1:236
Part 3
[AdoptedW1-a2t7er-1 A9n8d8 SBeywOerrd L. iNneo .C 1o-n1n9e8c8ti(oPna rCt h8a0r gOefs The 1991
Compilation Of Ordinances)]
ARTICLE XIII
Payment of Connection Charges
§ 313-64. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this Part 3 to provide for the payment by benefiting
property owners of their share of the cost of installation of local water
distribution lines and local collector sewer lines. It is recognized that some
property owners will not require construction of local water distribution
lines and sanitary sewer local collector lines for water and/or sewer service,
but will connect directly to an intermediate water transmission line or trunk
sewer lines. It is the further purpose of this Part 3 to require that such
property owners pay a share of the cost of installation of such intermediate
water transmission lines and trunk sewer lines related to their direct use
of such lines. This Part 3 sets forth the basis for establishing and collecting
such connection charges.
§ 313-65. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of the
terms used in this Part 3 shall be as follows:
COMMERCIAL USER — A person whose premises are used to offer services
and/or products such as retail and wholesale stores, service stations,
restaurants, schools, churches, nursing homes, theaters and governmental
buildings.
DOMESTIC USER — A person whose premises are domiciles for single- or
multiple-family use.
INDUSTRIAL USER — A person who operates a manufacturing or
processing facility which is engaged in producing a product.
INTERCEPTOR SEWER LINES — Those sewer lines whose basic function is
to collect wastewater from two or more separate trunk sewer lines and to
transport such wastewater for treatment.
INTERMEDIATE WATER TRANSMISSION LINES — Those pipes whose
basic function is to transport water to one or more local service areas, but
also may provide local service to abutting property.
LOCAL COLLECTOR SEWER LINES — Those lines which collect
wastewater only from the abutting property within one local service area
and empty into a trunk or interceptor sewer line.
LOCAL WATER DISTRIBUTION LINES — Those pipes which service only
the abutting property within only one local service area.
§ 313-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-65
1:237
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, public or private
corporation, public agency, or instrumentality or any other entity receiving
water and/or sewer service.
PREMISES — Each lot or parcel of land or building having any connection
to the Township water system and/or Township sewer system.
PRIMARY WATER TRANSMISSION LINES — Those pipes whose only
function is to transport water to and through one or more local service
areas.
TOWNSHIP — Cascade Charter Township.
TOWNSHIP SEWER SYSTEM — Those interceptor sewer lines, trunk sewer
lines, local collector sewer lines, and related lift stations and other
appurtenances installed at the expense of the Township regardless of
whether such lines, lift stations, and other appurtenances are owned by the
Township or the City of Grand Rapids.
TOWNSHIP WATER SYSTEM — Those intermediate water transmission
lines, primary water transmission lines, local water distribution lines and
related pumps and other appurtenances installed at the expense of the
Township whether such lines, pumps, and other appurtenances are owned
by the Township or the City of Grand Rapids.
TRUNK SEWER LINES — Those lines whose basic function is to collect
wastewater from one or more local service areas and transport such
wastewater to an interceptor sewer line, but also may provide local service
to abutting property.
§ 313-66. Connection to Township water or sewer system.
Provided the Township has available to it sufficient water distribution and/
or sewage treatment capacity, the owner of a premises may connect to
a local water transmission line or directly to an intermediate water
transmission line of the Township water system for water service and to a
local collector sewer line or trunk sewer line of the Township sewer system
for sewer service, provided that the owner pays the applicable charges
prescribed by this Part 3 and other applicable rates and charges including
the appropriate Township transmission (hookup) charge prescribed by Part
4 of this chapter. A premises may not connect directly to a primary water
transmission line or interceptor sewer line.
§ 313-67. Connection charges.
A. Connection to local water distribution lines and local sewer collector
lines paid through special assessments. Whenever a local water
distribution line or local collector sewer line is financed and
constructed through a special assessment project, the benefiting
property owners for whom the line is designed to serve shall pay their
share of the cost of constructing and financing the line as established in
the special assessment roll confirmed by the Township Board prior to
construction.
§ 313-65 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-67
1:238
B. Connection to local water distribution lines and local sewer collector
lines paid for by Township. If the Township shall finance the
construction of a local water distribution line or local collector sewer
line other than by a special assessment project, any property owner
requesting service who has not paid his share of the costs of
constructing the local water distribution line or local collector sewer
line shall pay those charges as established by resolution of the
Township Board before service is permitted. The charges to each
benefiting property shall be determined by allocating the total costs of
constructing and financing the line to the properties for whom the line
was designed to serve in proportion to the benefit received or to be
received by each property in the same manner as a special assessment
project. If, during the calendar year that service is first available, the
benefiting property owner either pays the charges in full or enters into
an agreement to pay the charges in installments in accordance with
§ 313-68 hereof, he shall pay the charges as established by Township
Board resolution. If, however, the benefiting property owner elects to
pay the charges in full or enter into an agreement to pay the charges in
installments after the calendar year service was first available, he shall
pay an additional amount equal to 5% of the charges established by
Township Board resolution for each year or portion thereof that has
elapsed after the year service was first available. This additional
amount is intended to reflect the Township's carrying cost of financing
the line up to the time arrangements are made by a benefiting property
owner to repay his proportionate share of the cost of the line.
C. Connection to intermediate water transmission lines and trunk sewer
lines. Whenever a property owner requests to connect directly to an
intermediate water transmission line of the Township water system
and/or a trunk sewer line of the Township sewer system installed at the
expense of the Township, he shall pay those charges as established by
resolution of the Township Board before service is permitted. Annually,
these charges will be reviewed and may be revised to reflect the
current average cost of constructing and financing local water
distribution lines and local sewer collector lines. If, during the calendar
year that service is first available, the benefiting property owner either
pays the charges in full or enters into an agreement to pay the charges
in installments in accordance with § 313-68 hereof, he shall pay the
charges as established by Township Board resolution. If, however, the
benefiting property owner elects to pay the charges in full or enter into
an agreement to pay the charges in installments after the calendar year
service was first available, he shall pay an additional amount equal to
5% of the charges established by Township Board resolution for each
year or portion thereof that has elapsed after the year service was first
available. This additional amount is intended to reflect the Township's
carrying cost of financing the line up to the time arrangements are
made by a benefiting property owner to repay his proportionate share
of the cost of the line. When an owner of a large undeveloped parcel of
property requests water or sewer service to only a portion of the
property, the determination of the connection charge shall be based on
§ 313-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-67
1:239
§ 313-68. Payment of charges by installment.
Whenever a property owner is required to pay the charges established
pursuant to § 313-67B or C of Part 3 of this chapter, he may, upon execution
of a written agreement with the Township, pay said charges in equal annual
installments plus interest. Interest on such charges shall accrue from the
date of execution of the written agreement. The Township Board shall
establish from time to time by resolution the maximum number of annual
installments permitted and the annual interest rate to be applied. Although,
the maximum number of annual installments and annual interest rate may
change by resolution of the Township Board, the number of installments
and interest rate shall remain unchanged for those property owners who
entered into an installment agreement prior to the effective date of such
change. Accrued interest shall be due and payable at the same time an
annual installment is due. All payments received shall be first applied to
accrued interest, next to penalties, if any, and then to the unpaid principal
balance of connection charges. In the event an installment plus interest is
not paid within one month of the due date, a penalty shall be charged and
added to the past-due installment equal to 1% of the principal amount of
the installment due for each month or fraction thereof after the first month
that the installment remains unpaid. The written agreement between the
property owner and the Township shall provide that any unpaid balance
including interest and penalties shall constitute a lien upon the property of
the same character and subject to the same methods of collection as special
assessments.
the average building parcel size which for the purposes of this Part
3 shall be 125 feet frontage by 150 feet depth, unless the parcel to
be effectively serviced shall be of larger or smaller frontage, in which
case that frontage shall be used to determine the connection charges. If
the original parcel is subsequently subdivided and service is requested
to additional portions thereof, the applicant requesting such additional
service shall pay a connection charge based upon the average size
building parcel unless the parcel to which service is to be effectively
extended is of a larger or smaller frontage, in which case that frontage
shall be used to determine the connection charge for such service.
Connection charges shall be paid to the Township by property owners
who subsequently request service to a portion of the original parcel
until the entire frontage of the original parcel has paid its proportionate
share of the costs.
§ 313-67 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-68
1:240
Part 4
[Adopted 1W-8a-t1e9r 9A0nBd ySOewrde.r NTroa. n1s-m19i9ss0io(nP aCrht a8r1g Oesf The 1991
Compilation Of Ordinances)]
ARTICLE XIV
Payment of Hookup Charges
§ 313-69. Illegal connection; connection permits.
It shall be unlawful for any person, property owner or contractor, or agent
thereof, to connect a private sewer and/or water line to any existing
municipal water and/or sewer line in the Township of Cascade without
a connection permit having first been issued for such connection by the
Charter Township of Cascade (hereinafter, "Township"). No connection
permit shall be issued until the applicable transmission (hookup) charges
have been paid in full.
§ 313-70. Imposition of charges.
§ 313-71. Schedule of Transmission (Hookup) Charges.
The Township Board has by resolution adopted a Schedule of Transmission
(Hookup) Charges, and may amend such schedule from time to time by
resolution.
A. At such time as any request is made to connect to any existing sanitary
sewer or water line in the Township and the applicant or property
owner has not previously paid or been assessed a transmission
(hookup) charge for water and/or sewer for such connection or
connections, a transmission (hookup) charge shall be paid to the
Township.
B. Where a building permit is required for a new structure or an existing
structure being revised and where such structure is required by
Township ordinance to connect to public sewer and/or water facilities,
said building permit application shall also be deemed to be an
application for water and/or sewer connection, provided that municipal
water and/or sewer service is available or can be made available at that
location within a reasonable time period (considered not to be greater
than one year from the date of the issuance of the building permit). No
building permit shall be issued under this subsection until a connection
permit has also been issued.
C. All transmission (hookup) charges shall be paid in full prior to the
issuance of a building permit.
D. Transmission (hookup) charges shall be in addition to any charges or
fees made or levied by the City of Grand Rapids under the Grand Rapids
Cascade Charter Township Retail Sewer/Water Agreement, as amended
from time to time.
§ 313-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-72
1:241
§ 313-72. Charges for miscellaneous uses.
The Township Engineer and/or staff shall determine the applicable category
and applicable fee formulas on an individual or per-case basis for residential
equivalent assignments involving uses other than those listed in the current
Transmission (Hookup) Charge Schedule. Such charges shall be determined
by fee formulas as established by the Cascade Charter Township Board
pursuant to § 313-71 hereof.
§ 313-73. Place of payment.
Transmission (hookup) charges shall be paid to the Township at the Cascade
Charter Township offices.
§ 313-74. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part 4 shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction of such violation, shall be punished
by a fine of not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment for a period of not to
exceed 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, at the discretion of the
court. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed
a separate offense.
§ 313-72 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-74
1:242
Part 5
[Adopted 3-12-1990 BSyewOerdr .C Noon.n 3e-c1t9io9n0s(Part 83 Of The 1991
Compilation Of Ordinances)]
ARTICLE XV
Connection Requirements
§ 313-75. Title.
This Part 5 shall be known and may be cited as the "Cascade Charter
Township Sanitary Sewer Connection Ordinance."
§ 313-76. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this Part 5 to require connection to available public
sanitary sewer in order to preserve the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the Township.
§ 313-77. Definitions.
As used in this Part 5, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AVAILABLE PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER — A public sanitary sewer located
in a right-of-way, easement, highway, street, or public way which crosses,
joins, or abuts upon the property and passing not more than 300 feet at the
nearest point from a structure in which sanitary sewage originates.
STRUCTURE IN WHICH SANITARY SEWAGE ORIGINATES or STRUCTURE
— A building in which toilet, kitchen, laundry, bathing, or other facilities
which generate water-carried sanitary sewage are used or are available for
use for household, commercial, industrial, or other purposes.
§ 313-78. Sewer connection required. [Amended 12-22-1993 by Ord.
No. 17-1993]
A. The following structures situated within the Township shall be
connected to an available public sanitary sewer in the Township within
180 days after date of official notice to do so:
(1) All commercial structures;
(2) All industrial structures;
(3) All multifamily residential structures;
(4) All single-family residential structures constructed after the
effective date of this Part 5 where there is available a public
sanitary sewer prior to initial occupancy of the structure.
B. All existing single-family residential structures, including such
structures which are covered by an existing special assessment district
for public sanitary sewer, shall be required to connect to an available
§ 313-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-78
1:243
§ 313-79. Violations and penalties.
The violation of this Part 5 may be legally enjoined or otherwise abated
in any manner provided by law. In addition, any owner of a structure
who fails to comply with the provisions of this Part 5 shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not more than $500
or shall be imprisoned in the County Jail for not more than 90 days, or
both. Each and every day in which a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
public sanitary sewer when there is failure of the private septic system
as determined by the Kent County Health Department, but no
connection shall be required prior to that time.
§ 313-78 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-79
1:244
Part 6
[Adopted 3-12-1990 BWyaOterrd .C Noon.n 4e-c1t9io9n0s(Part 84 Of The 1991
Compilation Of Ordinances)]
ARTICLE XVI
Connection Requirements
§ 313-80. Title.
This Part 6 shall be known and may be cited as the "Cascade Charter
Township Public Water Connection Ordinance."
§ 313-81. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this Part 6 to require connection to available public
water in order to preserve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of
the Township.
§ 313-82. Definitions.
As used in this Part 6, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AVAILABLE PUBLIC WATER — Public water pipes located in a right-of-way,
easement, highway, street, or public way which crosses, joins, or abuts upon
the property and passing not more than 300 feet at the nearest point from
a structure.
STRUCTURE — A building in which kitchen, laundry, bathroom, or other
facilities which use water are located.
§ 313-83. Public water connection required. [Amended 12-22-1993
by Ord. No. 18-1993]
A. The following structures situated within the Township shall be
connected to available public water in the Township within 180 days
after date of official notice to do so:
(1) All commercial structures;
(2) All industrial structures;
(3) All multifamily residential structures;
(4) All single-family residential structures constructed after the
effective date of this Part 6 where there is available public water
prior to initial occupancy of the structure.
B. All existing single-family residential structures, including such
structures which are covered by an existing Special Assessment District
for public water, shall be required to connect to available public water
when there is failure of their private well, as determined by the Kent
§ 313-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-83
1:245
§ 313-84. Violations and penalties.
The violation of this Part 6 may be legally enjoined or otherwise abated
in any manner provided by law. In addition, any owner of a structure
who fails to comply with the provisions of this Part 6 shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not more than $500
or shall be imprisoned in the County Jail for not more than 90 days, or
both. Each and every day in which a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
County Health Department, but no connection shall be required prior
to that time.
§ 313-83 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 313-84
1:246
Chapter 325
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 299. Zoning — See Ch. 400.
§ 325-1. Purpose and intent.
This chapter is intended to keep public streets, sidewalks, trailways and
similar public ways within the Township clean and free of debris and
obstacles to travel, not only for purposes of sanitation and cleanliness, but
also to prevent hazards to motorists and pedestrians. The Township Board
hereby determines that the adoption and enforcement of this chapter is
essential to the public health, safety and welfare of both the residents and
property owners within Cascade Charter Township.
§ 325-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ROAD — The paved or other hard surface improved portion of a public
road right-of-way or easement (and the shoulders thereof, whether paved or
unpaved), as as any paved or concrete public sidewalk, public walking or
bicycle trail, or similar public way. This definition shall also include any and
all portions of a road.
§ 325-3. Prohibited activities.
No person shall engage in any of the following uses, activities, or practices:
A. Cause dirt, gravel, clay, mud, rocks, stones, sand, or similar materials to
be deposited, left or spilled onto or within a road pursuant to an
excavation, building, or other project or activity and fail to fully remove
such materials from the road and completely clean up the portion of the
road involved within 24 hours of the time that the materials have been
deposited or spilled onto or within the road.
B. Intentionally dump, store, or deposit dirt, clay, gravel, mud, stones,
rocks, sand, or a similar material onto or within a road.
C. Place, push, or deposit debris, brush, branches, or similar materials
onto or within any road.
D. Dump or deposit leaves, debris, earth, or other obstacle or impediment
in a drainagecourse or drain within a public road right-of-way or other
public drainage easement without first having obtained a permit or
written approval from the Township Manager (or such other official as
§ 313-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-3
1:247
§ 325-4. Exemptions.
The prohibitions contained in § 325-3 of this chapter shall not apply in the
following situations:
§ 325-5. Issuance of zoning or building permit; deposit.
No zoning permit or building permit shall be issued for a building or
construction project for any property within the Township if the Township
determines that the project may cause soil erosion and sedimentation
spillover onto or into any street or adjoining property or may cause drainage
problems. Such determination will be made by the Zoning Administrator
and will be based on site conditions such as slope, soil types, drainage,
and the scope of the project. If it is determined by the Township that
such factors may cause erosion or unreasonable damages, the Township
shall require a security deposit of $200 to ensure compliance with all of
the requirements of this chapter during construction and cleanup. Such
deposit shall be in addition to any other applicable fees or deposits. Once
a certificate of occupancy has been issued or the project or construction is
otherwise complete, the Township shall refund the deposit less any monies
retained by the Township to remedy any violations of this chapter.
§ 325-6. Violations and penalties; stop-work orders.
is designated by the Township Board) for such dumping, depositing or
use.
E. Alter or recontour the land on a lot or parcel in such a way that it causes
flooding of any neighboring or nearby lots or properties.
F. Cause or allow construction debris, trash, scraps or other items
associated with a building or construction project or site to blow,
migrate or be deposited upon the lot or parcel of another without
permission of the property owner of the other lot or parcel.
A. Any use or activity by a government employee or official, municipal
firefighter, or police officer while engaged in his or her official
government duties.
B. With regard to § 325-3C of this chapter, where brush and branches are
allowed to be deposited within a public road right-of-way pursuant to an
official program by the local unit of government that picks up and
lawfully disposes of such brush or branches.
A. Violations.
(1) A violation of this chapter constitutes a municipal civil infraction.
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to
comply with any provision of this chapter, or any amendment
thereof, or any person who knowingly or intentionally aids or abets
another person in violation of this chapter, shall be in violation of
this chapter and shall be responsible for a civil infraction. The civil
§ 325-3 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 325-6
1:248
Chapter 329
SOLICITORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 170. Noise — See Ch. 264.
§ 329-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SOLICITOR, SOLICIT, SOLICITATION and SOLICITING — Any person
(which includes any individual, firm, entity, corporation, association,
partnership, limited liability company, or organization or its agents)
traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, vehicle, or other conveyance,
from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or
attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, products, or merchandise or
personal property of any nature; or attempting to collect monies, pledges or
fine for a municipal civil infraction shall be not less than $100 for
the first offense and not less than $200 for subsequent offenses, in
the discretion of the court, in addition to all other costs, damages,
expenses and remedies provided by law. For purposes of this
section, "subsequent offense" means a violation of the provisions
of this chapter committed by the same person within 12 months
of a previous violation of the same provision or another provision
of this chapter or similar provision of this chapter for which said
person admitted responsibility or was adjudged to be responsible.
Each day during which any violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
(2) A violation of this chapter shall also be a nuisance per se. Any and
all remedies available to the Township shall be deemed cumulative
and not mutually exclusive.
B. Stop-work orders. Upon notice from the Zoning Administrator, Building
Inspector or Building Official (or such other official as is designated by
the Township Board) that any work, use or activity is being conducted
contrary to the provisions of this chapter, such work, activity or use
shall be immediately stopped. Such stop-work order shall be in writing
and shall be given to the owner of the property involved as shown on
the most recent property tax records for Cascade Charter Township.
Any person who shall continue to engage in any activity or use on the
structure, land or building involved after having been served with a
stop-work order (except such work as that person is directed by the
Township to be performed to remove a violation) shall be in violation of
this chapter.
§ 325-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-1
1:249
donations for political, charitable, or religious causes; or for services to be
furnished or performed, whether or not such person has, carries or exposes
for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether such person is
collecting advance payments on such sales or not; or any similar action or
activities including those persons who call themselves transient merchants,
canvassers, hucksters, peddlers or other similar terms. These activities
shall also include any actions involving the canvassing or petitioning for
a public office, public official, political candidate, election, or millage or
public initiative or referendum affecting public policy.
§ 329-2. Permit required.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall solicit or act
as a solicitor within Cascade Charter Township without first obtaining a
permit from the Township. No permit shall be granted by the Township
without prior approval by the Township Manager, Township Clerk, or such
other Township official as is appointed by the Township Board. All permits
shall expire 30 days after their issuance, unless renewed by the Township
Manager, Township Clerk, or such other Township official as is appointed by
the Township Board.
§ 329-3. Background check.
Except for persons or solicitors that are partially exempt from this chapter
pursuant to § 329-5 hereof, a background check will be performed by the
Township for each individual solicitor before a Township permit is issued.
The Township Board shall determine what type of background check shall
be performed for different categories or types of solicitors based on the
potential threat to the public health or safety.
§ 329-4. Permit application; issuance or denial.
A permit application may be obtained during normal business hours at the
Township offices.
A. Such application shall be fully completed and filed with the Township at
least 10 days prior to the date of commencement of the solicitation. The
application shall contain all of the following information:
(1) Name of the applicant and the names of those persons soliciting for
the applicant. Each individual solicitor must supply, in person, a
copy of their driver's license or other form of government-issued
photo personal identification to the Township.
(2) Permanent home address and local address of the applicant (and
for all other persons soliciting for the applicant).
(3) A brief description of the nature of the organization and business
and the goods or services to be sold or solicited.
(4) If the solicitor is otherwise employed, the applicant shall provide
the name and address of such employer.
§ 329-1 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 329-4
1:250
§ 329-5. Partial exemptions.
The following persons and organizations are exempt from the permitting
requirements under this chapter when engaging in the type of solicitation
(5) The length of time for which the solicitation within the Township is
desired.
(6) The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold or
orders taken for the sale are manufactured or produced, where
such products or goods are located at the time said application is
filed and the proposed method of delivery.
(7) A statement as to approximate locations within the Township where
the solicitations will take place.
(8) Each solicitor shall sign a statement as to whether or not that
solicitor (or the solicitor's firm, corporation or organization) has
been convicted of a felony and/or misdemeanor theft or fraud
offense and if so, stating the nature of the offense. A "yes" response
is cause for denial of a permit for the applicant.
B. If the requirements of this chapter are met, the Township shall prepare
and issue a solicitor permit to each person soliciting under the
applicant. The permit shall be displayed by the solicitor at all times
while soliciting in the Township and shall be presented by that person
to any resident requesting identification prior to any attempt to sell a
product or service to that resident.
C. Any denial of a permit application shall be made in writing specifying
the reasons for denial within three business days of the filing of a
complete application. The Township may take a longer period of time in
determining whether a particular permit will be issued if the
background check cannot be completed in a shorter period of time. Any
appeal of a permit denial pursuant to this chapter must be in writing
signed by the applicant and filed with the Township within 10 days of
the date of the denial. All appeals shall be decided by the Township
Board.
D. A solicitor permit shall be denied by the Township if any of the following
standards are not met:
(1) Every requirement of this chapter will be met.
(2) The safety of the residents of the Township will be protected.
(3) Neither the applicant nor the applicant's employer or organization
has been convicted of either a felony of any kind or a misdemeanor
involving solicitation, theft or fraud.
(4) Neither the applicant nor the applicant's organization is delinquent
in any real or personal property taxes or other indebtedness to the
Township.
§ 329-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-5
1:251
mentioned below in this § 329-5. Except as otherwise provided in this
§ 329-5, all solicitation that is exempt under this section shall still comply
with the general regulations and prohibitions of § 329-7 of this chapter.
§ 329-6. Permit fee and deposit.
A. Solicitation for religious or charitable institutions. Any person who is
soliciting for a school, state or federally registered or recognized
charity, a nonprofit corporation or entity, or a church or religious
society shall not be required to obtain any permit or pay any permit fee
pursuant to this chapter. The solicitor for any group listed under this
Subsection A must still register with the Township and provide the
Township Manager, Township Clerk, or other Township official
designated by the Township Board with a name, address, and a copy of
their driver's license before such exempt solicitation can occur within
the Township. The applicant shall provide evidence [i.e., 501(c)(3)
status, etc.] to the Township that the organization for which the
solicitation is taking place is a school, recognizable charitable,
nonprofit or religious organization.
B. Political speech or canvassing. Solicitations exclusively intended to
canvass or petition for a public official, political candidate, public policy
or initiative being promoted for purposes of a public referendum,
initiative, millage, or election does not require any registration, permit
or permit fee.
C. Any person exempt from the permitting requirements of this chapter by
virtue of state or federal law.
A. Except for exempt permits specified in § 329-5 hereof, a nonrefundable
permit fee in the amount of $25 shall be paid to the Township at the
time that an application for a solicitor permit is filed with the Township.
If a permit renewal application is filed with the Township within the
thirty-day time period before the date that the original permit expires, a
nonrefundable renewal permit fee in the amount of $15 shall be paid to
the Township. If an application for a permit renewal is not filed with the
Township (together with the applicable fee) prior to the time the
original permit expires, the application shall be deemed an application
for a new solicitor permit, and the nonrefundable permit fee to be paid
to the Township at the time of application shall be $25.
B. Each solicitor shall also make a deposit of $25 per permit to the
Township. This deposit will be refunded upon return of the permit to the
Township. Return of the permit to the Township must be made in person
by each individual permittee. All permits must be returned within five
days of their expiration or the deposit of $25 shall be forfeited. The
above fees and deposit may be modified by the Township Board by
resolution from time to time.
§ 329-5 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 329-7
1:252
§ 329-7. General regulations and prohibitions.
Unless otherwise expressly permitted by another Township ordinance or
mandated by state law:
A. Where a permit is required by this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any
person to engage in solicitation without having first obtained a permit
issued by the Township. The permit must be visible at all times while
the solicitor is engaged in the act of soliciting and shown upon the
request of any person.
B. While conducting any act of solicitation, the solicitor shall clearly
display the permit and photo identification that correctly identifies who
the solicitor is and for whom the solicitor is working.
C. No persons shall stop or park a vehicle at the curb for the purpose of
solicitation from a vehicle, nor shall any person establish a stand, booth
or other place of business on any street curb, sidewalk, public right-ofway
or other public place. This subsection shall not be interpreted to
prohibit parking for the purpose of making deliveries or for the purpose
of consummating a business transaction with persons waiting at the
curb, provided that the solicitor leaves the curb immediately after the
deliveries or transactions are completed.
D. No person shall operate or maintain any stand, structure, building or
vehicle on or near to any public right-of-way for the service of
customers or for solicitation in such a manner that requires customers
to stand, occupy or congregate within the public roadway.
E. No person shall conduct any solicitation so as to obstruct any street,
alley, sidewalk or driveway except as may be necessary and reasonable
to consummate a permitted transaction or at any time after having been
requested to desist by any public officer because of congested or
dangerous traffic conditions or for the public health, safety or welfare.
F. No person shall engage in any solicitation on any property against the
wish or desire of the property owner or the tenant or occupant of the
property. No person shall trespass on the property of another while
engaged in solicitation.
G. No person engaged in any solicitation shall visit any dwelling or
residence without an appointment where a sign is displayed stating "No
peddlers," "No solicitors," "No sales," "No trespassing" or words of
similar meaning.
H. No person engaged in solicitation shall, while in a stationary position in
any public place, shout, cry out his goods or merchandise, nor blow any
horn, ring any bell, broadcast or play any sound, or use any other
similar device to attract the attention of the public.
§ 329-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-7
1:253
§ 329-8. Permit revocation; appeal.
I. No persons shall travel from door to door, street to street, or place to
place within the Township while engaged in solicitation except between
the following hours:
(1) April 1 to September 30: 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
(2) October 1 to March 31: 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
J. No person engaged in any solicitation shall enter upon a property or
call upon any occupant of the property by any means of entry or contact
other than approaching the front entry door of the premises. No person
engaged in any solicitation shall enter into an attached or detached
garage or a rear yard, unless invited by the occupant of the premises.
K. A permit under this chapter shall not be granted to any person owing
any real or personal property taxes or other indebtedness to the
Township or who contemplates using any personal property on which
personal property taxes are owing in the operation of a business.
L. No person shall block or impede the passage of the person being
solicited.
M. No person who is soliciting shall follow the person being solicited after
that person has objected to the solicitation or asked the solicitor to
leave.
N. No person shall use any threatening or offensive behavior or language
when engaging in solicitation.
A. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the
Township. Such revocation shall be done by the Township Manager,
Township Clerk, or such other Township official as is appointed by the
Township Board.
B. The applicant may appeal the revocation of the applicant's permit
revoked pursuant to this chapter by filing an appeal with the Township
Board. Any such appeal must be in writing (signed by the applicant) and
filed with the Township within 10 days of the date of the permit
revocation.
C. When considering whether or not to revoke a permit issued under this
chapter (or during an appeal of such a revocation), the Township official
or body involved shall consider the following:
(1) Whether one or more provisions of this chapter have been violated.
(2) Whether continued solicitation by the applicant pursuant to the
permit would endanger the health, safety, or welfare of Township
residents or property owners.
§ 329-7 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 329-8
1:254
§ 329-9. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 333
SOLID WASTE
(3) Whether there were material misrepresentations in the permit
application.
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall upon
conviction be deemed guilty of a criminal misdemeanor and shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $150 nor more than $500 or
imprisonment in the county jail for not to exceed 93 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, plus the costs of prosecution.
B. Repeat offenses under this chapter shall be subject to increased fines as
provided by this section below. As used in this section, "repeat offense"
means a second (or any subsequent) misdemeanor conviction of the
same requirement or other provision of this chapter committed by a
person within one year of the prior conviction. The increased fine for a
repeat offense under this chapter shall be as follows:
(1) The fine for the second conviction shall not be less than $250, plus
costs.
(2) The fine for any third or subsequent conviction shall not be less
than $500 each, plus costs.
C. Each day on which any violation of this chapter occurs or continues
constitutes a separate offense subject to separate sanctions.
D. The person or persons authorized by the Township Board shall enforce
this chapter and may issue appearance tickets for violations of this
chapter.
E. In addition to the above, the Township shall have such other remedies
as are accorded to it for a violation of this chapter pursuant to law and
equity. Any remedy or remedies pursued by the Township shall be
deemed cumulative and shall not preclude the Township from pursuing
other remedies available at law or equity.
§ 329-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-9
1:255

ARTICLE I
Waste Disposal Facilities
[Adopted 12-19-1979 by Ord. No. 6-1979 (Part 77 of the 1991
Compilation of Ordinances)]
§ 333-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Cascade Charter
Township Waste Management Ordinance."
§ 333-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — An individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, municipality, this state, a county, or any other entity or
governmental authority created by statute, which has applied for a permit
or license under this article.
ASHES — The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, refuse,
wastewater, sludge or other materials.
DISPOSAL FACILITY — A waste transfer facility, incinerator, sanitary
landfill, waste processing plant or other waste handling or disposal facility
utilized in the disposal of waste matter.
GARBAGE — Rejected food wastes including waste accumulation of animal,
fruit or vegetable matter used or intended for food or that attends the
preparation, use, cooking, dealing in, or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or
vegetable.
HAZARDOUS WASTE MATTER — Waste, or a combination of waste and
other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained
gaseous material, which, because of its quality, concentration or physical,
chemical or infectious characteristics, may cause or significantly contribute
to an increase in mortality or increase in serious irreversible illness or
serious incapacitating but reversible illness, or pose a substantial present or
potential hazard to human health or the environment if improperly treated,
stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. Hazardous waste
does not include material which is in domestic sewage discharge, or solid
or dissolved material in an irrigation return flow discharge, authorized
industrial discharge to a municipal treatment system, or industrial
discharge which is a point source subject to permits under Section 402 of
the Clean Water Act of 1977, 33 U.S.C. § 1342. A source, special nuclear,
or by-product material, as defined any the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 42
U.S.C. §§ 2011 to 2282, shall also be considered as hazardous.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — The Kent County Department of Health.
HEALTH OFFICER — A full-time administrative officer of the County
Department of Health.
§ 333-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-2
1:257
MANAGER — The Township Manager of Cascade Charter Township or his
designee.
MANIFEST — The form provided by the Department of Natural Resources,
used for identifying the quantity, composition, origin, routing and
destination of hazardous waste during its transportation from the point of
generation to the point of disposal, treatment or storage.
PERSON — An individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, association,
corporation or other entity (public or private), organized or existing under
the laws of this state or any other state, including a federal corporation.
"Person" shall also mean any municipal, county, state, or federal
government, but excluding the Township or a special district of the
Township having taxing powers.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible waste matter consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible waste, including paper, cardboard, metal containers,
yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, demolished building
materials, or litter of any kind that may be a detriment to the public health
and safety.
RULE — A rule or regulation promulgated by the Township Manager or the
Township Board pursuant to this article.
SANITARY LANDFILL — A tract of land developed, designed or operated
for the disposal of solid waste, ashes, garbage or rubbish; but excluding any
hazardous waste matter.
WASTE HAULER — A person who owns or operates a waste-transporting
unit.
WASTE MATTER — Garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator ash, incinerator
residue, street cleanings, municipal, commercial and industrial; liquids,
sludges or solids, animal waste, solid waste, or hazardous waste matter; but
does not include human body waste or liquid.
WASTE PROCESSING PLANT — A tract of land, building or unit, or
appurtenance of a building or unit, or a combination of land, buildings and
units that is used or intended for use for the processing of waste matter or
the separation of material for salvage or disposal, or both.
WASTE TRANSFER FACILITY — A tract of land, building or unit, or
appurtenance of a building or unit, or combination of land, buildings and
units that is used or intended for use in the rehandling or storage of waste
matter incidental to the transportation of the waste matter. A waste transfer
facility does not include any tract of land if the waste containers have an
individual volume of 10 cubic yards or less, and do not have an aggregate
total volume of 65 cubic yards or less, and are used only for the storage of
waste matter generated on the site.
WASTE TRANSPORTING UNIT — A container, which may be an integral
part of a truck, or other piece of equipment used for the transportation of
waste matter.
§ 333-2 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 333-3
1:258
§ 333-3. Plans or methods for disposal of waste matter.
The Township Manager is directed to encourage only plans, operations or
methods for the disposal of waste matter which are environmentally sound,
which maximize the utilization of valuable resources, and which encourage
resource conservation, including source reduction and source separation,
and which protect the general health, safety and welfare of the Township.
§ 333-4. Disposal facility operating permit application.
A. A person shall not establish a disposal facility without an operating
permit from the Township Manager. A person proposing the
establishment of a disposal facility shall make application for a permit
to the Township Manager on a form provided.
B. The application for an operating permit shall contain the name and
residence of the applicant, the location of the proposed disposal facility,
and other information considered necessary by the Township Manager.
The application shall be accompanied by a fee that has been established
on a graduated scale from $100 to $700. The Township Manager shall
establish by rule the scale for determining the initial permit application
fee. The scale shall be based on the site size, projected waste volume,
and nature of the waste. The application shall be accompanied by a
determination of existing hydrogeological conditions specified in a
hydrogeological report and monitoring programs consistent with rules
promulgated by the Township Manager or Board for groundwater and
surface water quality standards, an environmental assessment, an
engineering plan, and a contamination contingency plan.
C. Before the submission of an application for an operating permit for a
new waste disposal facility, the applicant shall request an advisory
analysis from the Health Officer. However, the applicant may file an
application for a permit not less than 15 days after the request and
notwithstanding an analysis result.
D. Upon receipt of an operating permit application, the Township Manager
shall:
(1) Immediately notify the Township Board and Planning Commission,
the local soil erosion and sedimentation control agency, the
designated regional solid waste management planning agency, and
the Health Department.
(2) Publish a notice in a newspaper having major circulation in the
Township. The required published notice shall contain a map
indicating the location of the proposed disposal facility and shall
contain a description of the proposed action and the location where
the complete application package may be reviewed and copies may
be obtained.
(3) Indicate in the public, departmental, and agency notice that the
Township Board shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
§ 333-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-4
1:259
§ 333-5. Permit renewal; monitoring program.
disposal facility if a written request is submitted by the applicant,
a resident or an agency. The request shall be validated by the
Township Clerk. This public hearing shall be held after the
Township Manager makes a preliminary review of the application
and all pertinent data and before an operating permit is issued.
(4) Review the plans of the proposed operation to determine if it
complies with this article and the rules promulgated under this
article. The review shall be made by persons qualified in
hydrogeology and waste matter engineering. Written
recommendations by these persons shall be received before a
permit is issued. If the site review, plan review, and the application
meet the requirements of this article and the rules promulgated
under this article, the Township Manager shall issue the permit
which may contain stipulations specifically applicable to the site
and operation. An expansion, enlargement or alteration of a facility
beyond the specified areas indicated in the original application
shall constitute a new proposal for which a new permit is required.
E. The Township Manager shall make a final decision on a permit
application within 120 days after the Township Manager receives the
complete application. If the Township Manager fails to make a final
decision within 120 days, the permit shall be considered issued.
A. An operating permit shall expire one year after the date of issuance. A
permit that has expired may be renewed upon payment of a permit
renewal fee and submission of any additional information the Township
Manager may require. The permit renewal application fee shall be
established on a graduated scale from $100 to $700. The Township
Manager shall establish the criteria by rule for determining the permit
renewal application fee. The criteria shall be based on site size,
projected waste volume, and nature of the waste.
B. A person who operates an existing disposal facility shall make a renewal
permit application in the same manner as a new disposal facility.
C. Upon receipt of a permit renewal application for an existing disposal
facility, the Township Manager shall inspect the site and determine if
the proposed continued operation complies with this article and the
rules promulgated under this article.
D. The Township Manager shall not permit a disposal facility to operate
without an approved hydrogeologic monitoring program. The Township
Manager shall use the results of this information in conjunction with
other information about the facility to determine a course of action
regarding further permitting of the disposal facility consistent with this
article. In deciding a course of action, the Township Manager shall
consider, at a minimum, the health hazards, environmental
degradation, and other public or private alternatives. The Township
§ 333-4 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 333-5
1:260
§ 333-6. Covenant upon land; inspector; restoration of area.
§ 333-7. Suspension of permit.
Manager may suspend a permit or issue a timetable (schedule) for
compliance for the disposal facility or operation, including specific
remedial measures. This timetable shall not extend beyond nine
months.
A. At the time of initial permitting of a disposal facility, an instrument
which imposes a restrictive covenant upon the land involved shall be
executed by all of the owners of the tract of land upon which the
disposal facility is to be located. The instrument imposing the
restrictive covenant shall be filed for record by the Township Manager
in the office of the Register of Deeds of Kent County. The covenant shall
state that the land described in the covenant has been or will be used as
a disposal facility, and that neither the property owners, their servants,
agents or employees, nor any of their heirs, successors, lessors, or
assigns shall ever engage in any filling, grading, excavating, drilling,
development or mining on the property without authorization of the
Township. In giving authorization, the Township shall consider the
original design, type of operation, material deposited, and the stage of
decomposition of the fill. Authorization shall not be unreasonably
withheld.
B. The Township Manager may require that a Township Inspector be
present at the disposal facility during operating hours. This inspector
shall have the authority to reject any load of waste matter which does
not conform to the operating permit. A copy of each manifest shall be
retained by the inspector for Township use. The inspector shall make
investigations as necessary to ensure compliance with the operating
permit.
C. Reasonable and necessary costs of providing this inspector shall be
billable to the disposal facility operator.
D. Upon closing, the operator of a disposal facility shall restore the area to
a natural and presentable state and erect a monument declaring the
nature and amount of the waste matter deposited.
A. The Township Board may suspend a permit after reasonable notice and
hearing if the Township finds that the disposal facility is not being
operated in accordance with the permit, this article, the rules
promulgated under this article, or the statutes of the State of Michigan
or rules promulgated thereunder by any agency of the state.
B. The Township Manager may issue a cease and desist order to a person
who constructs or operates a disposal facility without a permit, or to a
person who holds a permit but constructs or operates a disposal facility
that is not in accordance with the permit, this article, the rules
§ 333-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-7
1:261
§ 333-8. Disposition of fees.
Fees collected under this article shall be deposited with the Township
Treasurer who shall keep the deposits in a special fund designated for use
in carrying out the purposes of this article.
§ 333-9. Disposal of solid waste upon individual's own land.
This article shall not be construed to prohibit an individual from disposing
of solid waste matter from the individual's own household upon the
individual's own land as long as the disposal does not create a nuisance
or hazard to health or conflict with other laws, ordinances, rules or
regulations. Waste matter accumulated as a part of an improvement or the
planting of privately owned farmland may be disposed of on the property
if the method used is not injurious to human life or property and does not
unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property or conflict
with other laws, ordinances, rules or regulations.
§ 333-10. Surety bond.
Before the Township Manager may issue an operating permit or a waste
hauler license, the applicant shall submit to the Township Manager a surety
bond in favor of the Township to assure operation in accordance with this
article, and rules promulgated under this article, according to the following
schedule:
promulgated under this article, or the statutes of the State of Michigan
or rules promulgated thereunder by any agency of the state.
C. The Township Manager shall specify, in writing, the reasons for
suspension of an operating permit, specifying those particular sections
of ordinances, rules promulgated under this article, or state statute or
rule which may be violated by the disposal facility operator and in what
manner the violation occurred.
A. A surety bond in form approved by the Township Attorney submitted for
a hazardous waste disposal facility shall be in an amount equal to
$400,000 per acre of disposal facility, but not less than $2,000,000.
Each bond shall be renewed to provide assurance for the maintenance
of the disposal facility for a period of 100 years after the disposal facility
is closed.
B. A surety bond in form approved by the Township Attorney for any other
disposal facility shall be in an amount equal to 1/4 of 1% of the
construction cost of the facility, but shall not be less than $400,000 and
shall be continued in effect for a period of 50 years after the disposal
area is closed.
C. Each waste hauler shall submit a bond in form approved by the
Township Attorney for spill containment and restoration in the amount
of $500,000 per waste transporting unit.
§ 333-7 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 333-11
1:262
§ 333-11. Licensing waste haulers; seal of compliance; spill
containment.
§ 333-12. Suspension of license or seal.
A. Each waste hauler using these facilities shall be licensed by the
Township. Each solid waste transporting unit shall be required to carry
a seal indicating compliance. The application for a waste hauler license
shall be made before operation to the Township Manager on a form
provided by the Township Manager and shall be accompanied by a
license application fee of $50, plus $20 for each waste transporting unit
operated by the applicant. Each additional waste transporting unit
placed in service after a new or renewal application has been filed for
the current year shall be reported to the Township Manager on a form
provided by the Township Manager and shall be accompanied by the
appropriate unit fee before the Township Manager may issue the
required seal. If an applicant meets the requirements of this article and
the rules promulgated under this article, the Township Manager shall
issue a license.
B. The Township Manager shall inspect the waste transporting units in
accordance with procedures established by the Township Manager and
shall determine that the waste hauler has, in operation, only waste
transporting units which are proper and hygienic, that the waste
transporting units do not leak or contribute to litter, and that all waste
is delivered to disposal facilities permitted under this article. A license
shall expire one year after the date of issuance. A seal furnished by the
Township Manager shall designate the year for which the waste hauler
license was issued and shall be affixed to each waste transporting unit.
A private individual may transport the individual's own household waste
in the individual's own vehicle without being licensed. This section shall
not be construed to release the private individual from a duty to provide
proper constraints to prevent the discharge of waste from the vehicle
during transport.
C. Each waste hauler shall operate according to a plan approved by the
Township Manager. This plan shall, at minimum, specify operating
routes and spill containment procedures.
D. A waste transporting unit used for garbage, industrial or domestic
sludges, or other moisture laden materials shall be watertight and
constructed, maintained and operated to prevent improper discharging
or leaking. Solid waste transporting units used for hauling other solid
waste shall be designated and operated to prevent littering or any other
nuisance.
E. In the event of a spill, the waste hauler shall immediately notify the
Township Manager and initiate containment procedures. The waste
hauler shall be liable for damages resulting from a spill.
§ 333-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-12
1:263
§ 333-13. Consistency with waste management plan.
The Township Manager shall not issue a permit for the operation of a waste
disposal area unless the facility complies with, and is consistent with, an
approved waste management plan, if such a plan exists.
§ 333-14. Location of sanitary landfill; public hearing.
A sanitary landfill shall not be operated if the sanitary landfill will be located
within 10,000 feet of a runway of an airport licensed and regulated by
the Michigan Aeronautics Commission until the construction, location, and
operation are approved by the Township Board. The Township Board shall
review for hazards to the safety of aircraft as affected by the construction,
location and operation of the sanitary landfill. In all such cases, the
Commission shall set a date for a public hearing and give reasonable
notice to all affected parties whom the Township Board has reason to
believe are interested in the project. Following the hearing, all affected or
interested parties shall be given a reasonable time to file their objections
to the granting of a permit in writing. After the hearing, the Township
Board shall, by resolution, set forth its findings on the issuance or denial
of the application. The Township Board shall set forth its reasons for the
recommendation in the resolution.
§ 333-15. Rules implementing article.
A. A waste hauler who violates this article shall be subject to the penalties
provided in this article. After proper notice and hearing, a license or
seal issued under this article may be suspended by the Township Board.
B. Pending the suspension of a license or a seal, as provided for in
Subsection A of this section, the Township Manager, a Health Officer, or
a law enforcement officer may order a waste transporting unit out of
service if the unit does not satisfy the requirements of this article or the
rules promulgated under this article. Continued use of a waste
transporting unit ordered out of service is a violation of this article.
A. Not more than six months after the effective date of this article, the
Township Manager shall submit to the Township Board rules which
contain design and operational standards for waste transporting units
and disposal facilities and otherwise implement this article. The rules
shall include standards for hydrogeologic investigations, monitoring,
liner materials, leachate collection and treatment, if applicable,
groundwater separation distances, environmental assessments,
methane gas control, soil erosion, sedimentation control, groundwater
and surface water quality, noise and air pollution, the use of floodplains
and wetlands, and other pertinent factors.
B. The Township Manager may undertake or contract for studies or
reports necessary or useful in the preparation of these rules.
§ 333-12 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 333-16
1:264
§ 333-16. Intent.
This article is not intended to prohibit the private sector from doing
business in waste disposal and transportation. This article is intended to
only encourage waste disposal and transportation businesses when in
compliance with the requirements and intent of this article, within areas
properly zoned for such under the Cascade Charter Township Zoning
Ordinance.81
§ 333-17. Violations and penalties.
A. Any violation of this article may result in suspension and/or revocation
of any license or permit issued hereunder. Further, the Township
Manager may institute an action in the appropriate court to enjoin any
continued violation, together with a claim for damages for injuries to
persons or property by reason of such violation. Further, the Township
may hold the principal and any surety on any bond hereunder in default
and collect any such damages pursuant to the provisions of such bonds.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be
responsible for a criminal misdemeanor, subject to the penalties in
Chapter 40, Article IV, Penalties for Misdemeanors and Municipal Civil
Infractions.82
81.Editor's Note: See Ch. 400, Zoning.
82.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 333-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-17
1:265
Chapter 342
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cable service rates — See Ch. 135.
Multichannel video providers — See Ch. 258.
Franchises — See Ch. A410.
§ 333-17 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 333-17
1:266
ARTICLE I
Telecommunications Provider Right-of-Way Management
[Adopted 11-13-2002 by Ord. No. 18-2002; amended in its entirety
1-8-2014 by Ord. No. 3-2014]
§ 342-1. Purpose.
The purposes of this article are to regulate access to and ongoing use
of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their
telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and
welfare and to exercise reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in
compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-
Way Oversight Act [Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002 (MCLA § 484.3101
et seq.)]; Public Act 143 of 2012 (MCLA § 125.3514); and Section 6409 of
the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012 (47 U.S.C. § 1455),
and other applicable law, and to ensure that the Township qualifies for
distributions under the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and
complying with the Act.
§ 342-2. Conflict.
Nothing in this article shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict
with the Act; Public Act 143 of 2012 (MCLA § 125.3514); Section 6409 of
the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012 (47 U.S.C. § 1455);
or other applicable law.
§ 342-3. Definitions.
A. The terms used in this article shall have the following meanings:
ACT — The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act [Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002 (MCLA § 484.3101
et seq.)], as amended from time to time.
PERMIT — A nonexclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this
article to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way
in the Township for its telecommunications facilities.
TOWNSHIP — Cascade Charter Township.
TOWNSHIP BOARD — The Township Board of Cascade Charter
Township or its designee. This section does not authorize delegation
of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the
Township Board.
TOWNSHIP MANAGER — The Township Manager or his or her
designee.
B. All other terms used in this article shall have the same meaning as
defined or as provided in the Act, and MCLA § 125.3514, including
without limitation the following:
§ 342-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-3
1:267
AUTHORITY — The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications
Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to the Act.
CO-LOCATE — To place or install wireless communications equipment
on an existing wireless communications support structure or in an
existing equipment compound. "Co-location" has a corresponding
meaning.
EQUIPMENT COMPOUND — An area surrounding or adjacent to the
base of a wireless communications support structure and within which
wireless communications equipment is located.
MPSC — The Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department
of Consumer and Industry Services and shall have the same meaning as
the term "Commission" in the Act (MCLA § 484.3102).
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, association,
governmental entity, or any other legal entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — The area on, below, or above a public
roadway, highway, street, alley, easement, or waterway. Public right-ofway
does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way.
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES or FACILITIES — The equipment
or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires,
switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can
generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide
telecommunication services or signals. Telecommunication facilities or
facilities do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas,
equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and
miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial
mobile service as defined in Section 332(d) of Part I of Title III of the
Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C.
§ 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR
20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communications
device.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER, PROVIDER and
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES — Those terms as defined in
Section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179,
MCLA § 484.2102. "Telecommunication provider" does not include a
person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed
commercial mobile radio service as defined in Section 332(d) of Part I of
the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C.
§ 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47
CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication
device. For the purpose of the Act and this article only, a provider also
includes all of the following:
A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications
service.
(1)
Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns
telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way.
(2)
§ 342-3 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 342-3
1:268
§ 342-4. Permit required.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT — The set of equipment
and network components used in the provision of wireless
communications services, including, but not limited to, antennas,
transmitters, receivers, base stations, equipment shelters, cabinets,
emergency generators, power supply cables, and coaxial and fiber optic
cables, but excluding wireless communications support structures.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A structure
that is designed to support, or is capable of supporting, wireless
communications equipment, including a monopole, self-supporting
lattice tower, guyed tower, water tower, utility pole, or building.
(3) A person providing broadband internet transport access service.
A. Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, or in MCLA
§ 125.3514, a telecommunications provider using or seeking to use
public rights-of-way in the Township for its telecommunications
facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit pursuant to this article.
B. Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on
an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with the Act
and MCLA § 125.3514. A telecommunications provider shall file one
copy of the application with the Township Clerk, one copy with the
Township Manager, and one copy with the Township Attorney.
Applications shall be complete and include all information required by
the Act, including without limitation a route map showing the location
of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with the
Act.
C. Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that
any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application
contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is
exempt from Michigan's Freedom of Information Act, Act No. 442 of the
Public Acts of 1976 [See MCLA § 15.231 et seq. as amended, pursuant
to Section 6(5) of the Act,; MCLA § 484.3106(5).], the
telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face
of each map.
D. Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, an application
shall be accompanied by a one-time nonrefundable application fee in
the amount of $500.
E. Administratively complete application. After an application for a permit
is filed with the Township, the Township shall determine whether the
application is administratively complete. Unless the Township proceeds
as provided under Subsection F below, the application shall be
considered to be administratively complete when the Township makes
that determination or 14 business days after the Township receives the
application, whichever is first.
§ 342-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-4
1:269
F. Additional information. As set forth above, the Township may request
an applicant to submit such additional information which the Township
Manager deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall
comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines
for such additional information established by the Township Manager. If
the Township and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of
additional information requested by the Township, the Township or the
applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in Section 6(2) of the Act.
[See MCLA § 484.3106, Sec. 6, (2).] If, before the expiration of the
fourteen-day period under Subsection E, the Township notifies the
applicant that the application is not administratively complete,
specifying the information necessary to make the application
administratively complete, or notifies the applicant that the fee
required to accompany the application has not been paid, specifying the
amount due, the running of the fourteen-day period under Subsection E
is tolled until the applicant submits to the Township the specified
information or fee amount due. The notice shall be given in writing or
by electronic notification.
G. Response deadline. The Township shall approve or deny the application
not more than 60 days after the application is considered to be
administratively complete and not more than 90 days after the
application is considered to be administratively complete if special land
use approval is required. If the Township fails to timely approve or deny
the application, the application shall be considered approved and the
Township shall be considered to have made any determination required
for approval.
H. Previously issued permits. Pursuant to MCLA § 484.3105, Sec. 5, (1),
authorizations or permits previously issued by the Township under
Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, {Act No. 179 of
the Public Acts of 1991, as amended, [MCLA § 484.2251 (repealed by
P.A. 2002, No. 48, effective 11-1-2002)]}, and authorizations or permits
issued by the Township to telecommunications providers prior to the
1995 enactment of Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications
Act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this article.
With the exception of fee provisions, which are now covered by 2002
P.A. 48, all provisions of Part 16, Ordinance No. 3-1998 of the
Compilation of Ordinances of Cascade Charter Township (old Part 16),
shall remain in full force and effect with regard to telecommunications
providers that obtained permits or consent agreements prior to
November 1, 2002.
I. Existing providers. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, within 180 days
from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a
telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-ofway
in the Township as of such date, that has not previously obtained
authorization or a permit under Section 251 of the Michigan
Telecommunications Act, Act No. 179 of the Public Acts of 1991, as
amended, and MCLA § 125.3514, shall submit to the Township an
§ 342-4 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 342-4
1:270
application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this
article. Pursuant to MCLA § 484.3105, Sec. 5, (3), a
telecommunications provider submitting an application under this
subsection is not required to pay the application fee of $500 required
under Subsection D above. A provider under this subsection shall be
given up to an additional 180 days to submit the permit application if
allowed by the Authority for good cause, as provided in Section 5(4) of
the Act. (MCLA § 484.3105, Sec. 5, (4)).
J. Special land use approval of wireless communications equipment
described above is expressly conditional only on the wireless
communications equipment's meeting the requirements of other local
ordinances and of federal and state laws before the wireless
communications equipment begins operation.
K. Permit not required. As set forth in MCLA § 125.3514, wireless
communications equipment that meets all of the following conditions is
a permitted use of the property and is not subject to special land use
permit requirements or other approval by the Township:
(1) The wireless communications equipment will be co-located on an
existing wireless communications support structure or in an
existing equipment compound;
(2) The existing wireless communications support structure or existing
equipment compound is in compliance with the local unit of
government's zoning ordinance or was approved by the
appropriate zoning body or official for the local unit of government;
(3) The proposed co-location will not do any of the following:
(a) Increase the overall height of the wireless communicationssupport
structure by more than 20 feet or 10% of its original
height, whichever is greater; or
(b) Increase the width of the wireless communications support
structure by more than the minimum necessary to permit colocation;
or
(c) Increase the area of the existing equipment compound to
greater than 2,500 square feet;
(4) The proposed co-location complies with the terms and conditions of
any previous final approval of the wireless communications support
structure or equipment compound by the appropriate zoning body
or official of the local unit of government.
L. If the wireless communications equipment meets all of the conditions as
set forth above in Subsection K, such that the use is a permitted use of
the property not subject to special land use permit requirements or
other approval by the Township, the applicant must still file with the
Township a copy of the proposed site plan(s) and/or route map(s) for the
§ 342-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-4
1:271
§ 342-5. Issuance of permit.
wireless communications equipment no less than 30 days prior to the
installation of such equipment and must provide the Township with a
copy of the site plan and/or route map(s) within 90 days after installing
the equipment if the equipment, as installed, does not comport with
the previously disclosed site plan on file with the Township. (See also
§ 342-8 below.) This subsection shall not be interpreted to contradict
the Act or MCLA § 125.3514, however is a means of insuring that the
Township has a copy of all wireless equipment site plans for wireless
equipment installed within the Township.
M. Non-co-located equipment and wireless support structures. For special
land use approval for wireless communications equipment that is not
co-located on an existing structure or compound, or for a request to
install a wireless support structure, the same fourteen-day
administrative window applies as outlined in Subsections E and F
above; however, the period for approval or denial is 90 days, not 60
days.
A. Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for
a permit is delegated to the Township Manager. Pursuant to MCLA
§ 484.3115(3) and MCLA § 125.3514, and as set forth above, the
Township Manager shall approve or deny an application for a permit
within 60 days (or 90 days under § 342-5, Subsection M) from the date
the telecommunications provider's application for a permit for access to
and usage of a public right-of-way within the Township is deemed
administratively complete. The Township Manager shall notify the
MPSC when the Township Manager has granted or denied a permit,
including information regarding the date on which the application was
filed and the date on which the permit was granted or denied. The
Township Manager shall not unreasonably deny an application for a
permit.
B. Form of permit. If an application for a permit is approved, the Township
Manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with
or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with
MCLA §§ 484.3106, Sec. 6, (1) and (2) and 484.3115.
C. Conditions. Pursuant to MCLA § 484.3115(4), and MCLA § 125.3514,
the Township Manager may impose conditions on the issuance of a
permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications
provider's access and use of the public right-of-way.
D. Bond requirement. Pursuant to MCLA § 484.3115(3), and without
limitation on Subsection C above, the Township Manager may require
that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a
condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the
reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its
original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's
access and use.
§ 342-4 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 342-6
1:272
§ 342-6. Construction/engineering permit.
A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon,
over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the Township without first
obtaining a construction or engineering permit as required under this Code,
as amended, for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be
charged for such a construction or engineering permit.
§ 342-7. Conduit or utility poles.
In accordance with the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees required
under the Act or under this article does not give a telecommunications
provider a right to use conduit or utility poles.
§ 342-8. Route maps.
Pursuant to MCLA § 484.3106(7), a telecommunications provider shall,
within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new
telecommunications facilities in the Township, submit route maps showing
the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and
to the Township. The route maps should be in electronic format unless
and until the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with MCLA
§ 484.3106(8).
§ 342-9. Repair of damage.
A telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction
or installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or
temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the Township, as authorized
by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface
and all installations under, over, below, or within the public right-of-way and
shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition.
§ 342-10. Establishment and payment of maintenance fee.
In addition to the nonrefundable application fee paid to the Township set
forth in § 342-4D above, a telecommunications provider with
telecommunications facilities in the Township's public rights-of-way shall
pay an annual maintenance fee to the Authority pursuant to MCLA
§ 484.3108.
§ 342-11. Modification of existing fees.
In compliance with the requirements of MCLA § 484.3113(1), the Township
hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, fees charged to
telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of
the Act, relating to access and use of the public rights-of-way, to an amount
not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the Act,
which shall be paid to the Authority. In compliance with the requirements
of MCLA § 484.3113(4), the Township also hereby approves modification
of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-
§ 342-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-11
1:273
of-way within the Township's boundaries, so that those providers pay only
those fees required under MCLA § 484.3108. The Township shall provide
each telecommunications provider affected by the fee a copy of this article,
in compliance with the requirement of Section 13(4) of the Act. To the
extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the
amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with
the Act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the Township's
policy and intent and, upon application by a provider or discovery by the
Township, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error. In
all other respects, the provisions of Part 16, Ordinance No. 3-1998 of the
Compilation of Ordinances of Cascade Charter Township (old Part 16), shall
remain in full force and effect with regard to telecommunications providers
that obtained permits or consent agreements prior to November 1, 2002.
§ 342-12. Savings clause with respect to fee modification.
Pursuant to Section 13(5) of the Act, if MCLA §§ 484.3113(5) and 484.3108,
is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under
§ 342-11 above shall be void from the date the modification was made.
§ 342-13. Use of funds.
Pursuant to MCLA § 484.3110(4), all amounts received by the Township
from the Authority shall be used by the Township solely for rights-of-way
related purposes.
§ 342-14. Annual report.
Pursuant to MCLA § 484.3110(5), the Township Manager shall file an annual
report with the Authority on the use and disposition of funds annually
distributed by the Authority.
§ 342-15. Cable television operators.
Pursuant to MCLA § 484.3113(6), the Township shall not hold a cable
television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an
obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this
Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from
charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided
through broadband internet transport access services.
§ 342-16. Existing rights.
Pursuant to MCLA § 484.3104(2), except as expressly provided herein with
respect to fees, this article shall not affect any existing rights that a
telecommunications provider or the Township may have under a permit
issued by the Township or under a contract between the Township and a
telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way.
§ 342-11 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 342-17
1:274
§ 342-17. Compliance required.
The Township declares that its policy and intent in adopting this article is
to fully comply with the requirements of the Act; MCLA § 125.3514; and
Section 6409 of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012
(47 U.S.C. § 1455), and the provisions of this article should be construed in
such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The Township shall comply in all
respects with the requirements of the Act; MCLA § 125.3514; and Section
6409 of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012 (47 U.S.C.
§ 1455), including but not limited to the following:
A. Exempting certain route maps from disclosure consistent with the Act
and state law as provided in § 342-4C of this article;
B. Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit
requirements hereof, in accordance with § 342-4F of this article;
C. Approving or denying an application for a permit within 60 days (or 90
days under § 342-4, Subsection M) from the date the
telecommunications provider's application for a permit for access to
and usage of a public right-of-way within the Township is deemed
administratively complete, in accordance with § 342-5A of this article;
D. Notifying the MPSC when the Township has granted or denied a permit,
in accordance with § 342-5A of this article;
E. Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance
with § 342-5A of this article;
F. Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without
additional or different permit terms, as provided in § 342-5B of this
article;
G. Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the
telecommunications provider's access and use of the public right-ofway,
in accordance with § 342-5C of this article;
H. Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds
the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to
its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's
access and use, in accordance with § 342-5D of this article;
I. Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for
construction or engineering permits, in accordance with § 342-6 of this
article;
J. Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the Township's
right-of-way fees with a copy of this article, in accordance with § 342-11
of this article;
K. Submitting an annual report to the Authority, in accordance with
§ 342-14 of this article; and
§ 342-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-17
1:275
§ 342-18. Reservation of police powers.
Pursuant to MCLA § 484.3115(2), this article shall not limit the Township's
right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to and
ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the Township's authority to
ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
§ 342-19. Authorized Township officials.
The Township Manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as
the authorized Township official to issue municipal civil infraction citations
(directing alleged violators to appear in court) for violations under this
article as provided by the Township Code.
§ 342-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be responsible for
a municipal civil infraction, subject to the penalties in Chapter 40, Article
IV, Penalties for Misdemeanors and Municipal Civil Infractions. Nothing
in this section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the
Township in the event of a violation by a person of this article or a permit.
L. Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay
certain franchise fees, in accordance with § 342-15 of this article.
§ 342-17 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 342-20
1:276
ARTICLE II
Video Service Provider Right-of-Way Management
[Adopted 5-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3-2008]
§ 342-21. Purpose.
A. Under the Uniform Video Services Local Franchise Act,83 video service
providers may obtain a franchise to provide video services in a
municipality using a standardized, uniform form of franchise agreement
established by the MPSC. This form includes the right to use the public
right-of-way to provide such service but does not contain right-of-way
management and related provisions.
B. The municipality's cable television consent agreement with its current
cable operator predates the Uniform Video Services Local Franchise
Act and has right-of-way management and related provisions. However,
that Act states that as of January 1, 2007, "any provisions" of such an
agreement "that are inconsistent with or in addition to" the
standardized, uniform form of franchise agreement established by the
MPSC "are unreasonable and unenforceable by the franchising entity."
C. Telecommunications providers who obtain a standardized, uniform
form of franchise agreement generally will have previously obtained
from the municipality a permit under the Metro Act84 to construct and
maintain their telecommunications facilities in the public right-of-way.
Such Metro Act permits set forth the terms and conditions for such
right-of-way usage, standard forms of such permits were agreed to in a
collaborative process between municipalities and providers that was
initiated by the MPSC, and such standard forms have since been
approved by the legislature and the MPSC.
D. Because telecommunications providers typically provide video services
over combined video and telecommunications facilities, such Metro Act
permits generally provide adequate public right-of-way-related
protections for a municipality and the public when such providers are
providing video services.
E. Other video service providers, in particular new providers or existing
cable operators, may not have a Metro Act permit issued by a
municipality.
F. The Uniform Video Services Local Franchise Act and the standardized,
uniform franchise agreement require video service providers with such
an agreement to comply with all valid and enforceable local regulations
regarding the use and occupation of the public right-of-way in the
delivery of video services, including the police powers of the
franchising entity, and makes such right-of-way usage subject to the
83.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3301 et seq.
84.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3101 et seq.
§ 342-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-21
1:277
§ 342-22. Consistent interpretation.
This chapter shall be interpreted and applied so as to be consistent with
the Metro Act and corresponding provisions of the forms of the Metro Act
permit approved by the MPSC, including applicable MPSC, Metro Authority
and court decisions and determinations relating to same.
§ 342-23. Definitions.
The following definitions apply to this article:
ACT — The Uniform Video Services Local Franchise Act, being Act 480 of
the Public Acts of 2006, MCLA § 484.3301 and following, as amended from
time to time.
CABLE OPERATOR — The same meaning as in the Act.86
CLAIMS — The meaning set forth in § 342-27A.
laws of the State of Michigan and the police powers of the franchising
entity.
G. The Uniform Video Services Local Franchise Act and the standardized,
uniform franchise agreement state that franchising entities shall
provide video service providers with open, comparable,
nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral access to the public rightof-
way, and may not discriminate against a video service provider for
the authorization or placement of a video service or communications
network in the public right-of-way.
H. The Michigan Constitution reserves reasonable control of their
highways, streets, alleys and public places to local units of government,
which may exercise such authority through the use of their police
powers.
I. The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the public health,
safety and welfare and exercise reasonable control over the public
right-of-way by regulating the use and occupation of such rights-of-way
by video service providers who lack a Metro Act permit from the
municipality. This chapter does so by setting forth terms and conditions
for such usage and occupation from the forms of Metro Act permit
approved by the MPSC and approved by the Legislature in Section 6(1)
of the Metro Act,85 thus providing open, comparable, nondiscriminatory,
and competitively neutral access to the public right-of-way and not
discriminating against a video service provider for the authorization or
placement of a video service or communications network in public
right-of-way.
85.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3106(1).
86.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3301(2)(a).
§ 342-21 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 342-23
1:278
FACILITIES — The lines, equipment and other facilities of a permittee which
use or occupy the public right-of-way in the delivery of video services in the
municipality.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — The franchise agreement entered into or
possessed by a video service provider with the municipality as required by
Section 3(1) of the Act,87 if it is the standardized, uniform form of franchise
agreement established by the MPSC.
MANAGER — The municipality's Township Supervisor or his or her
designee.
METRO ACT — The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-
Way Oversight Act, being Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002, MCLA
§ 484.3101 and following.
METRO ACT PERMIT — A permit to use the public right-of-way issued by
the municipality under Article I of this chapter which implements the Metro
Act, after a provider's application for same to the municipality as set forth
in such chapter.
METRO AUTHORITY — The same meaning as "Authority" in the Metro Act.
MPSC — The Michigan Public Service Commission and shall have the same
meaning as the term "Commission" in the Act and the Metro Act.
MUNICIPALITY — Cascade Charter Township.
PERMITTEE — A video service provider without a currently valid Metro
Act permit but with either a preexisting agreement or a currently valid
franchise agreement. Upon applying to the municipality for and then
obtaining a Metro Act permit from the municipality, a video service provider
is not a permittee and is no longer required to comply with this chapter. A
video service provider is also not a permittee and is not required to comply
with this chapter if it and the municipality enter into a voluntary franchise
agreement as described in § 342-31B of this article.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, association, partnership,
governmental entity, or any other legal entity.
PREEXISTING AGREEMENT — A cable television consent agreement
predating the effective date of the Act, January 1, 2007, which has not
expired or been terminated.88
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — The same meaning as in the Act.
STREET CONSTRUCTION AND STREET RESURFACING — The meanings
set forth in § 342-26H of this article.
VIDEO SERVICE — The same meaning as in the Act.
VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER — The same meaning as in the Act, and shall
include an incumbent video provider as referred to in Section 5(2) of the
Act.89
87.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3303(1).
88.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3301 et seq.
§ 342-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-24
1:279
§ 342-24. Compliance required; insurance exception.
All permittees shall comply with this article, except that a permittee need
not comply with the insurance provisions of § 342-28 of this article if it
is maintaining the insurance required by Section 11.J of the standardized,
uniform form of franchise agreement established by the MPSC (which in
accordance with the Act states that incumbent video providers shall comply
with the terms which provide insurance for right-of-way related activities
that are contained in its last cable franchise or consent agreement from the
franchising entity entered into before the effective date of the Act).
§ 342-25. Contacts, maps and plans.
A. Permittee contacts. The permittee shall provide the Manager with the
names, addresses and the like for engineering- and construction-related
information for the permittee and its facilities as follows:
(1) The address, e-mail address, phone number and contact person
(title or name) at the permittee's local office (in or near the
municipality).
(2) If the permittee's engineering drawings, as-built plans and related
records for the facilities will not be located at the preceding local
office, the location address, phone number and contact person (title
or department) for them.
(3) The name, title, address, e-mail address and telephone numbers of
the permittee's engineering contact person(s) with responsibility
for the design, plans and construction of the facilities.
(4) The address, phone number and contact person (title or
department) at permittee's home office/regional office with
responsibility for engineering- and construction-related aspects of
the facilities.
(5) The permittee shall at all times provide the Manager with the
phone number at which a live representative of the permittee (not
voice mail) can be reached 24 hours a day, seven days a week, in
the event of a public emergency.
(6) The permittee shall notify the municipality in writing pursuant to
the notice provisions of its franchise agreement or preexisting
agreement (whichever is then in effect) of any changes in the
preceding information.
B. Route maps. Within 90 days after the substantial completion of
construction of new facilities in the municipality, the permittee shall
submit route maps showing the location of the facilities to the
municipality, in the same manner and subject to the same provisions as
89.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3305(2).
§ 342-24 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 342-25
1:280
§ 342-26. Use of public right-of-way.
apply to telecommunications providers under Section 6(7) and 6(8) of
the Metro Act, MCLA § 484.3106(7) and (8).
C. As-built records. The permittee, without expense to the municipality,
shall, upon 48 hours' notice, give the municipality access to all as-built
maps, records, plans and specifications showing the facilities or
portions thereof in the public right-of-way. Upon request by the
municipality, the permittee shall inform the municipality as soon as
reasonably possible of any changes from previously supplied maps,
records, or plans and shall mark up maps provided by the municipality
so as to show the location of the facilities.
A. Overlashing. The permittee shall not allow the wires or any other
facilities of a third party to be overlashed to the permittee's facilities
without the municipality's prior written consent. The municipality's
right to withhold written consent is subject to the authority of the
MPSC under Section 361 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act,
MCLA § 484.2361.
B. No burden on public right-of-way. The permittee, its contractors,
subcontractors, and the facilities shall not unduly burden or interfere
with the present or future use of any of the public right-of-way. The
permittee's aerial cables and wires shall be suspended so as to not
endanger or injure persons or property in or about the public right-ofway.
If the municipality reasonably determines that any portion of the
facilities constitutes an undue burden or interference, due to changed
circumstances, the permittee, at its sole expense, shall modify the
facilities or take such other actions as the municipality may determine
is in the public interest to remove or alleviate the burden, and the
permittee shall do so within a reasonable time period. The municipality
shall attempt to require all occupants of a pole or conduit whose
facilities are a burden to remove or alleviate the burden concurrently.
C. No priority. This article does not establish any priority of use of the
public right-of-way by the permittee over any present or future
permittees or parties having agreements with the municipality or
franchises for such use. In the event of any dispute as to the priority of
use of the public right-of-way, the first priority shall be to the public
generally, the second priority to the municipality, the third priority to
the State of Michigan and its political subdivisions in the performance
of their various functions, and thereafter as between other permit,
agreement or franchise holders, as determined (except as otherwise
provided by law) by the municipality in the exercise of its powers,
including the police power and other powers reserved to and conferred
on it by the State of Michigan.
D. Restoration of property. The permittee, its contractors and
subcontractors shall immediately (subject to seasonal work
restrictions) restore, at the permittee's sole expense, in a manner
§ 342-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-26
1:281
approved by the municipality, any portion of the public right-of-way
that is in any way disturbed, damaged, or injured by the construction,
installation, operation, maintenance or removal of the facilities to a
reasonably equivalent (or, at the permittee's option, better) condition
as that which existed prior to the disturbance. In the event that the
permittee, its contractors or subcontractors fail to make such repair
within a reasonable time, the municipality may make the repair, and the
permittee shall pay the costs the municipality incurred for such repair.
E. Marking. The permittee shall mark its facilities installed after the
effective date of this article as follows: Aerial portions of the facilities
shall be marked with a marker on the permittee's lines on alternate
poles which shall state the permittee's name and provide a toll-free
number to call for assistance. Direct buried underground portions of
the facilities shall have: a) a conducting wire placed in the ground at
least several inches above the permittee's cable (if such cable is
nonconductive); b) at least several inches above that, a continuous
colored tape with a statement to the effect that there is buried cable
beneath; and c) stakes or other appropriate aboveground markers with
the permittee's name and a toll-free number indicating that there is
buried cable below. Bored underground portions of the facilities shall
have a conducting wire at the same depth as the cable and shall not be
required to provide the continuous colored tape. Portions of the
facilities located in conduit, including conduit of others used by the
permittee, shall be marked at its entrance into and exit from each
manhole and handhole with the permittee's name and a toll-free
telephone number.
F. Tree trimming. The permittee may trim trees upon and overhanging the
public right-of-way so as to prevent the branches of such trees from
coming into contact with the facilities, consistent with any standards
adopted by the municipality. The permittee shall dispose of all trimmed
materials. The permittee shall minimize the trimming of trees to that
essential to maintain the integrity of the facilities. Except in
emergencies, all trimming of trees in the public right-of-way shall have
the advance approval of Manager.
G. Installation and maintenance. The construction and installation of the
facilities shall be performed pursuant to plans approved by the
municipality. The open cut of any public right-of-way shall be
coordinated with the Manager or Manager's designee. The permittee
shall install and maintain the facilities in a reasonably safe condition. If
the existing poles in the public right-of-way are overburdened or
unavailable for the permittee's use, or the facilities of all users of the
poles are required to go underground, then the permittee shall, at its
expense, place such portion of its facilities underground, unless the
municipality approves an alternate location. The permittee may
perform maintenance on the facilities without prior approval of the
municipality, provided that the permittee shall obtain any and all
permits required by the municipality in the event that any maintenance
§ 342-26 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 342-26
1:282
will disturb or block vehicular traffic or are otherwise required by the
municipality.
H. Pavement cut coordination. The permittee shall coordinate its
construction and all other work in the public right-of-way with the
municipality's program for street construction and rebuilding
(collectively "street construction") and its program for street repaving
and resurfacing, except seal coating and patching (collectively "street
resurfacing"). The goals of such coordination shall be to encourage the
permittee to conduct all work in the public right-of-way in conjunction
with or immediately prior to any street construction or street
resurfacing planned by the municipality.
I. Compliance with laws. The permittee shall comply with all valid and
enforceable federal and state statutes and regulations and all valid and
enforceable local regulations regarding the use and occupation of the
public right-of-way, including the police powers of the municipality,
regarding the construction, installation, and maintenance of its
facilities, now in force or which hereafter may be promulgated. Before
any installation is commenced, the permittee shall secure all necessary
permits, licenses and approvals from the municipality or other
governmental entity as may be required by law, including, without
limitation, all utility line permits and highway permits. The municipality
shall not unreasonably delay or deny issuance of any such permits,
licenses or approvals. The permittee shall comply in all respects with
applicable codes and industry standards, including but not limited to
the National Electrical Safety Code (latest edition adopted by Michigan
Public Service Commission) and the National Electric Code (latest
edition). The permittee shall comply with all zoning and land use
ordinances and historic preservation ordinances as may exist or may
hereafter be amended. This section does not constitute a waiver of the
permittee's right to challenge laws, statutes, ordinances, rules or
regulations now in force or established in the future.
J. Street vacation. If the municipality vacates or consents to the vacation
of public right-of-way within its jurisdiction, and such vacation
necessitates the removal and relocation of the permittee's facilities in
the vacated public right-of-way, the permittee shall consent to the
vacation and remove its facilities at its sole cost and expense when
ordered to do so by the municipality or a court of competent
jurisdiction. The permittee shall relocate its facilities to such alternate
route as the municipality and the permittee mutually agree, applying
reasonable engineering standards.
K. Relocation. If the municipality requests the permittee to relocate,
protect, support, disconnect, or remove its facilities because of street or
utility work, or other public projects, the permittee shall relocate,
protect, support, disconnect, or remove its facilities, at its sole cost and
expense, including where necessary to such alternate route as the
municipality and the permittee mutually agree, applying reasonable
§ 342-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-26
1:283
§ 342-27. Indemnification.
engineering standards. The work shall be completed within a
reasonable time period.
L. Public emergency. The municipality shall have the right to sever,
disrupt, dig up or otherwise destroy facilities of the permittee if such
action is necessary because of a public emergency. If reasonable to do
so under the circumstances, the municipality shall attempt to provide
notice to the permittee. Public emergency shall be any condition which
poses an immediate threat to life, health, or property caused by any
natural or man-made disaster, including, but not limited to, storms,
floods, fire, accidents, explosions, water main breaks, hazardous
material spills, etc. The permittee shall be responsible for repair at its
sole cost and expense of any of its facilities damaged pursuant to any
such action taken by the municipality.
M. MISS DIG. If eligible to join, the permittee shall subscribe to and be a
member of MISS DIG, the association of utilities formed pursuant to Act
53 of the Public Acts of 1974, as amended, MCLA § 460.701 et seq., and
shall conduct its business in conformance with the statutory provisions
and regulations promulgated thereunder.
N. Underground relocation. If the permittee has its facilities on poles of
Consumers Energy, Detroit Edison or another electric or
telecommunications provider and Consumers Energy, Detroit Edison or
such other electric or telecommunications provider relocates its system
underground, then the permittee shall relocate its facilities
underground in the same location at the permittee's sole cost and
expense.
O. Identification. All personnel of the permittee and its contractors or
subcontractors who have as part of their normal duties contact with the
general public shall wear on their clothing a clearly visible
identification card bearing the permittee's name, their name and
photograph. The permittee shall account for all identification cards at
all times. Every service vehicle of the permittee and its contractors or
subcontractors shall be clearly identified as such to the public, such as
by a magnetic sign with the permittee's name and telephone number.
A. Indemnity. The permittee shall defend, indemnify, protect, and hold
harmless the municipality, its officers, agents, employees, elected and
appointed officials, departments, boards, and commissions from any
and all claims, losses, liabilities, causes of action, demands, judgments,
decrees, proceedings, and expenses of any nature (collectively
"claims") [including, without limitation, attorneys' fees] arising out of or
resulting from the acts or omissions of the permittee, its officers,
agents, employees, contractors, successors, or assigns, but only to the
extent such acts or omissions are related to the permittee's use of or
installation of facilities in the public right-of-way and only to the extent
§ 342-26 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 342-27
1:284
§ 342-28. Insurance.
of the fault or responsibility of the permittee, its officers, agents,
employees, contractors, successors and assigns.
B. Notice; cooperation. The municipality shall notify the permittee
promptly in writing of any such claims and the method and means
proposed by the municipality for defending or satisfying any such
claims. The municipality shall cooperate with the permittee in every
reasonable way to facilitate the defense of any such claims. The
municipality shall consult with the permittee respecting the defense
and satisfaction of such claims, including the selection and direction of
legal counsel.
C. Settlement. The municipality shall not settle any claim subject to
indemnification by the permittee without the advance written consent
of the permittee, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. The
permittee shall have the right to defend or settle, at its own expense,
any claim against the municipality for which the permittee is
responsible hereunder.
A. Coverage required.
(1) Prior to beginning any construction in or installation of the
permittee's facilities in the public right-of-way, the permittee shall
obtain insurance as set forth below and file certificates evidencing
same with the municipality. Such insurance shall be maintained in
full force and effect until the end of the term of its franchise
agreement or preexisting agreement (whichever is then in effect).
In the alternative, the permittee may satisfy this requirement
through a program of self-insurance, acceptable to the
municipality, by providing reasonable evidence of its financial
resources to the municipality. The municipality's acceptance of
such self-insurance shall not be unreasonably withheld.
(a) Commercial general liability insurance, including completed
operations liability, independent contractors liability,
contractual liability coverage, railroad protective coverage and
coverage for property damage from perils of explosion,
collapse or damage to underground utilities, commonly known
as "XCU coverage," in an amount not less than $5,000,000.
(b) Liability insurance for sudden and accidental environmental
contamination with minimum limits of $500,000 and providing
coverage for claims discovered within three years after the
term of the policy. Pursuant to the 2006 MPSC decision in Case
U-14720, the permittee need not comply with the preceding
sentence until such time after the effective date of this article
that it decides to place any new or existing facilities
underground within the public right-of-way in the municipality.
§ 342-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-28
1:285
(c) Automobile liability insurance in an amount not less than
$1,000,000.
(d) Workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance with
statutory limits and any applicable federal insurance of a
similar nature.
(2) The coverage amounts set forth above may be met by a
combination of underlying (primary) and umbrella policies so long
as in combination the limits equal or exceed those stated. If more
than one insurance policy is purchased to provide the coverage
amounts set forth above, then all policies providing coverage limits
excess to the primary policy shall provide drop down coverage to
the first dollar of coverage and other contractual obligations of the
primary policy, should the primary policy carrier not be able to
perform any of its contractual obligations or not be collectible for
any of its coverages for any reason during the term of the franchise
agreement or preexisting agreement (whichever is then in effect),
or (when longer) for as long as coverage could have been available
pursuant to the terms and conditions of the primary policy.
B. Additional insured. The municipality shall be named as an additional
insured on all policies (other than worker's compensation and
employer's liability). All insurance policies shall provide that they shall
not be canceled, modified or not renewed unless the insurance carrier
provides 30 days prior written notice to the municipality. The permittee
shall annually provide the municipality with a certificate of insurance
evidencing such coverage. All insurance policies (other than
environmental contamination, workers' compensation and employer's
liability insurance) shall be written on an occurrence basis and not on a
claims-made basis.
C. Qualified insurers. All insurance shall be issued by insurance carriers
licensed to do business by the State of Michigan or by surplus line
carriers on the Michigan Insurance Commission approved list of
companies qualified to do business in Michigan. All insurance and
surplus line carriers shall be rated A+ or better by A.M. Best Company.
D. Deductibles. If the insurance policies required by this article are
written with retainages or deductibles in excess of $50,000, they shall
be approved by Manager in advance in writing. The permittee shall
indemnify and save harmless the municipality from and against the
payment of any deductible and from the payment of any premium on
any insurance policy required to be furnished hereunder.
E. Contractors. The permittee's contractors and subcontractors working
in the public right-of-way shall carry in full force and effect commercial
general liability, environmental contamination liability, automobile
liability and workers' compensation and employer liability insurance
which complies with all terms of this section. In the alternative, the
permittee, at its expense, may provide such coverages for any or all its
§ 342-28 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 342-28
1:286
§ 342-29. Performance bond or letter of credit.
The municipality may require the permittee to post a bond (or letter of
credit), in the amount provided in Section 15(3) of the Metro Act, as
amended, MCLA § 484.3115(3).
§ 342-30. Removal of facilities.
contractors or subcontractors (such as by adding them to the
permittee's policies).
F. Primary insurance. The permittee's insurance coverage shall be
primary insurance with respect to the municipality, its officers, agents,
employees, elected and appointed officials, departments, boards, and
commissions (collectively "them"). Any insurance or self-insurance
maintained by any of them shall be in excess of the permittee's
insurance and shall not contribute to it (where "insurance or selfinsurance
maintained by any of them" includes any contract or
agreement providing any type of indemnification or defense obligation
provided to or for the benefit of them from any source, and includes any
self-insurance program or policy or self-insured retention or deductible
by, for or on behalf of them).
A. Removal of underground facilities. As soon as practicable after the later
of the term of its franchise agreement or preexisting agreement
expires, the permittee or its successors and assigns shall remove any
underground cable or other portions of the permittee's facilities from
the public right-of-way which has been installed in such a manner that it
can be removed without trenching or other opening of the public rightof-
way. The permittee shall not remove any underground cable or other
portions of the facilities which requires trenching or other opening of
the public right-of-way except with the prior written approval of
Manager. All removals shall be at the permittee's sole cost and expense.
For purposes of this subsection, "cable" means any wire, coaxial cable,
fiber optic cable, feed wire or pull wire.
B. Removal of aboveground facilities. As soon as practicable after the later
of the expiration of the term of its franchise agreement or preexisting
agreement, the permittee, or its successor or assigns at its sole cost and
expense, shall, unless waived in writing by the Manager, remove from
the public right-of-way all aboveground elements of its facilities,
including but not limited to poles, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes,
and lines attached to or suspended from poles.
C. Schedule. The schedule and timing of removal shall be subject to
approval by the Manager. Unless extended by the Manager, removal
shall be completed not later than 12 months following the expiration of
the later of the term of a franchise agreement or preexisting
agreement. Portions of the permittee's facilities in the public right-ofway
that are not removed within such time period shall be deemed
abandoned and, at the option of the municipality exercised by written
§ 342-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-30
1:287
§ 342-31. Other items.
§ 342-32. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-24-2012 by Ord.
No. 7-2012]
Any permittee who violates any provision of this article shall be responsible
for a municipal civil infraction, subject to the penalties in Chapter 40,
Article IV, Penalties for Misdemeanors and Municipal Civil Infractions.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the remedies available
to the Township in the event of a violation by a person of this article or a
permit.
§ 342-33. Authorized officials. [Amended 10-24-2012 by Ord. No.
7-2012]
The Manager, which includes his or her designee, is hereby designated as
the authorized official of the municipality to issue municipal civil infraction
citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) for violations of this
article, as provided in the Code of Cascade Charter Township.
notice to the permittee at the address provided for in the franchise
agreement or preexisting agreement (whichever was last in effect), title
to the portions described in such notice shall vest in the municipality.
A. Duties. The permittees shall faithfully perform all duties required by
this chapter.
B. Different terms. The Act allows local units of government and video
service providers to enter into voluntary franchise agreements that
include terms and conditions which are different from those required
under the Act or which are different from those in the standardized,
uniform form of franchise agreement established by the MPSC. The
Metro Act allows municipalities and providers to mutually agree to
Metro Act permit terms differing from those in the standard forms of
Metro Act permit approved by the MPSC. Current or prospective
permittees who desire terms different from those in this chapter, as
applied to them, should request such a voluntary franchise agreement
or a mutually agreed to Metro Act permit from the municipality.
C. Interpretation and severability. The provisions of this article shall be
liberally construed to protect and preserve the peace, health, safety and
welfare of the public, and should any provision or section of this article
be held unconstitutional, invalid, overbroad or otherwise
unenforceable, such determination/holding shall not be construed as
affecting the validity of any of the remaining conditions of this article. If
any provision in this article is found to be partially overbroad,
unenforceable, or invalid, the permittee and the municipality may
nevertheless enforce such provision to the extent permitted under
applicable law.
§ 342-30 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 342-33
1:288
ARTICLE III
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 6-2012]
§ 342-34. Removal restrictions.
Leaving snow and/or ice removed from driveways on public property, road
rights-of-way or another private property is prohibited without consent.
§ 342-35. Responsibility of owner, employee or contractor.
If a property owner or occupant has snow removed from private property
by a snow removal contractor or another party, the contractor or person
removing the snow shall have the same responsibilities as the property
owner or occupant to adhere to the regulations described in § 352-34 of this
article.
§ 342-36. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine determined in
accordance with Chapter 40 of the Code.
A. No snow or ice shall be removed from private property and deposited or
left upon any road, road right-of-way, public sidewalk or nonmotorized
pathway, driveway or parkway of another person without that person's
consent.
B. All snow removed from any driveway shall be deposited only on the
property or parkway of the same property as the driveway.
§ 342-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-36
1:289
Chapter 355
TAXATION
§ 342-36 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 342-36
1:290
ARTICLE I
Housing Tax Exemption for Elderly
[Adopted 7-9-1979 by Ord. No. 2-1979 (Part 2 of the 1991
Compilation of Ordinances)]
§ 355-1. Applicability.
The tax exemption established in Subsection (1) of Section 15(a) of Act
346 of 1966, as amended [MSA 16.114(15a)]90 shall not apply to any class
of housing projects within the Charter Township of Cascade to which
Subsection (1) of Section 15(a) of said Act applies except that class of rental
housing for lower income elderly families where financing has occurred,
directly or indirectly, under Section 8 of the United States Housing Act
of 1937, as amended by the Housing and Community Development Act of
1974, as amended.
§ 355-2. Conditions.
The tax exemption established in Subsection (1) of Section 15(a) of Act 346
of 1966, as amended by Act No. 109 of the Public Acts of 1969, Public
Acts of Michigan [MSA 16.114 (15a)], Michigan Compiled Laws of 1970,
§ 125.1415(a), shall not apply to any class of housing project within the
boundaries of Charter Township of Cascade; except that upon approval of
the Township Board "consumer housing cooperatives", "qualified nonprofit
housing corporations" and "limited dividend housing corporations" as these
are defined in Act No. 343 of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended,91 which
are members of the class of housing projects defined as rental housing for
lower income elderly families where financing has occurred, either directly
or indirectly, under Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937,
as amended by the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as
amended, shall have the tax exemption provided in the above-mentioned
Subsection (1) of Section 15(a) commencing with the 1980 assessment roll
during such period of time as the owner of a housing project eligible for
exemption shall have:
A. Complied with the statute;
B. Paid all taxes and assessments for the years at such times as the same
shall have been due and payable;
C. Paid a service charge equal to 4% of the contract rents of the preceding
calendar year as defined by the rules adopted pursuant to the United
States Housing Act of 1937, as amended by the Housing and
Community Development Act of 1974, as amended, exclusive of any
charges for gas, electricity, heat or other utilities furnished to the
occupants and exclusive of the service charge paid hereunder for the
previous calendar year.
90.Editor's Note: See MSLA § 125.1415a.
91.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1411.
§ 355-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-2
1:291
Chapter 368
VANDALISM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 282.
§ 368-1. Unlawful acts.
It is unlawful to destroy, damage, or remove any tree, shrub, wild flower,
or other vegetation or to destroy, damage, deface, or remove any publicly
owned property from any Township-owned or -leased properties nor in any
public park or recreation area in Cascade Charter Township.
§ 368-2. Violations and penalties.92
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be responsible
for a criminal misdemeanor, subject to the penalties in Chapter 40, Article
IV, Penalties for Misdemeanors and Municipal Civil Infractions.
§ 368-3. Reimbursement for damages; judgment.
§ 368-4. Disposition of funds.
Upon collection of any and all sums collected hereunder, these monies shall
be credited to the general fund of Cascade Charter Township and shall be
used for repairs and improvements in the Township, on Township-owned
properties, and in the Township parks.
Chapter 375
A. In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter for violating its
provisions, any person convicted of an act of vandalism shall reimburse
Cascade Charter Township for up to three times the amount of the
damages determined by the Court.
B. In every case of conviction for the offenses, the Court before which such
conviction is obtained shall enter judgment in favor of Cascade Charter
Township and against the defendant for liquidated damages in a sum as
provided in Subsection A of this section. The Township shall with the
assistance of the Township or the prosecuting attorney collect the
award by execution or otherwise. If two or more defendants are
convicted of the vandalism, the judgment for damages shall be entered
against them jointly and severally. If the defendant is a minor, the
judgment shall be entered against his parents.
92.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 355-2 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 368-4
1:292
VEHICLES, JUNKED AND INOPERABLE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking of recreational vehicles — See Ch.
277, Art. I.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 299.
Sale and display of vehicles — See Ch. 380.
§ 375-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INOPERABLE VEHICLE OR MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle or motor
vehicle which cannot be started or legally or physically operated on
Township streets or public highways by virtue of lacking the equipment
required by the laws of the State of Michigan or which does not bear valid
and current license plates.
JUNKED VEHICLES OR MOTOR VEHICLES — Vehicles or motor vehicles
which have been so damaged or dismantled as to be total losses and
includes all parts or accessories of vehicles or motor vehicles without which
vehicles or motor vehicles cannot be operated in a safe manner on Township
streets or public highways. 93
MOTOR VEHICLE — Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle
which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires,
but not operated upon rails.
TOTAL LOSS — The cost to repair a damaged or dismantled vehicle or
motor vehicle exceeds the fair market value for such vehicle. Fair market
value may be determined by using any nationally recognized appraisal
books or method.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved by
human power or used exclusively upon rails or tracks.
§ 375-2. Storage of vehicles.
No person, firm, or corporation shall accumulate, store, place or permit the
accumulation, storage, or placement of any inoperable or junked vehicle or
motor vehicle in Cascade Charter Township, for more than 48 hours, unless
such inoperable or junked vehicle or motor vehicle is stored in compliance
with the Zoning Ordinance94 of Cascade Charter Township or in enclosed
garages or other structures.
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
94.Editor's Note: See Ch. 400, Zoning.
§ 368-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-3
1:293
§ 375-3. Prima facie evidence.
The ownership, occupation or use of land by any person, firm or corporation
upon which an inoperable or junked vehicle or motor vehicle is
accumulated, stored, or placed shall be prima facie evidence that such
person, firm, or corporation accumulated, stored or placed such inoperable
vehicle or motor vehicle upon such land, or permitted such inoperable
vehicle or motor vehicle to be accumulated, stored or placed upon such
land.
§ 375-4. Violations and penalties.95
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be responsible
for a municipal civil infraction, subject to the penalties in Chapter 40,
Article IV, Penalties for Misdemeanors and Municipal Civil Infractions.
Chapter 380
VEHICLES, SALE AND DISPLAY OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking and storage of recreational
vehicles — See Ch. 277, Art. I.
Junked and inoperable vehicles — See Ch.
375.
§ 380-1. Definitions. [Amended 10-13-1986 by Ord. No. 7-1986]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONSPICUOUS DISPLAY — Any occurrence in which a vehicle is parked
and identified by signage or other printed advertisement for the sole
purpose of sale and so located as to provide maximum exposure to passing
motorists or the general populace.
PARKING AREAS — Any improved open area other than public right-of-way,
used for parking of motor vehicles for a fee or as an accommodation to
clients, customers, tenants or employees.
VEHICLE — Any passenger car, truck, motorcycle, farm and/or garden
implement or recreation vehicle, including, travel trailers, motor homes,
pickup campers, off-road vehicles, boat and/or boat trailers and any other
portable units which are self-propelled or towed by another vehicle.
§ 380-2. Parking regulations. [Amended 10-13-1986 by Ord. No.
7-1986]
A. It shall be unlawful for any individual, firm or corporation, not
exempted under the provisions of Subsection C of this section, to at any
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 375-3 CASCADE CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE § 380-2
1:294
§ 380-3. Conflict with other ordinances.
In the event of conflict between any provisions of this chapter with those
of any other ordinance of the Charter Township of Cascade, the provisions
hereof shall be controlling.
§ 380-4. Violations and penalties.97
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be responsible
for a municipal civil infraction, subject to the penalties in Chapter 40,
Article IV, Penalties for Misdemeanors and Municipal Civil Infractions.98
Chapter 400
ZONING
time park for the purpose of conspicuous display and sale any vehicle
on any lot or parcel of land within the Township, unless said lot or
parcel is owned or leased by the same individual, firm or corporation, or
unless said parcel or lot is properly zoned and permitted for such use.
B. The conspicuous display of a vehicle by the real property owner(s) or
lessee(s) or those exempted under Subsection C below shall be
permitted, provided that on any given lot or parcel such display is
limited to a maximum of one vehicle per isolated occasion and further
provided that the location of such display is confined to only those areas
which are improved for parking or private driveway purposes.
C. Exception include the conspicuous display of a vehicle whereby a
person, firm or corporation owning the vehicle shall have obtained the
expressed permission of the owner(s) or lessee(s) of the real property
on which it is located. Such display shall be permitted, provided that
the location of the display is confined to those areas outlined in
Subsection B of this section and further provided that at least one sign
or other printed advertisement attached to, posted within, or otherwise
identifying the vehicle as being for sale shall visibly and legibly include
the signature of the real property owner(s) or lessee(s) and the date on
which such permission was granted.
D. The parking of vehicles in a parking area defined above shall be limited
to those persons defined and regulated above or as otherwise regulated
by the provisions of the Cascade Charter Township Zoning Ordinance,
as amended.96
96.Editor's Note: See Ch. 400, Zoning.
97.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
98.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 32.005, Enforcement, which previously followed this section,
was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 380-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-4
1:295
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
(ORDINANCE #5 OF 2003)
(AMENDED BY ORD NO 4 OF 2010; 3/10/10)
ADOPTED DATE APRIL 30, 2003
Article I - 1
CASCADE TOWNSHIP SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
"An Ordinance to regulate the subdivision of
land in the Township of Cascade; to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare; to
require and regulate the preparation and
presentation of sketch, preliminary and final
plats; to establish minimum subdivision
requirements; to require minimum improvements
to be made or guaranteed by the subdivider; to
provide a procedure to be followed by the
Cascade Township Board and Cascade
Township Planning Commission in the
application of the terms and provisions of this
Ordinance; and to prescribe penalties for the
violation of this Ordinance."
BE IT ORDAINED by the Cascade Township
Board, Kent County, Michigan, as follows:
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 1.1 - Short Title
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited
as the "Cascade Township Subdivision
Ordinance."
Section 1.2 - Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to regulate and
control the subdivision of land within the
Township in order to promote the safety, public
health and general welfare of the Township.
Without limiting the generalities of the
foregoing, this Ordinance is specifically
designed.
1) To provide for orderly growth and
harmonious development of the Township
consistent with the General Development Plan
and Zoning Ordinance;
2) To carry out the purpose and intent of the
Subdivision Control Act of 1967, PA1967, No.
288 (MCLA 560.101), as amended; and to carry
out the purpose and intent of the Condominium
Act of 1978, PA1978, No. 59 (MCLA 559.101)
3) To provide for, the extension of utility
services, streets and other necessary land
improvements;
4) To require that land be suitable, and suitably
improved, for building sites;
5) To provide for adequate drainage;
6) To prevent the premature development of
land;
7) To provide for proper ingress and egress to
lots;
8) To promote proper surveying, monuments
and legal descriptions;
9) To provide for safe and convenient traffic
circulation and traffic movement;
10) To insure against the creation of unsafe or
undesirable conditions;
11) To conserve the value of property;
12) To conserve open land, including those
areas containing unique and sensitive
natural features such as woodlands, steep
slopes, streams, floodplain and wetlands;
13) To reduce soil erosion and sedimentation
by the retention of existing vegetation and
the minimization of development of steep
slopes;
14) Permit reasonable development that is in
accordance with the principle of open space
conservation;
15) Preserve the scenic and rural character of
the Township;
16) To promote the creation of neighborhoods
with direct access to open land, with the
amenities in the form of neighborhood open
space;
17) To provide for the conservation of open
land within the Township for the active and
passive use by residents;
18) Connectivity to other subdivisions for
purposes of utility, pedestrian and
emergency and non-emergency vehicles
connections;
19) To establish rules and procedures for the
approval of subdivisions;
20) To provide penalties for the violation of this
Ordinance; and
Article I - 2
21) To provide for the variation of these rules
and requirements.
Section 1.3 - Legal Basis
This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to Michigan
Act 288 of 1967, as amended, the Subdivision
Control Act of 1967 and Michigan Act 59 of
1978, as amended the Condominium Act of 1978
and Michigan Act 177 of 2001.
Section 1.4 - Scope
This Ordinance shall not apply to any lot or lots
in a plat that has received either preliminary or
final approval from the Township Board nor to
any lot or lots forming a part of a subdivision
created and recorded prior to the effective date of
this Ordinance except in the case of any further
division of lots located therein. This Ordinance
shall not apply to Land Divisions exempted by
the Land Division Act (act 288 of 1967). This
Ordinance shall not repeal, abrogate, annul, or in
any way impair or interfere with existing
provisions of other laws, ordinances or
regulations, or with private restrictions placed
upon property by deed, covenant, or other private
agreements, or with restrictive covenants running
with the land to which the Township is a party.
Where this Ordinance imposes a greater
restriction upon land than is imposed or required
by such existing provision of any other
ordinance of this township, the provision of this
Ordinance shall control.
Section 1.5 - Schedule of Fees
The fees for the review of plats pursuant to this
Ordinance shall be in accord with the fee
schedule adopted by resolution of the Township
Board.
INDEX
TITLE CHAPTER
? General Provision Article I
? Rules Applying to Text and Definitions Article II
? Platting Procedure and Data Required Article III
? Site Condominium Procedure and Data Required Article IV
? Subdivision Design Standards Article V
? Subdivision Improvements Article VI
? Variances Article VII
? Administration, Enforcement and Penalties for
Failure to Comply with this Ordinance Article VIII
? Amendments Article IX
? Miscellaneous Provisions Article X
Article II-1
ARTICLE II
Rules Applying to Text
and Definitions
Section 2.1 - Rules Applying to Text
The following listed rules of construction apply
to the text of this Ordinance:
1) The particular shall control the general.
2) The headings which title various articles and
subsections and the statements of purpose are for
convenience only and are not to be considered in
any construction or interpretation of the
Ordinance or as enlarging or restricting the terms
and provisions of the Ordinance in any respect.
3) The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not discretionary. The word "may" is
permissive.
4) Words used in the present tense shall include
the future, and words used in the singular
number shall include the plural, and the plural
the singular, unless the context clearly indicates
the contrary.
5) The word "building" includes the word
"structure".
6) A "building" or "structure" includes any part
thereof.
7) The word "person" includes a firm,
association, partnership, joint venture,
corporation, or combination of any of them as
well as a natural person.
8) The word "used" or "occupied", as applied to
any land or building, shall be construed to
include the words "intended", "arranged", or
"designed to be used", or "occupied".
9) Any word or term not defined herein shall be
used with a meaning of common or standard
utilization.
10) The term "adjoining lots and parcels" is
intended to include lots and parcels separated by
highways, roads, streets or rivers.
Section 2.2 - Definitions
The following listed terms and words are defined
for the purposes of this Ordinance and shall
apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this Ordinance unless otherwise specifically
stated.
1. Acreage, Gross: The total land area within a
parcel of land.
2. Acreage, Net: A measure of developable
land after excluding non-developable land
area.
3. Alley: A public or private right-of-way
shown on a plat which provides secondary
access to a lot, block or parcel of land.
4. As-Built Plans: Revised construction plans
in accordance with all approved changes
made in the field.
5. Block: An area of land within a subdivision
that is entirely bounded by streets,
highways, or the exterior boundary or
boundaries of the subdivision.
6. Board: The Township Board of Cascade
Township.
7. Building Line (Building Setback): The
measurement from the property line to the
nearest point of the main wall of the
building or structure (refer to the Cascade
Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended),
the purpose being to prohibit construction of
buildings or structures within the area
between the property line and the building
line.
8. Caption: The name by which the plat is
legally and commonly known.
9. Commercial Development: A planned
commercial center providing building areas
parking area, service areas, screen planting
and widening, turning movement and safety
lane roadway improvements.
10. Condominium Act: means Public Act 59 of
1978, as amended.
11. Condominium dwelling: means the building
constructed upon a lot or condominium unit
which is intended for residential purposes.
Article II-2
12. County Drain Commissioner: The Kent
County Drain Commissioner.
13. County Health Department: The Kent
County Health Department.
14. County Plat Board: The Kent County Plat
Board
15. County Road Commission: The Kent
County Road Commission
16. Crosswalkway or Pedestrian Walkway:
A right-of-way, dedicated to public use,
which crosses a block to facilitate pedestrian
access to adjacent streets and properties.
17. Dedication: The intentional appropriation of
land by the owner to public use.
18. Developable Land Area: The portion of the
site that can be used for density calculations.
This is the land that is suitable as a location
for structures that can be developed free of
hazards and without disruption of, or have
significant impact on, natural resource areas.
19. Easement: The right to use property owned
by another for specific purposes or to gain
access to another property.
20. Engineer: Any person who is registered in
the State of Michigan as a Professional
Engineer.
21. Flood Plain: That area of land adjoining the
channel of a river, stream, watercourse, lake
or other similar body of water which will be
inundated by a flood which can reasonably
be expected to occur once in 100 years for
that area.
22. General Development Plan: The basic plan,
also known as the Master Plan or
Comprehensive Plan, as amended from time
to time, adopted by the Township pursuant
to Michigan Act 168 of 1959, as amended.
Such plan may include all or any part or
parts of the elements described in
subparagraph (2) of Section 7 of Michigan
Act 168 of 1959, as amended, and may
include maps, plats, charts, and descriptive,
explanatory and other related matter.
23. Governing Body: The Township Board of
the Township of Cascade.
24. Greenbelts of Planting Strips: A buffer strip
as defined in the Cascade Township Zoning
Ordinance.
25. Improvements: Any structure incidental to
servicing or furnishing facilities for a
subdivision such as grading, street surfacing,
curb and gutter, driveway approaches,
sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains and
lines, sanitary sewers, storm sewers,
culverts, bridges, utilities, lagoons, slips,
waterways, lakes, bays, canals and other
appropriate items with appurtenant
construction.
26. Industrial Development: A planned,
industrial area designed specifically for
industrial use providing screened buffers,
wider streets and turning movement, and
safety lane roadway improvements, where
necessary.
27. Lake: A permanent body of open water five
acres or more in size.
28. Lot: A piece or parcel of land abutting a
street whether or not the piece or parcel be
part of a recorded plat.
a) Lot Depth: The distance between the
front and rear lot lines, measured along
a line midway between the side lot
lines.
b) Lot Width: The distance between
the side lot lines measured at the
building setback line and at a right
angle to the lot depth.
29. Lot Division:
a) The combination of existing lots in a
recorded plat into one (1) parcel; or
b) The alteration of an existing lot line
in a recorded plat which does not
change the number of lots; or
c) The alteration of existing lot lines in
a recorded plat which creates an
additional lot.
Article II-3
30. Major Thoroughfare Plan: Major
thoroughfare plan shall mean that part of the
General Development Plan which describes
the existing street system in the Township
and outlines future street planning needs.
31. Non-developable Land Area: The portion of
the site that can not be used for density
calculations. This includes land that cannot
be used for habitable structures due to steep
slopes, soils, wetland areas, road right-ofway,
etc.
32. Non-Motorized Path: A bituminous or
concrete paved pathway intended for
use by pedestrians, bicycles, and other nonmotorized
traffic, which is typically
separated from the traveled portion of the
roadway, located in the public road
right-of-way and/or a public easement, and
is typically 10 feet wide but may
vary according to AASHTO
standards and the Township Engineer.
33. Outlot: When included within the boundary
of a recorded plat, an outlot is a lot set aside
for purposes other than a building site, park,
or other land dedicated for public use or
reserved for private use.
34. Parcel or Tract: A continuous area or
acreage of land which can be described as
provided for in the Subdivision Control Act
as amended.
35. Planning Commission: The Cascade
Township Planning Commission as
established pursuant to Michigan Act 268 of
1959, as amended.
36. Planned Unit Development: A land area
which is zoned Planned Unit Development
and has both individual building sites and
common property, such as a park, and which
is designated and developed under one (1)
owner or organized group as a separate
neighborhood or community unit.
37. Plat: A map or chart of a subdivision of
land. The precise content and scope of
various types of plats are described more
fully in Article III of this Ordinance.
a) Sketch Plat: An informal plan or
sketch drawn to scale showing the
existing features of a site and its
surroundings and the general layout of a
proposed subdivision.
b) Preliminary Plat: A map showing
the important features of a proposed
subdivision of land submitted to an
approving authority for purposes of
preliminary consideration.
c) Final Plat: A map of a subdivision
of land made up in final form ready for
approval and recording.
38. Pond: A permanent body of open water that
is less than five acres in size.
39. Private Open Space: means a natural state
preserving natural resources, natural
features, or scenic or wooded conditions:
agricultural uses or a similar use or
condition. Open Space does not include a
golf course but may include a recreational
trail, picnic area, children’s play area,
greenway or linear park. Open Space may
be, but is not required to be dedicated to the
public.
40. Proprietor, Subdivider, or Developer: A
natural person, firm, association,
partnership, joint venture, corporation or
combination of any of them, which may
hold any record ownership interest in land.
The proprietor is also sometimes referred to
as the "owner".
41. Public Utility: Any person, firm,
association, corporation, partnership, joint
venture, or municipal or other public
authority, or combination of any of them
duly authorized to furnish gas, electricity,
water, steam, telephone, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers, transportation or other
services of a similar nature.
42. Public Open Space: Land dedicated or
reserved for use by the general public
including, without limiting, the generality of
the foregoing parks, parkways, recreation
areas, school sites, community or public
building sites, streets and highways, and
public parking spaces. Public open space
shall include rights for the general public to
access the land dedicated to the public.
43. Replat: The process of changing, or the map
or plat which changes, the boundaries of a
Article II-4
recorded subdivision plat or part thereof. A
lot split, or the legal dividing of an outlot
within a recorded subdivision plat without
changing the exterior boundaries of the
outlot, is not a replat.
44. Right-of-Way: A street, alley, thoroughfare,
easement or strip of land used or intended to
be used for pedestrian or vehicular access or
other public purpose by the general public
and not reserved for the exclusive right of
any individual.
45. Rivers: Those areas where surface waters
produce a defined channel or bed.
46. Sidewalk: A paved pedestrian surface a
minimum of 5 feet wide.
47. Sight Distance: The unobstructed vision on
a horizontal plane along a street centerline
from a driver-eye height of 3.75 feet and an
object height of 6 inches.
48. Slope, Moderate: Those slopes that are
between 12 and 25% as defined in the Kent
County Soil Survey.
49. Slope, Steep: Those slopes that are greater
than 25% as defined by the Kent County
Soil Survey.
50. Stream: Those areas where surface waters
produce a defined channel or bed. The
channel or bed need not contain water year
round.
51. Street or Road: A right-of-way which
provides for vehicular and pedestrian access
to abutting properties.
a) Freeway: Those streets designed for high
speed, high volume through traffic, with
completely controlled access, no at-grade
crossings, and no private driveway
connections.
b) Arterial Street: Those streets of
considerable continuity which are used, or
may be used, primarily for fast or heavy
traffic.
c) Collector Street: Those streets used to
carry traffic from minor streets to arterial
streets, including principal entrance streets
to large residential developments.
d) Cul-de-sac: A minor street of short
length having one end terminated by a
vehicular turn-around.
e) Half-Street: Half the required width of
the required right-of-way.
f) Marginal Access Street: A minor street
which is parallel and adjacent to arterial
streets and which provides access to abutting
properties and protection from through
traffic but no carrying through traffic.
g) Minor Street: A street which is intended
primarily for access to abutting properties.
h) Street Width: The shortest distance
between the lines delineating the right-ofway
of streets.
52. Street Trees: A tree that is located or
proposed for planting along streets or
highways. Such trees can be located on
private property or on public property, with
permission from the appropriate public
agency. Street trees are typically planted in
a linear fashion and provide a spatial
enclosure as well as other aesthetic benefits.
53. Subdivide or Subdivision: The partitioning
or dividing of a parcel or tract of land by the
proprietor thereof or by his heirs, executors,
administrations, legal representatives,
successors or assigns, for the purpose of sale
or lease of more than one year, or of
building development that results in 1 or
more parcels of less than 40 acres or the
equivalent, and that is not exempted from
the platting requirements of the Subdivision
Control Act by sections 108 and 109
54. Subdivision Control Act: Michigan Act 288
of the Public Acts of 1967, as amended.
55. Surveyor: Either a land surveyor who is
registered in this state as a Registered Land
Surveyor.
56. Topographical Map: A map showing
existing physical characteristics with
contour lines at sufficient intervals to permit
determination of proposed grades, drainage
and other pertinent information.
Article II-5
57. Township: The Township of Cascade.
58. Tree: A woody plant material that normally
grows to a height of at least 13 feet and has
a diameter of four (4) inches or more at a
point four feet from the ground.
59. Water Resources Commission: The Water
Resources Commission of the Michigan
Department of Natural Resources.
60. Water bodies/Watercourses: Permanently or
temporarily flooded lands that lie below the
deepwater boundary of wetlands. The depth
of the water is such that the water is the
principal medium which prevalent
organisms live. Water bodies/Watercourses
include rivers, streams, lakes and ponds.
This definition is not meant to include
artificially created storm or surface water
runoff devices.
61. Wetland: Land that is characterized by the
presence of water which is sufficient to
support and normally supports wetland
vegetation or aquatic life and is commonly
referred to as a bog, swamp or marsh. This
includes all those lands designated as
wetlands by the U.S.G.S. National Wetland
Inventory and/or as identified by the
Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality.
Article III - 1
ARTICLE III
Platting Procedure and
Data Required
Section 3.1 - Sketch Plan
A sketch plan may be submitted, and a
preapplication conference may be requested, by
the subdivider to provide guidelines for the
subdivider concerning development policies of
the Township to acquaint the subdivider with the
platting procedures and requirements of the
Township Board and Planning Commission..
Acceptance of the sketch plan does not constitute
or assure acceptance of the preliminary plat.
1) Requirements: When a sketch plan is
submitted, it shall contain at least the following
data:
a) The outlines and intended layout,
including stages and property
owned or represented by the
subdivider.
b) General layout of streets, blocks
and lots in sketch form.
c) Existing conditions and
characteristics of the land on, and
adjacent to, the site such as
significant topographical features,
100-year flood plains, wetlands,
moderate and steep slopes, and
other physical features.
d) Any general area set aside for parks
and/or other community facilities.
e) Name of proposed plat, north
arrow, approximate scale and date.
f) Current proof of ownership of the
land to be platted or evidence of a
contractual ability to acquire such
land, such as an option or purchase
contract.
g) General description and layout of
storm water management plan.
2) Procedures: The following procedure will be
followed in the review of any sketch plan that is
submitted.
a) The subdivider shall submit a copy
of the sketch plan to the Township
Planner before an application is
made for plat approval.
b) The Township Planner shall review
the sketch plan with the subdivider
or his agent. In the event that the
Township Planner shall reasonably
determine that other public
agencies are affected, the Township
Planner may recommend that
copies of the sketch plan be
submitted by the subdivider to such
other affected agencies for review.
c) The Township Planner shall inform
the subdivider or his agent of the
Township's development policies
and make appropriate comments
and suggestions concerning the
proposed development.
Section 3.2 - Preliminary Plat – Tentative
Approval Procedure
A preliminary plat may be submitted for
tentative approval in accordance with the
following requirements and in accordance with
the Subdivision Control Act, as amended.
1) Requirements: When a Tentative approval of
a Preliminary Plat plan is requested the plan shall
contain at least the following data:
a) The name of the proposed subdivision.
b) The preliminary plat shall be drawn to a
scale of not more than two hundred (200)
feet to one (1) inch. The size of the site plan
shall be no larger than 22” x 34”. At least
one copy shall be 11” x 17”.
c) For projects which involve multiple sheets, a
cover sheet that includes a sheet index and a
sheet layout map shall be provided.
d) Legal description of the area to be platted.
Article III - 2
e) Name, address and telephone number of the
subdivider and the Surveyor or Engineer
who prepared the preliminary plat.
f) Location of the subdivision, giving the
numbers of section, township and range, and
the name of the township and county.
g) The name of abutting subdivisions, if any.
h) Statement of intended use of the proposed
plat, such as: residential single family, two
family and multiple housing; commercial;
industrial; or recreation.
i) In addition, the preliminary plat shall show
proposed sites, if any, for multi-family
dwellings, shopping centers, churches,
industry, and other non-public uses,
exclusive of single family dwellings, as well
as any sites proposed for parks, playgrounds,
schools or other public uses.
j) A map of the entire area scheduled for
development if the proposed plat is a portion
of a larger holding intended for subsequent
development.
k) A location map showing the relationship of
the proposed plat to the surrounding area.
l) The land use and existing zoning of the
proposed subdivision and the adjacent tracts
including identification of zoning district, lot
size and yard requirements as well as proof
of any variances or special exceptions which
may have been granted.
m) Streets, street names, right-of-way (both
existing and proposed) and roadway widths
including features such as adjoining plats,
streets, streams, railroads, utilities,
cemeteries, parks, county drains, or any
other features which may influence the street
layout or lot orientation.
n) All areas designated as Wetlands by the
State of Michigan and those by the U.S.G.S.
on the National Wetland Inventory.
o) All 100-year floodplain areas.
p) All slopes over 12% as defined by the Kent
County Soil Survey.
q) All public or private open space planned for
the subdivision.
r) Locations, type and size of all trees 4 inches
or larger in caliper measure 4 feet from
grade. This includes those trees planned to
be saved as part of the development and
those that are scheduled for landscaping as
part of the subdivision. This includes the
required street trees.
s) Location, type and size of all streetlights
planned for the subdivision.
t) Lot lines and dimensions to the nearest foot
and the total number of lots by block. The
subdivider shall also submit a table listing
the proposed lots by number, and the
respective lot area for each lot.
u) Existing contours at five (5) foot intervals or
less shall be shown where the slope is
greater than twenty-five (25) percent and at
two (2) foot intervals where the slope is
twelve (12) percent or less. All proposed
contours shall be shown with bolded lines.
v) Existing storm and sanitary sewers and
water mains, and a statement indicating the
method or methods by which drainage,
sewage disposal, and water supply will be
provided. The direction of drainage shall
also be shown.
w) Six (6) copies of proposed protective
covenants and deed restrictions, or a written
statement that none are proposed.
x) Utility easements showing location, width,
and purpose.
y) A statement of the lot area of the smallest lot
and the average lot area in the subdivision.
z) Building setback lines showing the
dimensions from all streets.
aa) Site data, including total acreage, number of
residential lots, typical lot size, and acreage
in parks and other non-residential uses.
bb) North arrow, scale, and date.
cc) Flood plain elevations when the proposed
plat abuts, includes, or is adjacent to, a
Article III - 3
stream, drain or other body of water for
which the flood plain has been established.
dd) All subdivision plans shall be presented in
order to clearly show the following plans*:
1) Existing drainage plan
2) Proposed grading plan
3) Developable Land Area plan
4) Proposed Utility plan (sewer, water,
storm)
5) Site Plan
6) Soil Erosion Plan
*Separate sheets are encouraged and may be
required if the Planning Director feels that it
would provide for a more easily understood
project.
2) Procedures: The following procedure will be
followed in the review of an application seeking
Tentative Preliminary Plat Approval.
a) The subdivider shall submit to the Township
Clerk ten (10) copies of the preliminary plat
prepared on a topographic map together with
an application and fee in accord with the
schedule adopted by the Township Board at
least thirty (30) days before the first meeting
of the Planning Commission at which the
preliminary plat is to be considered.
b) The Planning Commission, together with the
Township Planner, shall review the
preliminary plat and give its report and
recommendation to the Township Board not
more than sixty (60) days after submission of
the plat. This sixty (60) day period may be
extended by a written agreement between the
subdivider and the Planning Commission.
Any such written agreement shall contain a
specific delineation of the time period in
which the Planning Commission must act to
either tentatively approve or disapprove the
plat. A copy of any agreement reached by the
Planning Commission and the subdivider
with respect to an extension of time shall be
transmitted to the Township Clerk. If no
action is taken within sixty (60) days, the
Planning Commission shall be deemed to
have recommended approval of the
preliminary plat.
1) If the preliminary plat does not meet
all requirements, the Planning
Commission shall notify the subdivider
by letter indicating any additional
information or changes required.
2) If the preliminary plat meets all
requirements, the Planning Commission
shall so inform the developer by letter.
c) The Township Board, within ninety (90) days
from the date of filing [unless the time period
for approval has been extended pursuant to
Section 3.2(2)(b)], shall tentatively approve
and note its approval on a copy of the
preliminary plat to be returned to the
subdivider, or set forth in writing its reasons
for rejection and the requirements that must
be met for tentative preliminary plat
approval.
d) Tentative Approval of a Preliminary Plat
shall guarantee that the general terms and
conditions under which approval was granted
will not be changed by the Township, and
further, shall confer upon the subdivider
approval of lot sizes, lot orientation, and
street layout for a period of one (1) year from
the date of tentative approval. Such tentative
approval may be extended if applied for by
the subdivider and granted by the Township
Board in writing.
e) The Township Board shall not review,
approve or reject a preliminary plat until it
has received a report and recommendation
from the Planning Commission; provided,
however, that the Township Board may act
without a report and recommendation from
the Planning Commission if the Planning
Commission does not issue such a report and
recommendation within sixty (60) days or
within such extended time period as may be
agreed upon between the subdivider and the
Planning Commission.
Section 3.3 - Preliminary Plat – Final
Approval Procedure
The Subdivider may, if he or she chooses, apply
for Final Preliminary Plat approval at the same
time as Tentative Preliminary Plat approval.
1) Requirements: When a Final approval of a
Preliminary Plat plan is submitted, it shall
contain at least the following data:
In addition to the requirements of Tentative
approval of a Preliminary Plat, the subdivider
Article III - 4
shall submit the review comments of the
preliminary plat, of the following authorities as
provided in Sections 112 to 119 of the
Subdivision Control Act:
? Kent County Road Commission
? Kent county Drain Commission
? Michigan Department of State Highways
and Transportation
? Michigan Department of Natural Resources
? Michigan Water Resources Commission
? Kent County Health Department
? Kent County Plat Board
2) Procedures: The following procedure will
be followed in the review of an application
seeking Final Preliminary Plat Approval.
a) For final approval of the preliminary plat, the
subdivider shall submit a copy of the reviews of
all of the approving authorities to the Township
Clerk, certifying that all authorities as required in
Section 3.3(1) (Sections 112 to 119 of the
Subdivision Control Act) have reviewed and
approved the preliminary plat. The subdivider
shall also submit all of the approved copies of
the preliminary plat to the Township Clerk after
all necessary approvals have been secured. In
addition, the subdivider shall submit the
following to the Township Clerk:
1) Six (6) copies of a site report as
described in the rules of the State Department of
Public Health, as amended, if the proposed
subdivision will not be served by public sewer
and water systems. The preliminary plat shall
show the location and depth of soil borings and
the location of percolation test holes if the
proposed subdivision will not be served by
public sewer and water systems.
2) Six (6) sets of preliminary
engineering plans for streets, water, sewers,
storm sewers, sidewalks, trees, lighting and other
required improvements. Such engineering plans
shall contain enough data and information,
including profiles, to enable the Township
Engineer to make a preliminary determination as
to the conformance of the proposed
improvements to applicable Township
Ordinances.
b) The Township Clerk shall forward the
preliminary plat to the Township Planner,
together with copies of the approvals, site report,
and engineering plans noted in Section 3.3(2)(a).
c) The Township Engineer and Planner shall
examine the preliminary plat and the
accompanying material for conformance with
applicable Township ordinances and regulations,
and the provisions of the Subdivision Control
Act, as amended.
d) The Planning Commission shall review the
preliminary plat at its next regular meeting or
within thirty (30) days after receipt of the
materials submitted in accordance with Section
3.3) and copies of the Township Engineer's and
Planner's reports as required in Section 3.3(c).
e) The Planning Commission, together with the
Township Planner, shall review the preliminary
plat and also review the reports of the other
government agencies and give its report and
recommendation to the Township Board not
more than sixty (60) days after submission of the
plat and other related data as required by this
ordinance. This sixty (60) day period may be
extended by a written agreement between the
subdivider and the Planning Commission. Any
such written agreement shall contain a specific
delineation of the time period in which the
Planning Commission must act to either
tentatively approve or disapprove the plat. A
copy of any agreement reached by the Planning
Commission and the subdivider with respect to
an extension of time shall be transmitted to the
Township Clerk. If no action is taken within
sixty (60) days, the Planning Commission shall
be deemed to have recommended approval of the
preliminary plat.
1) If the Final Preliminary Plat meets
all of the requirements, the Planning
Commission shall indicate its recommendation
for final approval on one copy of the preliminary
plat and forward it to the Township Board. the
Planning Commission shall also inform the
developer by letter.
2) If the preliminary plat does not meet
all of the requirements, the Planning
Commission shall submit its findings in writing
to the Township Board. The Planning
Commission shall notify the subdivider by letter
indicating any additional information or changes
required.
Article III - 5
f) The Township Board, after receipt of the
necessary approvals of the preliminary plat, the
reports of the Township Engineer and Planner,
and the recommendations of the Planning
Commission, shall consider and review the
preliminary plat at its next meeting or within
twenty (20) days from the date of submission of
all of the materials to the Township Board. The
Township Board shall approve the preliminary
plat if the subdivider has met all conditions laid
down for approval of the preliminary plat. The
Township Clerk shall promptly notify the
subdivider of approval or rejection in writing
and, if rejected, will give the reasons.
1) Approval of a preliminary plat shall
not constitute approval of the final plat, but
rather that final plat approval shall be
conditioned on all requirements being met.
2) Final approval of the preliminary
plat by the Township Board shall confer upon
the proprietor for a period of two (2) years from
the date of approval the conditional right that the
general terms and conditions under which final
preliminary plat approval was granted will not be
changed. The Township Board may extend the
two (2) year period if applied for by the
subdivider and granted in writing, but only
concerning the Township's own requirements.
Written notice of such an extension shall be sent
by the Township Clerk to the other approving
authorities.
Section 3.4 - Final Plats
1) Requirements
a) Final plats shall be prepared and
submitted as provided in the Subdivision Control
Act (Sections 131 to 198).
b) The subdivider shall submit a
written request for approval and the recording
fee shall accompany all final plats.
c) The subdivider shall submit proof of
ownership of the land included in the final plat in
the form of an abstract of title certified to a date
on or after the proprietor's certificate, or a policy
of title insurance currently in force.
d) Three (3) sets of approved as-built
or final construction plans for streets, water,
sewer, storm drainage, sidewalks and other
required public improvements shall be submitted
to the township in order for the township, and
other agencies, to make a determination as to the
conformance of the proposed improvements to
State, County and Township Specifications and
Ordinances.
e) The subdivider shall submit one (1)
copy of the final deed restrictions or restrictive
covenants, if any.
f) The subdivider shall submit deeds to
any properties to be dedicated to the Township
or other public entity.
g) The subdivider shall submit a copy
of any performance or installation agreements
for any improvements not controlled or regulated
by other agencies, such as sidewalks, street lights
and new trees.
h) Payment and installation of all
streetlights proposed in the subdivision.
i) One (1) copy of any financing
arrangements between the Township and the
proprietor for the installation of required
improvements.
j) Such other information as the
Township shall deem to be reasonably necessary
to establish whether the proper parties have
signed the plat.
2) Final Plat Approval Procedure
a) The subdivider shall submit the final
plat with construction plans and other data,
where required, to the Township Clerk. The plat
shall be accompanied by a letter of approval
from the Kent County Health Department. The
Township Clerk shall promptly transmit all
copies of the plat and supporting documents to
the Township Board.
b) The Township Board shall review
the final plat at its next regular meeting, or at a
meeting to be called within twenty (20) days of
receipt of the final plat.
1) The Township Board shall either
approve or disapprove the plat. If disapproved,
the Township Board shall transmit to the
subdivider its reasons in writing.
2) If the plat is approved, the Township
Board shall instruct the Clerk to sign the
Article III - 6
municipal certificate on the approved plat on
behalf of the Township Board showing the date
approved on the plat and instruct the Clerk to
record all proceedings in the minutes of the
meeting which shall be open for inspection.
3) Recording of the final plat shall have
the effect of an irrevocable offer to dedicate all
streets and other public ways, all park areas,
school sites, and other such areas to the public
use unless a notation is placed in the plat by the
subdivider stating there is no such offer of
dedication of certain areas or ways.
4) Recording of the plat, however, shall
not impose any duty upon the Township, County
or other governmental unit concerning
improvement or maintenance of any such
dedicated or reserved area until the proper
authorities have agreed to accept the same by
legal action.
5) No building permits for the
subdivision will be issued until the final plat has
been approved by the Township and recorded at
the Kent County Register of Deeds.
Article IV- 1
ARTICLE IV
Site Condominium Procedure and
Data Required
Section 4.1 Site Condominium Subdivision
Approval.
Pursuant to authority conferred by Section 141
of the Condominium Act, (MCLA 559.241),
Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended, all site
condominium subdivisions must be approved by
the Cascade Township Board, upon
recommendation from the Planning Commission.
In determining whether to approve a site
condominium subdivision, the Township Board
shall consult with the Planning Commission,
Township Attorney, Township Engineer, Fire
Marshall and Planning Department regarding the
adequacy of the site condominium plans, deed
restrictions, utility systems and streets,
subdivision layout and design, and compliance
with all requirements of the Condominium Act.
1. Definitions: The following terms are defined
both in the context of the Condominium Act and
in a manner intended to make comparison
possible between the terms of this Zoning
Ordinance and the Subdivision Ordinance
(Ordinance No. 1 of 1978) with the
Condominium Act.
a. Condominium Act: means Public Act 59 of
1978, as amended.
b. Condominium dwelling: means the building
constructed upon a lot or condominium unit
which is intended for residential purposes.
c. Condominium structure: means a building or
structure constructed upon a lot or condominium
unit which is intended for office, industrial,
business, or recreational purposes.
d. Condominium unit: means that portion of the
condominium project designed and intended for
separate ownership and use, as described in the
Master Deed, regardless of whether it is intended
for residential, office, industrial, business,
recreational, use as a time-share unit, or any
other type of use.
e. Lot: shall mean the same as "Homesite" and
"Condominium Unit".
f. Master deed: means the site condominium
document recording the site condominium
project to which is attached as exhibits and
incorporated by reference the approved bylaws
for the project and the approved site
condominium subdivision plan for the project.
g. Site Condominium Subdivision - shall be a
division of land on the basis of condominium
ownership which is not subject to the provisions
of the Subdivision Control Act, Public Act 288
of 1967, as amended.
Section 4.2 Zoning Compliance:
All site condominium subdivisions and
structures therein shall comply with all the use,
size, sign, height and area (setback) regulations
of the underlying zoning district in which the
subdivision is located. The permitted use(s) and
density (if applicable) shall be consistent with
the Cascade Township Comprehensive Plan.
The review procedures shall be governed by
Section 4.3 below.
Section 4.3 Site Condominium Subdivision
Review Procedures:
a. At least twenty-eight (28) days before the first
meeting of the Planning Commission at which
the proposal is to be considered, the developer
shall submit to the Township all the materials
required by Section 4.4, (hereinafter referred to
as "site condominium plans") together with a fee
in accordance with the schedule adopted by the
Township Board.
b. The Planning Commission, together with the
Township Planning Department, shall review the
site condominium plans and give its report and
recommendation to the Township Board not
more than seventy-five (75) days after
submission of the site condominium plans. This
seventy-five (75) day period may be extended by
a written agreement between the developer and
the Planning Director. Any such written
agreement shall contain a specific delineation of
the time period in which the Planning
Commission must act to either approve or
disapprove the site condominium plan. A copy
of any agreement reached by the Planning
Director and the developer with respect to an
extension of time shall be transmitted to the
Planning Commission. If no action is taken
Article IV- 2
within seventy-five (75) days, or within any
agreed extension thereof, the Planning
Commission shall be deemed to have
recommended approval of the site condominium
plans.
c. The Township Board, within one hundred
twenty (120) days from the date of filing (unless
the time period for approval has been extended
pursuant to Section 4.3(b), shall approve and
note its approval on a copy of the site
condominium plans to be returned to the
developer or set forth in writing its reasons for
rejection and the requirements that must be met
for site condominium plan approval.
d. The Township Board shall not review,
approve or reject a site condominium plan until it
has received a report and recommendation from
the Planning Commission; provided, however,
that the Township Board may act without a
report and recommendation from the Planning
Commission if the Planning Commission does
not issue such a report and recommendation
within seventy-five (75) days or within such
extended time period as may be agreed upon
between the developer and the Planning Director.
e. Approval by the Township Board shall
guarantee that the general terms and conditions
under which approval was granted will not be
changed by the Township and, further, shall
confer approval of lot sizes, lot orientation, and
street layout for a period of one (1) year from the
date of site condominium plan approval. Such
plan approval may be extended if applied for by
the developer and granted by the Township
Board in writing.
Section 4.4 Site Condominium Plans -
Required Content:
All site condominium plans shall include the
following:
a. Project description which describes the nature
and intent of the proposed development.
b. A survey plan of the site condominium
subdivision.
c. A floodplain plan, if the site lies within or
abuts a floodplain area.
d. A site plan, consistent with Chapter 21,
showing the location, size, shape, area and width
of all site condominium units.
e. A utility plan pursuant to Section 4.5.
f. A street construction, paving, and
maintenance plan for all private streets within the
proposed site condominium subdivision.
g. A storm drainage and stormwater
management plan, including all lines, swales,
drains, basins, and other facilities.
h. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan
consistent with the Cascade Township Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Ordinance,
(Ordinance #4 of 1998).
i. A description of the common elements of the
project as will be contained in the Master Deed.
j. The use and occupancy restrictions as will be
contained in the Master Deed.
k. A "Consent to Submission of Real Property to
Condominium Project", stating all parties which
have ownership interest in the proposed site
condominium subdivision; or evidence of
authority or right that the developer has a legal
option to purchase the subject property from the
owner(s) of record.
l. The plan preparation requirements; review and
approval procedures; design, layout and
improvement standards of Sections 3.2, 3.3,
5.1,through 5.6 and 6.3, through 6.5 of the
Cascade Charter Township Subdivision
Ordinance, as amended. The requirements of
final plat approval in Section 3.3 of the
Subdivision Ordinance shall not apply to site
condominium subdivision plans, except that a
deposit in the form of cash, certified check, or
irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be made
with the Charter Township of Cascade to
guarantee the installation and completion of any
required public sanitary sewer, water supply, and
drainage facilities, within a length of time agreed
upon from the date of final approval of the site
condominium subdivision plan by the Township
Board. Nothing in this Section shall be
construed as requiring a site condominium
subdivision to obtain plat approval under the
Cascade Township Subdivision Ordinance or the
Subdivision Control Act.
Section 4.5 Utilities:
a. The site condominium plans shall include all
necessary easements (i.e. sewer/water,
Article IV- 3
sidewalks, bike paths, etc.) granted to Cascade
Township and Kent County for the purposes of
constructing, operating, inspecting, maintaining,
repairing, altering, replacing, and/or removing
pipelines, mains, conduits and other installations
of a similar character (hereinafter collectively
called "public structures") for the purpose of
providing public utilities, including conveyance
of sewage, water and stormwater run-off across,
through and under the property subject to said
easement, and excavating and refilling ditches
and trenches necessary for the location of said
structures.
b. The Township Board may require the
developer to enter into an agreement with the
Township for the imposition of a special
assessment for the construction of sewer and
water lines within all easements and/or rights of
way within the site condominium subdivision.
This requirement in as much as it deals with the
establishment of a Special Assessment District
under Act 188 of 1954, as amended, is not a
waiver of any developer's or his grantees rights
to contest the confirmation of any special
assessment roll as provided in the Act.
Section 4.6 Private Streets:
If a site condominium subdivision is proposed to
have private streets, the street(s) shall be built to
the design standards of the Cascade Charter
Township Private Road Ordinance, as amended
Section 4.7 Subdivision of Condominium
Units:
All subdivisions of individual condominium
units shall conform to the requirements of this
Ordinance for minimum lot width, lot area, and
the building setback requirements and shall be
approved by the Township Board, and these
requirements shall be made part of the bylaws
and recorded as part of the Master Deed.
Section 4.8 Master Deed - Contents:
All provisions of the site condominium plans
which are approved by the Township Board
pursuant to Section 4.3 must be incorporated, as
approved, in the Master Deed for the site
condominium subdivision. Any proposed
changes to the approved site condominium plans
must be reviewed and approved by the Township
pursuant to the procedure set forth in Section 4.3
for the approval of site condominium plans. A
copy of the Master Deed as filed with the Kent
County Register of Deeds for recording must be
provided to the Township within ten (10) days
after such filing with the County.
Article V - 1
ARTICLE V
Subdivision Design Standards
Section 5.1 – Applicability
This section shall apply to all residential subdivisions,
condominium, site condominium and Planned Unit
Development projects.
Section 5.2 - Streets and Roads
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be the
minimum Township requirements for streets, roads
and intersections. In the event that any other public
agencies having jurisdiction shall adopt any statutes,
ordinances, rules or regulations imposing additional,
different, or more stringent requirements, the terms of
such statutes, ordinance, rules or regulations shall
govern.
1) Cul-de-sac Streets
All temporary and permanent (where allowed) deadend
streets shall be provided with cul-de-sacs
(turnarounds), or any other turnarounds acceptable to
the KCRC and the Township, at their termini.
Temporary turnarounds shall be provided at the
termini of streets where a future extension is
contemplated. Temporary turnarounds need not be a
part of the dedicated right-of-way; however,
easements must be furnished to the Kent County Road
Commission for their use. For Public Roads, the
length of dead end streets shall be no longer than
allowed by the KCRC.
2) Half Streets
Half streets shall be prohibited except where unusual
circumstances make it essential to the reasonable
development of a tract in conformance with the
provisions of this Ordinance and where satisfactory
assurance for dedication of the remaining part of the
street is provided. Whenever a tract to be subdivided
borders on an existing half or partial street, the other
part of the street shall be dedicated within such tract,
according to the requirements of the Kent County
Road Commission.
3) Angle of Intersection
Streets shall intersect at ninety (90) degrees or as
closely thereto as practical. In no event shall the angle
of intersection be less than eighty (80) degrees.
4) Sight Triangles
Minimum clear sight distance at all minor street
intersections shall permit vehicles to be visible to the
driver of another vehicle when each is one hundred
twenty-five (125) feet from the center of the
intersection. No fence, wall, embankment, structure,
sign, or planting shall obstruct vision in this area.
5) Number of Streets
No more than two (2) streets shall meet at any one
intersection.
6) "T" Intersections
"T" type intersections shall be used where practical at
intersections of minor streets with any street.
7) Centerline Offsets
Slight jogs at intersections shall be eliminated where
practical. Where such jogs cannot be practically
avoided, street centerlines shall be offset by a distance
of one hundred twenty-five (125) feet or more.
8) The "Requirements and Specifications for
Plat Development" issued by the Board of County
Road Commissioners of Kent County, Michigan,
effective July 1, 1975, and any amendments thereto,
are incorporated by reference as part of this ordinance
as they pertain to all subdivisions or plats regulated by
the Subdivision Control Act.
Any variance in these requirements or specifications
also requires a variance in this Ordinance in
accordance with the procedures established in Article
VI.
Section 5.3 - Easements
1) Easement Location
Easements shall be provided along front or rear lot
lines for utilities and also along side lot lines when
necessary. The total width shall not be less than six
(6) feet along each lot, or a total of twelve (12) feet for
adjoining lots except in the case of those lots included
within the provisions of Section 5.5, 7) hereafter.
2) Drainageway
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse,
drainage way, channel, floodplain, or stream, a storm
water easement or drainage right-of-way should be
provided. This drainageway shall be designed to
prevent at least a ten-year storm event.
The subdivider shall provide drainageway easements
as required by the rules of the Kent County Drain
Commissioner.
Article V - 2
Section 5.4 - Blocks
1) Arrangements
A block shall be designed to provide two (2) tiers of
lots, except in those cases where lots back onto an
arterial street, natural feature or subdivision boundary.
2) Minimum Length
Blocks shall not be less than five hundred (500) feet
long from center of street to center of street.
3) Maximum Length
The maximum length allowed for residential blocks
shall be one thousand (1,000) feet along from center of
street to center of street.
Section 5.5 – Density & Lots
Determination of the maximum number of permitted
lots on any given property shall be based upon the
following:
1) Developable acreage of the site. The developable
acreage shall be determined by deducting the
following non-developable areas from the gross
acreage of the site:
a) All lands within existing or proposed right-ofways
or easements for public or private roads and
highways.
b) All areas designated as Wetlands by the State of
Michigan and/or as defined as wetlands by the
U.S.G.S. National Wetland Inventory.
c) 50% of all lands designated within a 100-year
floodplain.
d) All lands that are characterized with steep slopes,
unless public sewer is planned to be installed.
e) 50% of all lands that are characterized with
moderate slopes, unless public sewer is planned to
be installed.
f) All water bodies and watercourses.
2) Open Space. The area of open space shall be the
area of the plat not used for lots outside of those areas
described in 5.5.1 (a thru f). This does not preclude
those areas described in 5.5.1 (a thru f) from being
designated as open space, but no credit for open space
under the following tables is given. In the case where
public sewer will be installed in the subdivision those
areas described in section 5.5.1.d and e may also be
credited toward open space.
Any proposed open space areas shall be designed to
provide opportunities to connect with other open space
areas, for purposes of connecting parks, nature
reserves, cultural features, or historic sites with each
other for recreation or conservation purposes.
Table 5-1
ARC Zoning District
Proposed Type of
Subdivision
Minimum Lot
Width
Minimum Lot
Area
No open space 225 feet 200,000 square
feet
At least 25% of the
developable acreage left as
public or private open
space
200 feet 100,000 square
feet
At least 50% of the
developable acreage left as
public or private open
space
115 feet 50,000 square
feet
At least 50% of the
developable acreage is
dedicated as public open
space
115 feet 43,560 square
feet (1 Acre)
Table 5-2
R1 Zoning District?
Proposed Type of
Subdivision
Minimum Lot
Width
Minimum Lot
Area
No open space 150 feet 80,000 square
feet
At least 25% of the
developable acreage left as
private open space.
100 feet 40,000 square
feet
At least 25% of the
developable acreage is
dedicated as public open
space
100 feet 35,000 square
feet
At least 25% of the
developable acreage left as
public or private open
space with public sewer
and/or water.
100 feet 30,000 square
feet
At least 25% of the
developable acreage left as
public or private open
space with public sewer
and water
90 feet 25,000 square
feet
At least 50% of the
developable acreage is left
as public or private open
space.
75 feet 21,000 square
feet
At least 50% of the
developable acreage is left
as public or private open
space with public sewer
and water
65 feet 14,500 square
feet
Table 5-3
? Per section 6.3.1.g.b and 6.3.1.h.b of this ordinance the
Township Board may, at its discretion, require the subdivider to
extend public water and sewer lines into the proposed
subdivision.
Article V - 3
R2 Zoning District?
Proposed Type of
Subdivision
Minimum Lot
Width
Minimum Lot
Area
No open space 95 feet 36,000 square
feet
*At least 25% of the
developable acreage left as
public or private open
space
85 feet 15,000 square
feet
*At least 50% of the
developable acreage is left
as public or private open
space
65 feet 10,000 square
feet
* required to have public sewer and water
Table 5-4
FP zoning District**
Ord No 4 of 2010; 3/10/10
Proposed Type of
Subdivision
Minimum
Lot Width
Minimum Lot Area
No open space 225 feet 200,000 square feet
At least 50% of the gross
acreage left as
permanently protected
farmland
115 feet 50,000 square feet
** applies to Farmland Preservation District only. See
Section 5.10 for additional standards for Farmland
Preservation District
3) Once the Developable acreage and minimum lot
size are determined, the number of lots in a
subdivision shall be determined by dividing
developable acreage, less any open space, by the
minimum lot area.
4) The lot width, depth, building setback line, and
area shall not be less than the particular district
requirements of the Township Zoning Ordinance, as
amended, except where outlots are provided for some
permitted purpose.
5) Lot Lines
Side lot lines shall be as close to right angles to
straight streets and radial to curve streets as practical.
6) Uninhabitable Areas
Lands subject to flooding or otherwise deemed by the
Planning Commission to be uninhabitable shall not be
platted for residential purposes, or for uses that may,
in the judgment of the Planning Commission and
Township Board, increase the danger to health, life, or
property, or increase the flood hazard. Such lands
within a subdivision shall be set aside for other uses,
such as parks or other open space.
7) Back-Up Lots
? Per section 6.3.1.g.b and 6.3.1.h.b of this ordinance the
Township Board may, at its discretion, require the subdivider to
extend public water and sewer lines into the proposed
subdivision.
Lots shall back into such features as freeways,
shopping centers, or industrial properties, except
where there is a marginal access street, or unless a
secondary access is provided. Such lots shall contain a
landscaped easement along the rear at least twenty
(20) feet wide in addition to the utility easement to
restrict access to the arterial street to minimize noise
and to protect outdoor living areas.
8) Double Frontage Lots
Lots extending through a block and having frontage on
two (2) local streets shall be prohibited.
9) Lot Division
a) Prohibition of Division of Platted Lots: No lot,
outlot or other parcel of land located in a recorded
plat shall be further partitioned or divided or a
building permit issued for a partitioned or divided
lot unless such partition or division is first
approved by the Township Zoning Board of
Appeals in accordance with the following
restrictions:
1) No platted lot shall be further partitioned,
divided, or split to create one or more
additional residential building sites. This
prohibition shall not be applicable to lots
used for commercial, office or industrial
purposes.
2) Where two or more platted lots have been
combined for property tax purposes or where
two or more lots are deemed combined
pursuant to Section 22.08(4) of the Cascade
Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended
since one or more of the lots are
nonconforming, no platted lot shall be
detached or separated from the other platted
lot or lots nor shall any of the platted lots be
divided, partitioned, or split or property lines
be reconfigured unless such division, split,
partition or reconfiguration of lot lines is
approved by the Township Zoning Board of
Appeals. Additionally, no property line or
boundary of a platted lot shall be altered or
reconfigured without the prior approval of the
Zoning Board of Appeals hereunder. No
partition, division, split or reconfiguration of
property lines shall occur or be approved by
the Zoning Board of Appeals except as
follows:
i. Prior to a decision being made, a hearing shall
be held by the Zoning Board of Appeals. Prior
written notice of the hearing shall be given to
the owners of all property located within 300
feet of the property at issue at least 5 days prior
Article V - 4
to the hearing, in the same fashion and in the
same manner as would occur for a variance
hearing pursuant to Chapter 23 of the Township
Zoning Ordinance.
ii. The decision of whether to approve or deny the
request shall be within the discretion of the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
iii. In determining whether to grant the request for a
partition, division, split or reconfiguration of the
lot lines, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
consider the following standards:
(1) Whether the resulting lots will have
a materially adverse affect on
adjacent uses or properties.
(2) Whether the resulting lots will
change the essential character of the
surrounding area or neighborhood.
(3) Whether the resulting lots will place
demands on public services, roads
and facilities in excess of their
capacities.
(4) Whether the resulting lots will
establish a precedent which could
adversely affect the long term goals
of the Township Zoning Ordinance
and Master Plan.
iv. If the Zoning Board of Appeals grants the
request, reasonable conditions may be attached
to the approval.
(1) No partition, division, split or
reconfiguration of lot lines shall be
allowed that would result in the
creation of a lot that does not satisfy
the minimum requirements of the
Township Zoning Ordinance, as
amended.
(2) A decision rendered by the Zoning
Board of Appeals with respect to
this section may be appealed to the
Township Board by any person
aggrieved by such decision within
10 calendar days of the date on
which the contested decision was
rendered. Such appeal shall be
made in writing to the Planning
Director who shall, upon receipt of
the appeal, provide notice of a
second public hearing pursuant to
section 5.4(9)(a) above, except that
such notice shall specify that the
hearing is to be held before the
Township Board. A decision
rendered by the Township Board
shall be final unless such decision is
reversed or modified by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
Section 5.6 - Greenbelts and Reserve Strips
1) Greenbelts
Greenbelts and planting strips may be required to be
placed next to incompatible features such as highways,
railroads, commercial or industrial uses where
necessary or desirable to screen the view from
residential properties. Such greenbelts shall not be a
part of the normal road right-of-way or utility
easement.
2) Reserve Strips
a) Reserve Strips - Private
Privately held reserve strips controlling access to
streets and/or utilities shall be prohibited.
Section 5.7 - Public Sites and Open Spaces
1) Public Uses
When a proposed park, playground, school or other
public site shown on the Comprehensive Plan is
located in whole or in part within a proposed
subdivision, a suitable area for this purpose may be
dedicated to the public or reserved for public purchase.
The Township Board may, at its option at a later date,
release any such reservation for public purpose on a
showing that the lands in question are no longer
needed or required for the public purpose or purposes
indicated by the Comprehensive Plan.
2) Natural Features
Existing natural features which add value to residential
development and enhance the attractiveness of the
community (such as trees, watercourses, historic
spots, and similar irreplaceable assets) shall be
preserved, insofar as possible, in the design of the
subdivision.
Section 5.8 - Planned Unit Developments
1) Modification
This Ordinance may be modified in accordance with
Article VII in the case of a subdivision large enough to
constitute a complete community or neighborhood,
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, which
provides and dedicates adequate public open space and
improvements of the circulation, recreation, education,
Article V - 5
light, air, and service needs of the tract when fully
developed and populated.
2) Neighborhood Characteristics
A community or neighborhood under this provision
shall generally be consistent with the General
Development Plan and contain five hundred (500)
living units or more, contain or be bounded by major
streets or natural physical barriers as necessary, and
shall contain reserved areas of sufficient size to serve
its population with schools, playgrounds, parks, and
other public facilities. Such reserves may be
dedicated.
Section 5.9 - Commercial and Industrial
Developments
1) Commercial or Industrial Modification
These subdivision design standards may be modified
in accordance with Article VII in the case of
subdivisions specifically for commercial or industrial
development, including shopping districts,
wholesaling areas, and planned industrial districts. In
all cases, however, adequate provision shall be made
for off-street parking and loading areas as well as for
traffic circulation.
**Section 5.10 Farmland Preservation District
requirements and Design Standards:
Ord No 4 of 2010; 3/10/10
**1) The applicant shall provide a minimum of 50%
percent of the total lot area in permanently protected
and contiguous farmland.
**2) The Farmland Preservation area shall include the
following:
a. Any area classified as unique or prime soils on the
soil map on file with the Township.
b. Areas abutting active farmland along mutual
property boundaries.
c. The required farmland area along the main roadway
as described in item #3 below.
**3)The farmland shall be permanently protected
using a mechanism approved by the Township’s
Attorney, including:
a. conservation easement
b. enrolled in PA 116
c. purchase of development rights, or
d. deed restriction
**4) Where there are existing residential lots with an
area of less than ten (10) acres adjacent to the subject
site, the lot/units shall be adjacent to such existing
residential lots in an effort to cluster residential
development away from existing or potential
farmland or open space.
**5) Scenic views along the roadway are preserved.
An open space area along and parallel to the
roadway, a minimum of 50 feet in depth, not
including road right-of-way, is maintained as open
space. This area may be left in its natural state or
landscaped to help reduce the view of houses on site
from the roadway and preserve the rural view.
**6) The lots/units are contiguous unless the Planning
Commission finds that the physical characteristics of
the property, including the environmental conditions,
property configuration, or other circumstances beyond
the control of the applicant make this impractical.
**7) The proposed layout of the development shall
be such that development and traffic shall not
interfere with any neighboring or contiguous
productive farmland to protect the agricultural
integrity of the neighboring property and
surrounding area.
**8) Residential development shall be situated to
provide the greatest amount of separation between
residential uses and surrounding agricultural uses.
**9) Design and layout of the proposed residential
subdivision or residential site condominium not be
located on any soils prime or unique soils as shown
in the soils map on file with the Township Zoning
Administrator.
Article VI - 1
ARTICLE VI
Subdivision Improvements
Section 6.1 - Purpose
The improvements described in this Article will
be required to be constructed by the subdivider
as conditions for final plat approval.
Section 6.2 - Responsibility for Plans
1) It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider
of every proposed subdivision to have prepared
by a Registered Professional Engineer or a
Registered Land Surveyor, a complete set of
construction plans, including profiles, cross
section, specifications, and other supporting data,
for the hereinafter required streets, utilities,
storm drainage, and other facilities. Such
construction plans shall be based on preliminary
plans which have been approved with the
preliminary plat, and shall be prepared in
conjunction with the final plat. Construction
plans are subject to approval by the approving
bodies listed in Article III, Section 3.3 and shall
be prepared in accordance with the standards or
specifications of the respective body.
2) Upon completion of the required
improvements, one (1) complete copy of as-built
engineering plans for each required public
improvement shall be filed with the Township
Clerk coincident with the submission of the final
plat. Other requirements and procedures in the
submittal of final plats shall be as provided in
Section 3.3.
Section 6.3 - Required Improvements
1) Every subdivider shall be required to install
the following public and other improvements.
a) Monuments
Monuments shall be set in accordance with the
State Subdivision Control and the rules of the
State Department of Treasury.
b) Streets, Roads and Alleys
All public streets, roads and alleys shall be
constructed in accordance with the standards and
specifications adopted by the Kent County Road
Commission. Private roads shall meet the
standards and specifications adopted by Cascade
Township.
c) Curbs and Gutters
Curbs and gutters shall be required on all
marginal access streets and minor streets and
shall be constructed in accordance with the
standards and specifications adopted by the Kent
County Road Commission.
d) Installation of Public Utilities
All telephone and electrical utilities shall be
installed underground. In addition, all public
utilities shall be installed in accordance with the
Subdivision Control Act, as amended, and the
rules of the Michigan Public Service
Commission, as amended.
e) Driveways
All driveway openings shall be as specified by
the Department of State Highways and
Transportation on State and Federal roads and as
specified by the Kent County Road Commission
for all other roads in the Township.
f) Storm Drainage
1) An adequate storm drainage system
including necessary storm sewers, drain inlets,
manholes, culverts, bridges and other
appurtenances, shall be required in all
subdivisions. The requirements for each
particular subdivision shall be established by the
Kent County Drain Commissioner.
2) Construction of storm drainage
systems shall be in accordance with the standards
and specifications adopted by the Kent County
Drain Commissioner. All proposed storm
drainage construction plans for the proposed
plats shall be approved by the Kent County
Drain Commissioner.
g) Water Supply System
A water supply system shall be provided by one
or more of the following alternatives:
1) A water distribution system
consisting of appropriate water distribution
mains, fire hydrants, and other water system
appurtenances shall be provided by the
subdivider. These shall be installed to meet the
Township, County and State requirements and
any other municipality with which the Township
has contracted for water service.
a) If water transmission lines
are adjacent to the subdivision, the water system
Article VI - 2
provided by the subdivider shall be connected to
such transmission lines by the subdivider.
b) If water transmission lines
are reasonably proximate to the subdivision, then
the Township Board may in its discretion,
require the subdivider to bear the cost of
extending such transmission lines to the
subdivision. In considering whether or not to
require the developer to extend public water, the
Township Board shall consider the following:
1. Whether or not the soil is of a type that
is limited in its ability to support private
wells as part of the development. This
shall be based, in part, on the
information from the Kent County Soil
Survey which lists several types of soil
associations that are limited in their
ability to serve developments with
private well systems. The types of soils
which are limited in their ability to
serve private wells are those which have
a seasonable high water table and
moderately slow permeability (found in,
Marlette-Capac-Metamora, Kibbie-
Dixboro-Thetford, Capac-Parkhill-
Marlette association); by flooding,
ponding and the instability of organic
soils (found in the Houghton-Cohoctah-
Ceresco association); by seasonal high
water table (found in some parts of
Oakville-Thetford-Granby, Chelsea-
Thetford-Selfridge, Metamora-
Teasdale-Tekenink association); and by
the slope (found in parts of the
Marlette-Perrinton-Metea, Marlette-
Chealsea-Boyer and Chelsea-Plainfiled-
Boyer associations).
2. Any known contamination of the soils.
3. Any reported Septic and Well problems
according to the Kent County Health
Department that should limit the use of
any additional septic and wells in the
area.
4. Whether or not the proposed
subdivision is located with the utility
service boundary.
After such extension is completed, the water
system provided by the subdivider shall be
connected to the water transmission lines by the
subdivider.
c) If water transmission lines
are not adjacent to, or going to be extended to,
the subdivision, then the water system shall be
charged and capped in such reasonable manner
as is satisfactory to the Township Engineer.
2) As an alternative, the water
distribution system may, with approval of the
Township Board after consultation with the
Planning Commission, the Township Engineer,
and the Kent County Health Department, be
connected to a central well or wells to be
provided by the subdivider. Such well or wells
shall be in conformance with all requirements of
the County, the Michigan Department of Public
Health and the Township. The Township may,
at its option, choose to operate and maintain such
system or, in the alternative, the Township can
delay assuming operation and maintenance of
such system until a later date. At such time as
water transmission lines are adjacent to the
subdivision, use of the central water system shall
cease and terminate and connection shall be
made forthwith to the water transmission lines at
the expense of the subdivider.
3) If a central well or wells are not
required by the Township, then individual wells
may be utilized as long as they comply with all
requirements of the County, the State of
Michigan, and the Township.
4) If water transmission lines for a
public water supply are not required to be
extended to the subdivision, then the Township
Board may, in its discretion choose one of the
two following options:
a) require that the subdivider execute an
agreement agreeing to the imposition of
a special assessment to cover the
subdivision's share of the cost of
providing the necessary public waste
facilities to extend a public water
supply to the subdivision. Such
agreement shall be prepared by the
Township and shall be in such form as
shall be necessary, in the reasonable
opinion of the Township attorney, to
effectuate the purposes of this
provision.
b) require the developer to install a
“dry” public water line.
c) Sanitary Sewer System
A sanitary sewer, or septic tank shall be provided
by one or more of the following alternatives:
Article VI - 3
1) When connection to a public
sanitary sewer system is probable within a
reasonable period of time, a sanitary sewer
system consisting of appropriate sewer lines, lift
stations, and other sanitary sewer system
appurtenances shall be provided by the
subdivider. This system shall meet all
requirements of the County, the State of
Michigan, and Township, and any agency with
which the Township has contracted for the
treatment and disposal of its sewage.
a) If sanitary sewer transmission lines
are adjacent to the subdivision, the sanitary
sewer system provided by the subdivider shall be
connected to such transmission lines by the
subdivider.
b) If sanitary sewer transmission lines
are reasonably proximate to the subdivision, then
the Township Board may in its discretion,
require the subdivider to bear the cost of
extending such transmission lines to the
subdivision. In considering whether or not to
require the developer to extend public sewer, the
Township Board shall consider the following:
1. Whether or not the soil is of a type that
is limited in its ability to support septic
tank and drainfields as part of the
development. This shall be based, in
part, on the information from the Kent
County Soil Survey which lists several
types of soil associations that are
limited in their ability to serve
developments with private septic
systems. The types of soils which are
limited in their ability to serve private
septic systems are those which have a
seasonable high water table and
moderately slow permeability (found in,
Marlette-Capac-Metamora, Kibbie-
Dixboro-Thetford, Capac-Parkhill-
Marlette association); by flooding,
ponding and the instability of organic
soils (found in the Houghton-Cohoctah-
Ceresco association); by seasonal high
water table (found in some parts of
Oakville-Thetford-Granby, Chelsea-
Thetford-Selfridge, Metamora-
Teasdale-Tekenink association); and by
the slope (found in parts of the
Marlette-Perrinton-Metea, Marlette-
Chealsea-Boyer and Chelsea-Plainfiled-
Boyer associations).
2. Any known contamination of the soils.
3. Any reported Septic and Well problems
according to the Kent County Health
Department that should limit the use of
any additional septic and wells in the
area.
4. Whether or not the proposed
subdivision is located with the utility
service boundary.
After such extension is completed, the sanitary
sewer system provided by the subdivider shall be
connected to the sanitary sewer transmission
lines by the subdivided.
2) When connection to a public sanitary sewer is
not required or probable within a reasonable
period of time, then septic tanks and disposal
fields may be utilized as long as they comply
completely with all requirements of the County,
the State of Michigan, and the Township. In
such instance, the Township Board in its
discretion may choose one of the two following
options:
a) require the subdivider to execute an
agreement agreeing to the imposition of a
special assessment to cover the cost of
constructing appropriate sewer lines, lift
stations, and other sanitary sewer system
appurtenances within the subdivision as well
as the cost of providing the necessary public
sanitary sewer facilities to extend public
sanitary sewer service to the subdivision.
Such agreement shall be prepared by the
Township and shall be in such form as shall
be necessary, in the reasonable opinion of
the Township Attorney, to effectuate the
purposes of this provision.
b) require the developer to install a “dry”
public sewer line.
i) Street Name Signs
Street name signs shall be installed in the
appropriate locations at each street intersection
in accordance with the requirements of the Kent
County Road Commission and/or Cascade
Township.
j) Street Lighting
Street lights shall be required to be installed in
every subdivision. All such lighting shall
comply with all applicable Township ordinances
as well as the requirements of the public utility
providing such lighting. Streetlights shall be
paid for and installed by the developer prior to
final plat approval.
Article VI - 4
k) Traffic Control Signs
Traffic control signs and/or warning devices
shall be installed as may be determined
necessary by the Kent County road Commission
and/or Cascade Township.
l) Trees
Existing trees to the extent feasible shall be left
undisturbed in the new subdivision. New trees
shall be required in every subdivision. New
trees shall be of a type that are compatible with
the surrounding neighborhoods and the soil types
of the area.
The developer of the subdivision shall be
required to provide a minimum of four (4) trees
per lot. Any tree that is left remaining on each
lot, that is at least four (4) inches in caliper a
minimum of four (4) feet from grade may count
towards the required number of trees. However,
regardless of how many trees are left remaining,
at least two (2) trees per lot shall be street trees.
Street trees shall be planted a minimum of
twenty (20) feet apart from one another.
All new trees shall be a minimum of eight (8)
feet tall and a minimum two (2) inches in caliper
a minimum of four (4) feet from the grade.
All new trees shall comply with all applicable
Township regulations and any other
governmental regulation that may apply. All
newly planted trees shall be guaranteed for a
minimum of two (2) years from planting.
m) Pedestrain Pathways
If the proposed subdivision connects to an
existing Township Pedestrian Pathway the
Township Board may, in its discretion require
that the subdivider build a Pedestrian Path to the
same specifications as the Township Pedestrian
Path. The subdivision shall be considered
connecting if separated by right-of-way.
Furthermore, the Planning Commission may, at
its discretion, recommend to the Township
Board not to require the developer to build any
sidewalk or pedestrian path if they feel that it
will not connect to an existing or future
pedestrian path or sidewalk.
Section 6.4 – Public Open Space
1) Where a school site, neighborhood park,
recreation area, or other public open space is
planned as part of the proposed subdivision, the
Township Board may accept the reservation of
such open space for public access purposes. All
such areas shall either be reserved for the
respective school district in the case of school
sites or for the Township in all other cases.
Section 6.5 - Guarantee of Completion of
Improvements Required by the Township
1) Guarantee Arrangements, Exceptions
The construction of all improvements required
by this Ordinance shall be completed by the
subdivider and approved by the Township Board
prior to final flat approval. In lieu of the actual
installation and approval of all public
improvements required by this Ordinance prior
to final plat approval, the Township Board may,
in its discretion, for those requirements which
are over and beyond the requirements of the
Kent County Road Commission, Kent County
Drain Commissioner, or any other agency
responsible for the administration, operation and
maintenance of the applicable public
improvements, permit the subdivider to
guarantee completion of such required
improvements in one or a combination of the
following arrangements. In each instance where
the subdivider is to guarantee completion of
required improvements, the Township and the
subdivider shall enter into a written agreement
specifying in detail the nature of the required
improvements, the time in which these
improvements are to be completed, provisions
for checking or inspecting the construction of
each such improvement to determine its
conformity to the submitted construction plans
and specifications, and the nature of the financial
guarantee of performance which is to be
provided by the subdivider for each such
improvement.
2) Financial Guarantees Shall be Provided as
Follows:
a) Performance or Surety Bond
1) Accrual
The bond shall accrue to the Township and shall
cover the full cost of constructing and installing
the specific public improvement and, where
applicable, placing the specific public
improvements in operation.
2) Amount
Article VI - 5
The bond shall be in an amount equal to the total
estimated cost for completing construction and
installation of the specific public improvement,
including contingencies as estimated by the
Township Board, as well as, where applicable,
the total estimate of the cost of placing the
specific public improvement in operation,
including contingencies, as estimated by the
Township Board.
3) Term
The term of the bond shall be for such period as
shall be specified by the Township Board.
4) Bonding or Surety
Company
The bond shall be written by a surety company
authorized to do business in the State of
Michigan acceptable to the Township Board.
b) Cash Deposit, Certified Check,
Negotiable Bond or Irrevocable
Bank Letter of Credits
1) Treasurer, Escrow Agent,
or Trust Company
A cash deposit, certified check, negotiable bond,
or an irrevocable bank letter of credit, as
approved by the Township Board, shall be
deposited with the Township. Such deposit shall
be made pursuant to a written escrow agreement
between the subdivider and the Township. The
escrow agreement may provide that the deposit
will be held by the Township Treasurer, or in the
alternative, subject to approval by the Township
Board, that the deposit be held by a state or
national banking corporation.
2) Dollar Value
The cash deposit, certified check, negotiable
bond, or irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be
in an amount equal to the total estimated cost of
construction and installation of the specified
public improvement including contingencies, as
estimated by the Township Board.
3) Term
The deposit shall be retained by the Township
Board for a period to be specified by the
Township Board.
c) The agreement between the
Township and the subdivider may provide that
the amount of the bond provided pursuant to
subsection a) above or the deposit provided
pursuant to subsection b) above be progressively
reduced as the specified public improvements are
completed.
3) Penalty in Case of Failure to Complete the
Construction of a Public Improvement
In the event the subdivider shall, in any case, fail
to complete a public improvement within the
period of time specified in his agreement with
the Township for the completion of said public
improvements, the Township Board may, at its
option, proceed to have the public improvement
completed. The agreement between the
subdivider and the Township shall provide that
all costs and expenses incurred by the Township
in completing the public improvement shall be
reimbursed from the bond or deposit provided
pursuant to subsection 2) a) or 2) b) above.
Article VII - 1
ARTICLE VII
Variances
Section 7.1 - General
The Township Board may, on written application
from the subdivider and after receipt of a
recommendation from the Planning Commission,
grant a variance from the provisions or
requirements of this Ordinance which are under
the Board's control. A public hearing shall be
held by the Planning Commission prior to
making its recommendation to the Township
Board. Notice of this hearing shall be given in
the same manner as is provided in the Township
Rural Zoning Act, Michigan Act 184 of 1943, as
amended, with respect to the adoption or
amendment of a Township Zoning Ordinance.
No variance shall be recommended by the
Planning Commission or granted by the
Township Board unless there is a finding that:
1) There are such special circumstances or
conditions affecting the property in question
such that strict application of the provisions or
requirements of this Ordinance would clearly be
impracticable or unreasonable.
2) The granting of the variance will not be
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to
other property in the areas in which the
subdivision is situated.
3) The variance will not violate the provisions
of the Subdivision Control Act, as amended.
4) The variance will not have the effect of
nullifying the interest and purpose of this
Ordinance, the General Development Plan and
the Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
After the completion of the public hearing, the
Planning Commission shall make a written
recommendation to the Township Board which
shall include its findings and specific reasons for
its recommendation. On receipt of such written
recommendation, the Township Board shall act
to either grant or deny the variance.
Section 7.2 - Planned Unit Development
Variance
A subdivider may request a variance of certain
provisions or requirements of this Ordinance in
the case of a planned unit development. Such
request for a variance shall be considered and
acted upon in the same manner as is provided in
Section 7.1 above. In making its
recommendation to the Township Board, the
Planning Commission shall consider:
1) Whether the planned unit development
provides adequate public spaces and includes
provisions for efficient circulation, light and air,
and other needs.
2) The nature of the proposed use of land and
existing use of land in the vicinity.
3) The number of persons to reside or work in
the proposed planned unit development.
4) The probable effect of the proposed planned
unit development upon traffic conditions in the
vicinity.
5) Whether the proposed planned unit
development will constitute a desirable and
stable community development.
6) Whether the proposed planned unit
development would be in harmony with adjacent
areas.
Article VIII - 1
ARTICLE VIII
Administration, Enforcement and
Penalties for Failure to
Comply With This Ordinance
Section 8.1 - Administration
This Ordinance shall be administered by the
Township Board. The rules, regulations and
standards imposed by the Ordinance shall be
considered to be the minimum requirements for
the protection of the public health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the Township; and in
interpreting and applying them, primary
consideration shall be given to these factors.
Section 8.2 - Conformance to Requirements
No plat required by this Ordinance or the
Subdivision Control Act shall be submitted to
the public land records of the County or received
or recorded by the Kent County Register of
Deeds until such plat has received final approval
by the Township Board. No public board,
agency, commission, official or other authority
shall proceed with the construction of, or
authorize the construction of, any of the public
improvements required by this Ordinance (unless
such public improvement shall have already been
accepted, opened or otherwise received the legal
status of a public improvement prior to the
adoption of this Ordinance) unless such public
improvement shall comply in its location and in
all other respects with the requirements of this
Ordinance.
Section 8.3 - Enforcement
The Township Board, by its duly constituted
officers, the Building Inspector, or the attorney
for the Township of Cascade, may cause
complaint to be made for the violation of the
provisions thereof.
Section 8.4 - Penalties
Penalties for failure to comply with the
provisions of this Ordinance shall be as follows:
Violation for any of the provisions of this
Ordinance or failure to comply with any of its
requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor.
Any person who violates this Ordinance or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than
one hundred dollars ($100) or imprisoned for not
more than thirty (30) days, or both. Each day
such violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense. The land owner, tenant,
subdivider, builder, public official, or any other
person who commits, participates in, assists in,
or maintains such violation may each be found
guilty of a separate offense and suffer the
penalties herein provided. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the Township Board or
any other public official or private citizen from
taking such lawful action as is necessary to
restrain or prevent any violation of this
Ordinance or of the Subdivision Control Act.
Article IX - 1
ARTICLE IX
Amendments
Section 9.1 - Procedures
The Township Board may, from time to
time, amend or supplement this
Ordinance. A proposed amendment,
supplement or repeal may be originated
by the Township Board or by the Planning
Commission. All proposals not
originating with the Planning Commission
may be referred to it for a report thereon
before any action is taken on the proposal
by the Township Board. Such report shall
be submitted in writing to the Township
Board within sixty (60) days from the date
on which the proposal is referred to the
Planning Commission. If such report is
not received within sixty (60) days, then
the Township Board may act on the
proposal without the report of the
Planning Commission.
Article X - 1
ARTICLE X
Miscellaneous Provisions
Section 10.1 - Administrative Liability
No officer, agent, employee, or member of the
Planning Commission or Township Board
shall render himself personally liable for any
damage that may accrue to any person as the
result of any act, decision, or other
consequence or occurrence arising out of the
discharge of his duties and responsibilities
pursuant to this Ordinance.
Section 10.2 - Conflict With Other
Provisions
In cases of conflict with other provisions,
hereof, of any other ordinances, the most
restrictive provisions shall apply.
Section 10.3 - Severability
This Ordinance and the various parts, sections,
subsections, paragraphs, sentences, phrases
and clauses thereof are hereby declared to be
severable. If any part, section, subsection,
paragraph, sentence, phrase or clause is
adjudged constitutional or invalid, it is hereby
provided that the remainder of this Ordinance
shall not be affected thereby.
Section 10.4 - Repeal
The Township of Cascade does hereby repeal
the Cascade Charter Township Subdivision
Ordinance effective February 13, 1978, and all
amendments thereto.
Section 10.5 - Effective Date
This Ordinance shall take effect 30 days following
its publication (or summary thereof) after adoption.
The foregoing Ordinance was offered by Board
Member Goodyke, Supported by Board Member
Carpenter. The roll call vote was as follows:
Yeas: Goodyke, Carpenter, Julien, Kleinheksel,
Jones
Nays:
Absent: Timmons, Parrish
_______________________________________
Marlene Kleinheksel
Township Clerk
CERTIFICATION
I hereby certify the foregoing to be true copy of an
Ordinance adopted at a Regular Meeting of the
Cascade Charter Township Board on the 30th day of
April 2003.
_______________________________________
Marlene Kleinheksel
Township Clerk
ZONING ORDINANCE
Cascade Charter Township
Adopted: January 9, 2013
Notice of Adoption: January 22, 2013
Effective Date: January 29, 2013
Prepared with the Assistance of
Clearzoning, Inc.
www.clearzoning.com
TABLE OF CONTENTS
i
Table of Contents i
Zoning Map ii
Chapter 1 Title & Legal Basis 1-1
Chapter 2 Purpose and Interpretation 2-1
Chapter 3 Definitions 3-1
Chapter 4 General Provisions 4-1
Chapter 5 Mapped Zoning Districts 5-1
Chapter 6 R1 and R2 Residential Zoning Districts 6-1
Chapter 7 ARC, Agriculture/Rural Conservation Zoning District 7-1
Chapter 7a FP, Farmland Preservation Zoning District 7a-1
Chapter 8 B1, Village Business Zoning District 8-1
Chapter 9 VO, Village Office Service District 9-1
Chapter 10 B2, General Business Zoning District 10-1
Chapter 11 ES, Expressway Service Zoning District 11-1
Chapter 12 O, Office Zoning District 12-1
Chapter 13 I, Industrial Zoning District 13-1
Chapter 13a TI, Transitional Industrial District 13a-1
Chapter 14 AC, Airport Commerce Zoning District 14-1
Chapter 15 Mobile Home Park PUD 15-1
Chapter 16 PUD, Planned Unit Development 16-1
Chapter 17 Special Uses 17-1
Chapter 18 Zoning District Height, Area & Placement Standards 18-1
Chapter 19 Access, Parking and Loading 19-1
Chapter 20 Landscape and Greenbelt Provisions 20-1
Chapter 21 Site Plan Review 21-1
Chapter 22 Non-Conforming Uses and Structures 22-1
Chapter 23 Administrative Procedures 23-1
Chapter 24 Zoning Ordinance Enforcement 24-1
Chapter 25 Amendments 25-1
Chapter 26 Severability Conflict 26-1
Chapter 27 Repeal of Prior Zoning Ordinance 27-1
Chapter 28 Effective Date 28-1
Intentionally left blank
37TH ST
ARBORETUM DR
BURTON WOODS CT
CASCADE FARMS
LN
DR
CASCADE PLACE DR
WEATHERBY
HILLS DR
TEE
SEVENTEEN
CT
CHAMPION
CIR
HOTEL
AVE
ASHWOOD
DR
CHELAN CT
KIRKWOOD TRL
BURWOODHILL
BURWOOD HILL CT
FOX HAVEN CT
DEYANO
SOUTH COMPLEX DR
CT
HUMMINGBIRD
CT
CRAFTSMAN
CT
NORTH
QUAIL
CREST
PARTRIDGE
CT
GLASTON
CT
CASCADE
POINTE CT
CT
SUMMERSE TWOODS CT
DR
MOURNING
DOVE CT
CHAPSHIRE
DR
MIDDLEGATE
DR
HUNTER GREEN
CT
NORTH
THRUSH CT
MANCHESTER
CT
NORTH
DR
CT
CT
ME IJER
AVE
RIVERWALK
CT
SCOTCH PINE
CT
ARCHITRAVE DR
GROUSE
CT
KNIGHTSBRIDGE
RD
STERLING
LINVILLE
CT
SOUTH
THRUSH
STONESHIRE DR
THORNAPPLE HOLLOW DR
BOBWHITE
CT
ACROPOLIS
DR
DR
DR
ST
BURTON
ST
ST
DR
LARAWAY RIDGE DR
THORNAPPLE
CLUB DR
LINCOLNSHIRE CT
ARTISAN WOODSDR
SOUTH
GRACEMOOR CT
HUNTERS WAY CT
HAWTHORNE RIDGE
WYNDHAMDR
GLENSTONE CT
SUMMERSET WOOD
D EER HAVEN
CHATHAM WOODS DR
SPICE
BUSH DR
CANYON RIDGE CT
STRATFORD GLEN CT
DR
DR
BROADMOOR
LENA ROSE LN
NORTH
GRACEMOOR CT
TIMBERBLUFF
RANGER HILLS DR
THORNAPPLE PARK DR
HEATHERKNOLL
SPAULDING
BLVD
DR
STEKETEE WOODS DR
STERLING
CREEK DR
OVERLOOK
DR
LARAWAY LAKE
THORNAPPLE RIVER
RD
CT
LN
DONNEGAL
LN
WAYBRIDGE DR
NORTH GATEHOUSE DR
BRIARCLIFF DR
SOUTH
GATEHOUSE DR
WALDON HILLS
STICKLEY
BURTON
POINTE BLVD
ROSE VIEW CT
CASCADE LAKES CIR
GLENWOOD PONDDR
TANN ENBAUM
DR
HIGHGROVE DR
DR
MANCHESTER
HILLS DR
MANCHESTER HILLS DR
DEVONWOOD
LN
OLD OAK
HILL
DR
TRILLIUM WOOD DR
BROOKHAVEN
DR
HORIZON
DR
DR
ALASKA RIDGE
CASCADE POINTE
DR
GLEN ELLYN
DR
QUAIL CREST
HIGH RIDGE LN
SOUTH
QUAIL CREST DR
DR
BLOOMINGTON
HILLS DR
WINSFIELD LN
AVONLEA
CT
LORAL PINES
AVE
TALL PINES
LINCOLNSHIRE LN
MEADOWOOD
VAN LAAR DR
SHADLOW TRL
TIMBER
TRL
CANYON DR
HAWTHORNE HILLS
DR
PICKFORD
TIMBER BLUFF
DR
SHUMAC
SILVERTHORN DR
GRENELEFE
BALLYBUNION
STURBRIDGE
ANDERWALD LN
FOXFIRE
LN
TAHOE DR
ST
GATEWAY
WELSH DR
DR
TOWN
CENTER CT
PHEASANT
THORNAPLE
PINES DR
BRASSIE CT
EAST
GATEHOUSE
PRAIRIE HOME
ROYAL
COUNTY
DOWN
BRIARCLIFF CT
HUNTERS WAY DR
WH IT WORTHCT
POINTE CT
WAINSCOT
ST
WATERMARK CT
CT
SEQUOIA
ST
CASCADE
LAKES DR
THORNHI LLS CT
BURTON CT
MEDINA CT
BALSAM HILLAVE
CASCADE LAKES CT
FALCON LN
PLATINUM FALLS CT
THORNAPPLE WAY
GLENELLYN CT
HEATHMOOR CT
PIRATES COVE CT
CASCADE PINES DR
PICEA VALLEY CT
STERLI NG OAKS CT
LORAL PINES
CT
GOVE ESTATESDR
KENTMARSHCT
GOODWOOD CT
COVEY CT
THE TIMBERS
MEADOWOOD TRAILS CT
ALHAMBRA
WESTRIDGE DR
TAHOE LN
ALASKA AVE
MURDOCK WOODS CT
TIMBER POINT DR
O'NEALWOODS CT
LASALETTE DR
BUTTRICK PARK PL
FARMSEND DR
TALAMORE
GREENWAY DR
CHRISTINE CT
WEEPING WILLOW DR
RIV ER LN
ST
DR
E FULTON
HALLMARK LN
CLEAR MEADOW DR
AIR FARM DR
GROS VENTRE DR
OLDELM CT
CORPORATE AIRCRAFT DR
DOGWOOD MEADOWS DR
RED BUD LN
SONGBIRD LN
TAMMARRON CT
SEDGEFIELD LN
FAWNS RIDGE
LARAWAY LN
SETTING DR
FERNRIDGE AVE
FOX LN
FEATHERY
DR
LARAWAY
WOODS DR
THORNAPPLE BAYOU DR
BOYNTON HILLS DR
ST
NORTHERN DR
RIVEROAKS
DR
HI DDEN RIDGE DR
TIMBER RIDGE DR
STOREYBOOK LN
OAK APPLE DR
AIR CARGO DR
TALL PINES
STONINGTON
28TH S TREET CT
WOOD DUCK
SUDBURY LN
MEIJER DR
RUNNING DEER LN
THORNVIEW DR
OLD 60TH ST
48TH ST
ROSS DR
HAYWARD DR
OAK TERRACE CT
OAK
CREEK CT
BRIDGEWATER CT
VALLEY CT
CT
WATERMARK
CASCADE
FARMS CT
SAN
ANTONIO
BUCKHAVEN
CT
TRIPOLI
CT
OAKBURN
EXCHANGE CT
JENNYDALE
DR
NORTH
GLENSTONE DR
TEAL CT
NOTTINGHILL CT
PARVIEW
D R
ANDERS TRL
TERMINAL DR
NIMR OD ST
RIVERWOOD LN
TALL PINES D R
BISCAYNE WAY
CT
RD
SANDY HOLLOW
VENTURA DR
PINE TRAIL
LEYTON
VINEWOOD
AVE
HAYWARD
DR
SANDY
LANE CT
CASTA
VIEW
DR
ASPENWOOD
CT
GREENHILL
CT
COUNTRY BOOK DR
RIDGEMONT
CT
ABBEYDALE
CT
SOUTH
WHITE
OAK CT
30TH
AVE
AVE
HALL
BUTTRICK
S T
36TH
BEARD
DR
BUTTRICK AVE
LN
DR
THORNAPPLE RIVER
THORNHILLS
STONEHAVEN DR
VENETIAN DR
PINTA CT
BURRWOOD
CHAMPAGNE CT
CASCADE SPRINGS
DR
PAUL B. HENRY
GINGER BROOK
CT
TALLTIMBER
CT
SUNRISE CT
CAVALCAD E DR
CASCADE
TERRACE DR
BENTWOOD DR
HURLEY
ST
MOORIN G HEIGHTS CT
APPLE HILLCT
BOYTON AVE
EAST MEADOWS CT
COLNER AVE
MARACAIBO SHORES
AVE
TORIAN CT
KENDRICK CT
JACKSMITH
DR
ST
MUIRFIELD CT
PARADISE
LAKE DR
FOREST
SHORES DR
RED CLOVER DR
GOLDEN OAK TRL
WHISPERING RIDGE DR
DEL CANO DR
PINE PARK DR
CANDLEWICK CT
RIVERTON
ASHWOOD
CT
ASHTON RIDGE DR
CO RPORATE EXCHANGE BLVD
COACH RD
RIDGEMONT
WYCLI FFE DR
DR
SOUTH BELTLINE FRWY
PATAGONIA DR
TURNBERRY
DR
WESTCOTT DR
OLIVER WOODS DR
TOWN
CENTER DR
ABBEYD
ALE
DR
HOWLETT DR
SHADYVIEW DR
CHARLEV OIX
WOODS CT
CIMARRON DR
PEBBLEBROOK DR
HEARTHSIDE
DR
CASCADE
WOODS
DR
BECHALLA DR
GLENWOOD HILLS
KENR OB
KIRKWALL
DR
OAK
TR EE
SHADO WBRO OK
DR
LITTLE HARBOR
DR
GRACHEN DR
TAMMARRON AVE
DR
BANNOCKBURN
DR
TREELINE
DR
ORCHARD VISTA
DR
INTERNATIONAL
PKWY
LIME HOLLOW
DR
EXECUTIVE
PKWY
TALLTIMBER
ST
DOUBLOON DR
TRICKLEWOOD
GLEN EAGLES
DR
BURRWICK
DR
MAPLECREST DR
AVE
AVE
BROOKHILLS
DR
ASHWOOD
DR
HIDDEN
HILLS
TANNON
JEANLIN
CANDLEWOOD
WOODCREEK DR
BRIARCLIFF DR
MONT-RUE
DR
BRIDGEWATER
DR
FOREST VALL EY
WHITBURN
RALEIGH
DR
THORNAPPLE
RIVER DR
DR
RD
28TH
DR
DR
CASCADE SPRINGS DR
WOODBROOK DR
THORNCREST
DR
HILLSBORO
AVE
KRAFT AVE
52ND ST
QUIGGLE AVE
HALL ST
60TH ST
BUTTRICK
BUTTRICK
52ND ST
AVE
AQUA FRIA CT
DR
DR
BUTTRICK
PINE PARK CT
OLIVER WOODS
WOODLARK AVE
MAPLECREST CT
SHADOWBROOK
SPRINGLINE
CT
CHAMONIX CT
MISTY LANE
CT
PLACITA CT
MIDDLEBROOK
AVE
RED
CLOVER CT
KENROB CT
SANDY POINT
AVE
OAKBLUFF DR
OAKCREST
CT
WINTERBERRY
CT
DR
BOXTHORN
CT
DR
ST
HIDDEN HILLS
JONAT HAN
WOODS DR
REDFORD
AVE
WHITBURN CT
BIRKDALE
TANNON CT
DR
DONNEGAL CT
ORCHID CT
28TH ST
LN
AVE
TRICKLEWOOD CT
MAGELLAN
DR
HICKORYWOOD
SANDY LANE DR
INNOVATION CT
PEACE
ST
OAKMONT
DR
TOBEMORY CT
SAN MARIE DR
PINOAK CT
THORNBOOK AVE
LINSON CT
WOODVIOLET CT
MACNIDER AVE
DENHAM CT
AVE
TALLGRASS
AVE
APPLEHILL
DR
DR
CANDLESTICK
GLEN MEADOW CT
GLEN FOREST DR
JENNYDALE CT
AVE
GLADYS DR
BROOKPOINT
DR
ARBORTREE CT
DEERFIELD CT
TROON CT
DENISON DR
OAK BROOK ST
SYSCO CT
VINEWOOD AVE
TALON CT
MOUNTAIN ASH DR
RUM RUN AVE
ST 36TH
EAST
MEADOWS
CORPORATE GROVE
DR
HAYWARD DR
CASCADE FARMS DR
BUCKHAVEN
DR
AUTUMN WOODS DR
COLCHESTER DR
BEHLER DR
TRIPOLI ST
SANTIGO CT
DORS ET DR
MARSMMAN AVE
CAHOON DR
IRENE AVE
SHAGBARK AVE
WINDCRE ST ST
GALBRAITH AVE
SNOW
LN
KENDRICK S T
ORAN
DR
CLYDESDALE DR
LINDA AVE
RIVEREDGE
DR
LUCERNE DR
FOREM OST DR
SHEFFIELD DR
WOODVALE ST
EAGLE DR
ORANGE AVE
BUCCANEER
WENDELL ST
STARR ST
BURTO N ST
APPLE- CREST CT
AVE
SANTIGO AVE
LEYTON
CAPITAN DR
DANVERS DR
AVE
KRAFT AVE
DR
50T H ST
SARGENT AVE
DR
HILLSBORO AVE
ALASKA
52ND
LARAWAY LA KE
45TH
DR
40TH ST
MCCORDS
52ND ST
CHERRY
33RD
BO LT
PATTERSON AVE
KRAFT
DR
THORNAPPLE RIVER
THORNAPPLE RIVER
OLD 28TH ST
JOHN J OOSTE MA BLVD
KRAFT
CT
DR
AVE
CORPORATE
60TH
KILMER
DR
THORNAPPLE RIVER
SPAULDING
44TH ST
36TH
AVE
28TH
48TH
36TH
SNOW
GRAND RIVER
PATTERSON
ST
BUR TON
RD
28TH
DR
TRL
60TH
AVE
WHITNEYVILLE AVE
DR
STERLING OAKS BLVD
PLATINUM FALLS
STERLING
OAKS BLVD
DR
SHADYBROOK
ST
DR
CASCADE
ST
AVE
THORNCREST
DR
DR
DR
60TH ST
DR
AVE
CT
HILLS CT
MANOR CT
DR
DR
ASPENWOOD
QUIGGLE
SUMMIT DR
BURGER
GOODWOOD
DR
THORNAPPLE RIVER
THORNCREST
DR
AVE
DR
RD
QUIGGLE
ST
KITZBUHL CT
AVE
TANGLEWOOD
CT
TUSCANY
CASCADE
DR
BURGER
FOREST
DR
NICK KIK
DR
CHARLEVOIX
CASCADE
RD
CHARL EVOIX
DR
DR
TRL
PKWY
ST
AVE
WATERMARK DR
AVE
DR
PATTERSON
ST
ST
GATEWAY
DR
DR
AVE
CLEAR RIDGE
DR
SNOW
52NDDUANE DR
ST
ST
WHITNEYVILLE
DR
TIMBER
OLIVERWOODS
PATTERSON
ARGO
PUD-39
PUD-92
PUD-93
PUD-39
PUD-31
PUD-38
PUD-97
PUD-96
B1
R1
R1
I
AG
I
ARC
R2
AC Sub 1
I
ARC
TI
R2
I1
R1
I R1 ARC
R1
ROW
PUD-50
R2
R2
R1
I
B2 PUD-39
PUD-61
I
ARC
R2
ARC
R1
PUD-15
ARC
AG-2
B1
PUD-95
PUD-74
TI
AG-2
R1
AC Sub 2
TI
R2
AG-1
I
R-1
I-PUD
R-3
AC
AG-1
R2
R1-C
PUD-03
PUD-17
PUD-10
O
PUD-70
PUD-65
PUD-34
PUD-14
PUD-72
PUD-16
PUD-76
B2 B2
PUD-87
ES
R1-C
PUD-48
OS
R1
C2
PUD-85
B2
PUD-01
PUD-66
PUD-76
R2
PUD-02
PUD-52
PUD-19
PUD-83
PUD-86
PUD-69
PUD-59
R1
PUD-21
PUD-09
R-1
PUD-89
PUD-54
R1
PUD-60
PUD-75
R4
ES
PUD-55
PUD-29
PUD-84
PUD-64
ARC
PUD-07
PUD-43
ES
I-PUD
PUD-22
PUD-36
AC Sub 2
PUD-23
PUD-57
PUD-81
PUD-24
B2
R1
PUD-12
PUD-47
PUD-08
R1
B1
B2
PUD-82
R1-C
ROW
AC Sub 2
ROW
AG-2
ARC
PUD-11
PUD-41
PUD-27
PUD-45
ROW
ES
PUD-78
PUD-58
AC Sub 2
PUD-63
PUD-80
PUD-13
C-PUD
PUD-18
PUD-15
PUD-40
PUD-06
R1-C
PUD-28
PUD-30
PUD-77
PUD-51
PUD-62
PO/PUD
R-2/PUD
PUD-68
PUD-88
PUD-18
PUD-04
PUD-25
R1
PUD-53
PUD-71
PUD-35
I-1
PUD-33
PUD-73
PUD-05
R1
ROW
HYDRO
PUD-20
PUD-42
PUD-67
B2
B2
PUD-44
PUD-26
R1
ARC
R1
PUD-32
R1
PUD-49
PUD-33
PUD-94
R-2
PUD
PO/PUD
PUD-37
R1-C
PUD-91
2
4
3
9
8
7
6 5
11
10
15
14
23
26
32 35
22
36
34
20
13
27
12
16
28
29
21 24
25
17
33
18
19
30
31
28TH ST
UV6
UV6
§¨¦96
Cascade Charter Township
Kent County, Michigan October 2018
Official Zoning Ordinance Map
Cascade Township Planning Department
(616) 949-0224
_________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Sue Slater, Clerk Date
Planned Unit Development List
ADA TOWNSHIP
CALEDONIA TOWNSHIP
CITY OF KENTWOOD
LOWELL TOWNSHIP
´ Legend
1200
2000
4800 5600 6400 7200
8000 8800 9600
2800
3600
4400
5200
6000
1-Eastmont Meadows - #2 0f 1992, #6 of 1999
2-Golfview Office Park - #9 of 1999
3-Tammarron North - #10 of 1989, #9 of 1994
4-Fountain Estates - #4 of 1991
5-Timbers - #2 of 1991
6-Briarcliff Acres - #13 of 1993, #6 of 1998
7-Winsfield - #15 of 1992
8-Loral Pines - #9 of 1991
9-Old Elm - #24 of 1994
10-Highgrove - #23 of 1994
11-Timber Canyon Estates - #7 of 1991
25-Home Design Center - #6 of 1988, #3 of 1993
22-Cascade East - 1978
23-Chatam Woods - 1972
24-MVP - #10 of 2006
15-Watermark - #10 of 1997, #8 of 2003
16-Talll Pines - #16 of 1994
17-Quail Crest - #2 of 1983, #12 of 1995
18-Burton Pointe - #14 of 1990, #9 of 1996
19-Thornapple Centre - #3 of 1992, #1 of 2001
20-Cascade Christian Church - #15 of 1994
21-Grenelefe - #9 of 1985, #9 of 2000
12-Riverwood #10 of 1988
13-Cascade Lakes Plat #2 of 1996, #1 of 1997
14-Cascade Lakes - #10 of 1995, #10 of 1999
50-Meadowbrooke Business Park - #2 of 1988, #10 of 2003
51-Ridgewood Creek - #2 of 1995
52-Buttrick Country Estates - #18 of 1990, #9 of 2001
53-Signature Inns - #15 of 1987
54-Ada Moorings - #13 of 2003
55-Sentenel Pointe - #6 of 1984, #1 of 2016
56- Open
57-Caravelle Village #7 - #17 of 1995
58-Thornapple Manor - #2 of 1998, #2 of 2004
59-Platinum Falls - #11 of 1998
60-Whitneyville Station - #1 of 1999
61-Quail Ridge - #7 of 1999
70-Summerset - #12 of 2002
71-Betten Automotive - #16 of 2002
72-Clear Meadow - #3 of 2003
73-Park Place Condominium - #11 of 2003
74-Manchester Woods/ Stoneshire - #3 of 2004
75-Cascade Pointe - #4 of 2004
76-Waterfall Shoppes - #8 of 2004
77-Spees Realty - #10 of 2004
78-Glenwood Hills Office Park #3 - #9 of 2004
79-Cascade Engineering Corp Office - #14 of 2004
62-Thornapple Meadows - #8 of 1999
63-Hunter's Way - #10 of 2000, #1 of 2001
64-Laural Ridge - #14 of 2000
65-Sturbridge Estates - #6 of 2001
66-Bloomington Hills - #7 of 2001
67-East Imports - #1 of 2004, #6 of 2004, #9 of 2017
68-Caravelle Mixed Use - #2 of 2002, #16 of 2003
69-Meijer/Romano - #11 Of 2002
81-YMCA - #7 of 2014
82-Kraft St Partners - #8 of 2005
83-Anderson Woods - #9 of 2005
84-Gatehouse
80-Riebel Development - #2 of 2005, #7 of 2017
90-Sable Valley - #2 of 2013
85-Burwood - #2 of 2006
86-Oak Harbor Preserve - #8 of 2017
87-Anderson Woods Phase II and III - #11 of 2006
88- Spees #3 of 2007
89-Sturbridge Valley - #4 of 2007
91-Redwood - #6 of 2013
92-Drury Hotel - #12 of 2014
93-Thornapple Hilltop - #1 of 2015
94-Panera Bread - #2 of 2015
95-5905 Broadmoor - #3 of 2015
96-Leisure Living - #4 of 2017
97-Cascade One - #10 of 2017
46-Grooters 36th St - #14 of 1992
47-Patterson 36th St - #8 of 1982
48-KCRC Facility - #7 of 1988
49-LeTourneau - #6 of 1989
41-Glenwood Hills - #5 of 1986
42-Joseph Pacitti - #5 of 1987
43-Thornapple Estates - #9 of 1989, #7 of 1998
44-Heathmoor - #8 of 1991
45-Meadowood Trails - #5 of 1989, #9 of 1998
37-Kitchens By Stephanie - #13 of 1989
38-Northern Benefits - #15 of 1995
39-Centennial Park - 1973, #3 of 2013
40-Sunrise Senior Living - #12 of 2005
33-Thornapple Land Company - 1979
34-Crestwood Hills - #4 of 1997
35-Summit - #11 of 1990, #5 of 1999
36-Noto - #13 of 1995
29-I-96 Office Park - #11 of 1984, #12 of 1987
30-Sports and Recreation - #4 of 1995
31-Burger King - 1981
32-Esplanade - #6 of 1986, #20 Of 2000
26-Spruce Meadows - #4 of 1994, #1 of 2007
27-Highridge - #4 of 1989, #16 of 2000
28-Patterson Ice Center - #10 of 1994
FP, Farmland Preservation
ARC, Agriculture Rural Conservation
TI, Transitional Industrial
R1
R2
B1, Village Business
B2, General Business
ES, Expressway Service
O, Office
I, Industrial
Airport Commerce Sub Zone 2
Airport Commerce Sub Zone 1
Centennial Park Overlay Zoning District*
* Includes Underlying Zoning Distrcits
PUD 39, PUD 40, PUD 88 and B2
Airport Noise Contours 2005
conditional rezone 2768 Orange Ave; 3/14/18
Intentionally left blank
CHAPTER 1
Title and Legal Basis
1-1
Section 1.01 Title:
Title and Legal Basis
Section 1.02 Title:
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the
"Cascade Charter Township Zoning Ordinance."
Section 1.03 Legal Basis:
This Ordinance is enacted in accordance with the
authority granted townships under the Michigan Zoning
Enabling Act (PA 110 of 2006), as amended.
Intentionally left blank
CHAPTER 2
Purpose and Interpretation
2-1
Section 2.01 Title:
Purpose and Interpretation
Section 2.02 Purpose:
The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the public
health, safety, morals and general welfare in and of the
Township; to encourage the use of lands and natural
resources in the Township in accordance with their
character and adaptability; to limit and discourage the
improper use of lands, buildings and other structures; to
provide for the orderly development of the Township; to
reduce hazards to life and property; to establish the
location and size of and the specific uses for which
dwellings, buildings and other structures may be erected,
altered or moved into the Township; to regulate the
minimum open spaces, sanitary, safety and protective
measures that shall be required for such dwellings,
buildings and structures; to lessen congestion on the
public roads, streets and other public places; to provide
safety in traffic and in vehicular parking; to facilitate the
development of adequate systems of transportation,
education, recreation, sewage disposal, safe and
adequate water supply and other public requirements;
and to conserve life, property values and natural
resources and the expenditure of funds for public
improvements and services to conform with the most
advantageous uses of land resources and properties.
Section 2.03 Interpretation:
It is not intended by this Ordinance to repeal, abrogate,
annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing
provisions of other laws or ordinances, (except those
specifically repealed by this Ordinance), or any private
restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed or
other private agreement. Where this Ordinance imposes
a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises
or upon the height of buildings or lot coverage, or
requires greater lot areas, or larger yards, courts or other
open spaces than are imposed or required by such
existing provisions of law or ordinance or by such rules,
regulations, or permits or by such private restrictions, the
provisions of this Ordinance shall prevail.
Intentionally left blank
CHAPTER 3
Definitions
Section 3.01 Title:
Definitions
Section 3.02 General Interpretation:
For the purpose of this Ordinance, words used in the
present tense include the future, words in the singular
include the plural number and words in the plural include
the singular number. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory. The phrase "The
Township" shall be construed to mean “Cascade
Township” in the County of Kent and State of Michigan.
Section 3.03 Definitions:
For the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance certain terms
and/or words are defined as follows:
Accessory Building:
A subordinate or supplemental building or structure or
portion of a main building, not involving human
occupancy, located on the same lot or parcel of land as
the main building or buildings, the use of which is
incidental or secondary to that of the main building.
Where an accessory is attached to a main building such
accessory building shall be deemed a part of the principal
building for the purposes of determining compliance with
the yard area, and setback requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located.
Accessory Use:
A use naturally and normally incidental to the primary use
of the land or building.
Adult Cabaret:
A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or other establishment that
features or displays:
1. Live performances predominately characterized by an
emphasis on the exposure of any specified
anatomical area or by any specified sexual activity; or
2. Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, other
photographic reproductions, or visual media
predominately characterized by an emphasis on the
depiction or description of any specified sexual
activity or any specified anatomical area. (This definition
amended by Ord. #5 of 2001)
Adult Day Care Facility:
An establishment having as its principal function the
receiving of one (1) or more persons 18 years of age or
older for the provision of supervision, personal care and
protection for periods of less than 24 hours a day, four or
more days a week for two or more consecutive weeks.
Adult day care facilities may be further defined as follows:
1. Adult Day Care Center: A facility other than a private
residence, receiving more than six adults for group
care periods of less than 24 hours a day.
2. Adult Family Day Care Home: A private residence in
which one but less than seven adults are given care
and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a
day except adults related to the family by blood,
marriage or adoption.
3. Adult Family Group Day Care Home: A private
residence in which more than six but not more than
12 adults are given care and supervision for periods
of less than 24 hours a day except adults related to
the family by blood, marriage or adoption
4. Adult day care facilities do not include adult foster
care facilities or child care organizations as defined in
this Chapter.
Adult Foster Care Facility:
An establishment having as its principal function the
receiving of persons 18 years of age or older for the
provision of supervision, personal care and protection in
addition to room and board, for 24 hours a day, 5 or more
days a week, and for 2 or more consecutive weeks for
compensation, as licensed and regulated by the state
under Act No.218 of the Public Acts of 1979 and the
associated rules promulgated by the State Department of
Social Services. Such facilities may be further defined as
follows:
1. Adult foster care camp or adult camp: An adult
foster care facility with the approved capacity to
receive more than 4 adults who shall be provided
foster care. An adult foster care camp is a facility
located in a natural or rural environment.
2. Adult foster care congregate facility: An adult foster
care facility with the approved capacity to receive
more than 20 adults who shall be provided foster
care.
3. Adult foster care family: A private residence with the
approved capacity to receive not more than 6 adults
3-1
CHAPTER 3
Definitions
who shall be provided foster care for 5 or more days
a week and four or more consecutive weeks. The
adult foster care family home licensee shall be a
member of the household and an occupant of the
residence.
4. Adult foster care large group home: An adult foster
care facility with the approved capacity for receive at
least 13 but not more than 20 adults who shall be
provided foster care.
5. Adult foster care small group home: An adult foster
care facility with the approved capacity of not more
than 12 adults who shall be provided foster care.
6. Adult foster care facility does not include any of the
following:
a. Adult day care facilities as defined in this
Chapter.
b. Nursing homes, homes for the aged or hospitals
as defined in this Chapter and as licensed under
article 17 of the Public Health Code, Act No.368
of the Public Acts of 1978 as amended, or
facilities operated under the Mental Health Code
and Social Welfare Acts being Act No.258 of the
Public Acts of 1974 and Act No.280 of the Public
Acts of 1939.
c. A child care organization as defined in this
Chapter if the number of residents who become
18 years of age while residing in the facility does
not exceed the following:
1) Two, if the total number of residents is 10 or
fewer.
2) Three, if the total number of residents is not
less than 11 and not more than 14.
3) Four, if the total number of residents is not
less than 15 and not more than 20.
4) Five, if the total number of residents is 21 or
more.
5) An establishment commonly described as an
alcohol or a substance abuse rehabilitation
center, a residential facility for persons
released from or assigned to adult
correctional institutions, a maternity home,
or a hotel or rooming house which does not
provide or offer to provide foster care.
6) A veterans facility created under Act No.152
of the Michigan Public Acts of 1885, as
amended.
Adult Merchandise Store:
An establishment that emphasizes merchandise that is
predominately distinguished or characterized by its
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
any specified sexual activity or any specified anatomical
area. An establishment emphasizes merchandise that is
predominately distinguished by its emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to any specified sexual
activity or any specified anatomical area if any one or
more of the following applies to the establishment:
1. 25% of the establishment’s retail floor space (i.e.
excluding bathrooms, office areas, fitting rooms,
eating areas, storage rooms/closets, etc.) is used for
the sale of merchandise that is predominately
distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to any
specified sexual activity or any specified anatomical
area.
2. 25% of the establishment’s visible inventory is
comprised of merchandise that is predominately
distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to any
specified sexual activity or any specified anatomical
area.
3. 25% of the establishment’s gross revenues are
generated by the sale or rental of merchandise that is
predominately distinguished or characterized by its
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating
to any specified sexual activity or any specified
anatomical area.
4. The establishment is operated consistent with its
being an adult-oriented business (e.g., advertising is
directed to an “adult only” market; the establishment
self-imposes [or imposes consistent with state or
federal law] prohibitions on minors being present in
the establishment; segregated areas of the business
are devoted predominately to the sale or rental of
such merchandise; etc.)
5. The establishment displays merchandise that is
predominately distinguished or characterized by its
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating
to any specified sexual activity or any specified
anatomical area such that merchandise is visible to
patrons in the store and without cover (as opposed to
a situation where a de minimis amount of such
merchandise, while available for sale or rental, is
covered or otherwise shielded from the view of
patrons).
3-2
CHAPTER 3
Definitions
6. A comparison between (i) the establishment’s ratio of
general product to merchandise that is
predominately distinguished or characterized by its
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating
to any specified sexual activity or any specified
anatomical area, and (ii) other retail establishments’
ratio of general product to merchandise that is
predominately distinguished or characterized by its
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating
to any specified sexual activity or any specified
anatomical area, indicates that the establishment
emphasizes merchandise depicting, describing, or
relating to any specified sexual activity or any
specified anatomical area.
7. An Establishment with a segment or section devoted
to the sale or display of Adult Oriented Merchandise.
(This definition amended by Ord. #5 of 2001)
Adult Motel:
A hotel, motel or similar establishment that:
1. Offers accommodation to the public for any form of
consideration and provides patrons with closed-circuit
television (as distinguished from commercial cable
services) transmissions, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides, other photographic reproductions or
visual media that are characterized by an emphasis on
the depiction or description of any specified sexual
activity or any specified anatomical area; or
2. Offers a sleeping room for rent, or allows a tenant or
occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent, for a period
of time that is less than ten (10) hours, if the rental of
such rooms accounts for more than ten percent (10%)
of the establishment’s gross revenues. (This definition
amended by Ord. #5 of 2001)
Adult-Oriented Business:
A business or commercial establishment engaging in one
or more of the following enterprises: (1) adult cabaret; (2)
adult merchandise store; (3) adult motel; (4) adult
theater; (5) escort agency; (6) nude model studio; and (7)
sexual encounter center. (This definition amended by Ord. #5 of
2001)
Adult Theater:
A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
establishment which regularly features live performances
predominantly characterized by an emphasis on the
exposure of any specified anatomical area or by any
specified sexual activity or which regularly or primarily
shows films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides,
other photographic reproductions or visual media
predominantly characterized by an emphasis on the
depiction or description of any specified sexual activity or
any specified anatomical area. This definition includes,
without limitation, establishments which offer individual
viewing booths. (This definition amended by Ord. #5 of 2001)
Aeronautical:
Any and all acts or matters which treat or deal with flight
in space. (This definition added by Ord. #10 of 2002)
Agriculture:
The cultivation, raising, and storage of crops, animals and
animal products carried out by a farming operation or on
a farm as defined in this Chapter.
Airport:
An area of land that is used for or incidental to the
landing, take off and parking of aircraft, including
buildings and facilities. For the purposes of this definition
airport related buildings and facilities may include control
towers, passenger terminal buildings, fixed base
operators, hangars, rental car facilities, aircraft fueling
facilities, air cargo facilities, fire and rescue equipment
and facilities, visual and electronic navigational aids,
meteorological equipment and stations, airport
maintenance facilities and buildings, automobile parking
for employees and passengers, viewing areas and
contiguous reserve land held for such uses and purposes.
Alley:
A public or private right-of-way not more than sixty-five
(65) feet in width and not less than twenty (20) feet in
width which provides a secondary means of access to an
abutting lot or parcel of land but which is not intended for
general traffic circulation.
3-3
CHAPTER 3
Definitions
Alteration:
Any change in the supporting members of any building or
structure including, but not to the exclusion of, other
supporting members, bearing walls, columns, posts,
beams, girders and any architectural change of the
interior or exterior which may affect the structural
integrity of the building.
Antenna:
An antenna is any fixture or apparatus located outdoors,
which is designed or utilized to transmit or receive radio,
microwave, television, or similar waves, signals or
electrical impulses. The term "antenna" shall include, but
shall not be limited to, television antennas, citizen's band
radio antennas, amateur radio antennas, and satellite
dishes.
Apartment Building:
See “Dwelling-Multiple Family” as defined by this Chapter.
Automobile Repair - Major:
General repair, rebuilding, or reconditioning of engines,
motor vehicles or trailers, collision service, including body
repair and frame straightening; painting and upholstering;
vehicle steam cleaning and undercoating.
Automobile Repair - Minor:
Minor repairs, incidental replacement of parts, and motor
service to passenger automobiles and trucks not
exceeding two (2) tons capacity, but not including any
operation specified under “Automobile Repair-Major”.
Automobile Salvage:
The dismantling or disassembling of used motor vehicles
or trailers, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled,
partially dismantled or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
Automobile Service Station:
A commercial enterprise which in addition to the
dispensing of vehicular fuels offers to perform, as an
accessory use, minor automobile maintenance, service or
repair including but not limited to the sale and installation
of lubricants, tires, batteries and similar accessories for
automotive vehicles by station owner representatives.
Customers dispensing of motor fuels at specified pump
islands may also be available at such a commercial
enterprise. The incidental sale of merchandise such as
convenience foods, snacks and sundries not related to the
maintenance, service or repair of automotive vehicles is
available provided it does not provide more than 40
percent of the facilities gross annual revenues.
Automobile service stations do not include major
automobile maintenance, service or repair or bulk fuel
distributing. (This definition amended by Ordinance #9 of 1993.)
Automobile Wash Establishment (Also referred to as Car
Wash Establishments):
A building, or portions thereof, the primary purpose of
which is that of washing motor vehicles, either manually
or automatically.
Basement:
A portion of a building located totally below, or partly
below and partly above grade, where the vertical distance
from grade to the floor below is greater than the vertical
distance from grade to ceiling. (See Figure 3-1)
Bed & Breakfast Establishment:
A private residence that offers sleeping accommodations
to lodgers in fourteen (14) or fewer rooms for rent, in the
innkeeper's (owner or operator) principal residence while
renting rooms to lodgers; and serves breakfasts at no
extra cost to its lodgers. For the purpose of this definition,
a lodger means a person who rents a room in a bed and
breakfast establishment for fewer than thirty (30)
consecutive days.
Billboards:
See “Signs” as defined by this Chapter.
story
story
a
a
b
If a > b = story,
If a < b, then then c = story
c = basement
b
c
©birchlerarroyo
Figure 3-1
BASEMENT
3-4
CHAPTER 3
Definitions
Board or Township Board:
The Cascade Charter Township Board of Trustees.
Boarding House:
Also referred to as a lodging house, rooming house,
fraternity house, sorority house of dormitory. A dwelling
having one kitchen and used for the purpose of providing
lodging, or lodging and meals, for pay or compensation of
any kind on a weekly or longer basis to more than two
persons other than members of the family occupying such
dwellings.
Brew Pub:
A facility at which beer, ales or other similar beverages
are manufactured and primarily consumed on site. The
volume of production may not exceed 5,000 barrels a
year. (Ord No 11 of 2014)
Bufferyard:
A natural or planted landscape area located along the
perimeter of a required front, side or rear yard setback,
containing a specified minimum number of trees, shrubs,
bushes, grasses and other approved live vegetation
and/or other approved material designed to eliminate or
minimize land use conflicts between adjoining properties.
(Added by Ordinance #14 of 1989).
Buildable Area:
The area of a lot or parcel excluding required yard
setbacks and open space areas. (See Figure 3-2)
Building:
Any structure which is constructed or erected, either
temporary or permanent, having a roof intended to be
impervious to weather, supported by columns, walls, or
any other supports, which is used for the purpose of
housing, storing, or enclosing persons, animals, or
personal property or conducting business activities or
other similar uses. The definition includes tents, awnings,
and vehicles situated on private property and serving in
some way the function of a building, but not including
screened enclosure not having a roof impervious to
weather.
Buildable Area
Figure 3-2
BUILDABLE AREA
©birchlerarro
Figure 3-3
BUILDING HEIGHT
©birchlerarroyo
3-5
CHAPTER 3
Definitions
Building – Main or Principal:
A building in which is conducted the principal or main use
of the lot on which it is situated.
Building - Existing:
Any permanent building is considered to be in existence if
completed or the foundations of which are complete and
is actually under construction when this Ordinance takes
effect.
Building Height:
The vertical distance from grade to the top of the highest
roof beams of a flat roof, or the mean level of the highest
gable or slope of a hip roof. (See Figure 3-3).
Building Permit:
The written authority of the building inspector, issued on
behalf of the Township, permitting the construction,
moving or alteration, of a building or structure, in
conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance and the
Township's building code.
Building Setback:
The distance between the lot line, street right-of-way line,
or other reference line established by the provisions of
Section 4.15, and the nearest point of any building or
structure located on a lot or parcel. (See Figure 3-4).
Building Setback Line:
The line situated at ground level being parallel to the
street right-of-way line, or property line or other
reference line established by the provisions of Section
4.15, which defines the actual distance of the nearest
point of a building or structure from a street or property
line. (See Figure 3-4)
Building Setback Line, Minimum:
The line situated at ground level, parallel to the street
right-of-way line or property line or other reference line
established by the provisions of Section 4.15, which
defines the area of a lot or parcel within which no part of
a building or structure shall project or be located except
as otherwise provided by this Ordinance. (See Figure 3-4)
Camp or Campground:
Temporary or permanent buildings, tents, or other
structures established or maintained as a temporary living
quarter, operated continuously for a period of five (5)
days or more for recreation, religious, education, or
vacation purposes.
Carport:
Any roofed structure or shelter or a portion of a building
open on two (2) or more sides which may or may not be
attached to a dwelling, other than an attached or
detached garage, used for the purpose of storing motor
vehicles.
Carwash:
See “Automobile Wash Establishment” as defined in this
Chapter.
Certificate of Zoning Compliance:
A permit signifying compliance with the provisions of the
Ordinance as to use, activity, bulk, and density and with
the requirements of all other development codes and
ordinances currently in effect.
Figure 3-4
BUILDING SETBACK LINE
Building
Setback
Setback
Line
©birchlerarroyo
3-6
CHAPTER 3
Definitions
Child Care Organization:
A facility for the care of persons under 18 years of age, as
licensed and regulated by the State under Act No. 166 of
the Public Acts of 1973 and the associated rules
promulgated by the State Department of Social Services.
Such organizations shall be further defined as follows:
1. Child care center or day can center: A facility, other
than a private residence, receiving more than six (6)
pre-school or school age children for group care for
periods of less than 24 hours a day, and where the
parents or guardians are not immediately available to
the child. It includes a facility which provides care for
not less than two consecutive weeks, regardless of
the number of hours of care per day. The facility is
generally described as a child care center, day care
center, day nursery, nursery school, parent
cooperative preschool, play group, or drop-in center.
"Child care center" or "day care center" does not
include a Sunday school conducted by a religious
institution or a facility operated by a religious
organization where children are cared for during
short periods of time while persons responsible for
such children are attending religious services.
2. Foster family home: A private home in which one but
not more than four minor children, who are not
related to an adult member of the household by
blood, marriage, or adoption, are given care and
supervision for four hours a day, four or more days a
week, two or more consecutive weeks, unattended
by a parent or legal guardian.
3. Foster family group home: A private home in which
more than four but less than seven children, who are
not related to an adult member of the household by
blood, marriage, or adoption, are provided care for
24 hours a day, four or more days a week, two or
more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or
legal guardian.
4. Family day care home: A private home in which one
but less than seven minors are received for care and
supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day,
unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except
children related to an adult member of the family by
blood, marriage, or adoption. It includes a home that
gives care to an unrelated child for more than four
weeks during a calendar year.
5. Group day care home: A private home in which more
than six but not more than 12 children arc given care
and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a
day unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except
children related to an adult member of the family by
blood, marriage, or adoption. It includes a home that
gives care to an unrelated child for more than four
weeks during a calendar year.
Church:
A building wherein persons regularly assemble for
religious worship or services and which is maintained and
controlled by a religious body, group or organization
organized to sustain religious worship, services or works
together with all accessory buildings and uses customarily
associated with such primary purpose. (Ord. No. #10 of 2001)
Commission or Planning Commission:
The Planning Commission for Cascade Charter Township.
Common Open Space:
Any area or space other than required yard areas which is
unobstructed and unoccupied by buildings, roads, or
other man-made structures and is readily accessible to all
those for whom it is required.
Comprehensive Plan, Master Plan, General Development
Plan, Basic Plan:
The plan so designated by the Planning Commission
which, among other things, conveys land use policy, a
major street plan and a plan for public facilities and which
is designed to provide and accomplish the objectives of
the Michigan Planning Enabling Act (PA 33 of 2008) as
amended.
Condominium:
That form of property ownership under which a building,
or group of buildings, in which units are owned
individually, and the structure, common areas and
facilities are owned by all the property owners on a
proportional, undivided basis.
Contiguous Lot:
A lot which abuts or is separated from another lot (if at
all) by a street right-of-way or easement only.
3-7
CHAPTER 3
Definitions
Convalescent Home, Nursing Home or Home for The
Aged:
An institutional facility other than a private home or
facility defined in this Chapter having as its principle
function the provision of care, and supervision of
individuals for 24 hours a day and which are licensed
under Article 17 of the Public Health Code, Act No. 368 of
1978 as amended.
Department:
The Cascade Charter Township Planning Department.
Developer:
Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity
commencing development.
Development or to Develop:
A development includes the construction of any new
buildings or other structure on a lot, the relocation of any
existing buildings, or the use of a tract of land for any new
use. To develop is to create a development.
Director:
The Director of the Cascade Charter Township Planning
Department, or his designee. As used herein, "Planning
Director", "Department Director", and "Director" are
synonymous.
Dimensional Nonconformity:
A nonconforming situation that occurs when the height,
size, or minimum floor space of a structure or the
relationship between an existing building or buildings and
other buildings or lot lines does not conform to the
regulations applicable to the district in which the property
is located.
Dish Antennas:
A parabolic type antenna designed to receive radio,
television and microwave communication.
District or Zone:
A portion of the township under which certain uses are
permitted and within which certain regulations and
requirements apply under the provisions of this
Ordinance. The terms "zone" and "district" are considered
synonymous.
Drive-in Establishment, Drive-Through Establishment:
A business which offers goods or services to customers in
vehicles, including an establishment where customers
may serve themselves.
Dwelling:
Any building used in whole or in part as a home, residence
or sleeping place either permanently or temporarily
including mobile homes, one family, two family, and
multi-family buildings and boarding houses, but not
including hotels, motels, tents, recreational vehicles or
other unconventional structures.
Dwelling - Single Family Detached:
A building which is entirely surrounded by open space on
its building lot, used and designed for one (1) family or
domestic unit.
Dwelling - Mobile Home:
A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a chassis and is designed to be used as a
dwelling with or without a permanent foundation, when
connected to the require utilities, and includes the
plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems
contained in the structure. "Mobile Home" does not mean
a recreational vehicle.
Dwelling - Multiple Family:
A building used or designed as a residence for three (3) or
more families or domestic units living independently of
each other.
Dwelling - Two (2) Family or Duplex:
A detached building containing two (2) dwelling units and
designed for use by two (2) families or domestic units
living independently.
3-8
CHAPTER 3
Definitions
Dwelling - Earth Donned:
A dwelling where the ground floor area is partly below
grade to provide climatic, noise, or life safety protection,
but is so designed not to include any portion of a
basement in the floor area calculation.
Dwelling - Earth Sheltered:
A dwelling where the ground floor is partly below grade to
provide climatic, noise, or life safety protection, but so
designed to meet the requirements of the Township
Building Code and may include all or part of a basement in
the floor area calculations.
Dwelling Unit:
One (1) or more rooms designed or used as an
independent housekeeping establishment for one family
or domestic unit and containing kitchen facilities,
including a stove or cooking device and a permanently
installed sink, bathroom facilities, and sleeping facilities.
Erected:
Includes built, constructed, reconstructed, moved upon,
or any other physical operation on the premises required
for the building. Excavations, fill, drainage, and the like,
shall be considered part of an erection.
Escort:
A person who, for any form of consideration and
regardless of who pays that consideration, agrees to act
or offers to act as a companion or date for another
person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie
or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
(This definition amended by Ord. #5 of 2001)
Escort Agency:
A person or entity which furnishes, offers to furnish, or
advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration. An escort
agency is deemed to be operated in the location where (i)
a request for an escort is received, or (ii) the escort and
the person requesting the escort are together. (This
definition amended by Ord. #5 of 2001)
Essential Services:
The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by
public utilities, municipal departments or commissions or
private public utility contractors of underground or
overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmissions, or
distribution systems, collections, communication, supply,
or disposal systems (including towers, structures, poles,
wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire
alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants,
telephone exchange and/or repeater buildings, electric
substations, gas regulatory stations, and other similar
equipment and accessories in connection therewith)
reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate
service by such public utilities or municipal departments
or commissions for the public health, safety or general
welfare. This definition shall not include sanitary landfills,
recycling centers, or non-public utility transfer stations, or
buildings not reasonably necessary to house the
foregoing.
Excavation:
Any act by which earth, gravel, sand, rock, topsoil or other
materials are cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered,
removed, displaced or relocated. Also included shall be
the conditions resulting therefrom.
Extraction:
The act of removing sand, gravel, topsoil, or other
minerals by excavation for the purpose of disposition
away from the immediate premises whether such
disposition is immediate or in the future.
Family or Domestic Unit:
1. An individual or group of two or more persons related
by blood, marriage, or adoption, together with foster
children and servants of the principal occupants, with
not more than one additional unrelated person, who
are domiciled together as a single, domestic,
housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit or;
2. A collective number of individuals domiciled together
in one dwelling unit whose relationship is of a
continuing non-transient domestic character and who
are cooking and living as a single nonprofit
housekeeping unit. This definition shall not include
any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association,
lodge, coterie, organization, or group of students or
other individuals whose domestic relationship is of a
transitory or seasonal nature or for an anticipated
3-9
CHAPTER 3
Definitions
limited duration of a school term or other similar
determinable period.
Farm:
All contiguous neighboring or associated land operated as
a single unit on which farming is carried on directly by the
owner or his agent or by a tenant farmer. For purposes of
this Ordinance, “farming” includes:
1. The cultivation of the soil for purposes of producing
crops therefrom including orchards.
2. The operation of green houses and nurseries.
3. The operation of poultry or livestock farms except the
keeping of fur bearing animals or game.
4. Equestrian facilities.
5. Buildings necessary for the storage or housing of farm
implements, products, or animals or otherwise used
for the operation of the farm, excluding dwelling
units.
6. A farm shall be further defined as:
a. Forty or more acres in one ownership, which has
been devoted primarily to farm use; or
b. Five or more acres in one ownership, but less
than forty acres, devoted to a farm use, which
has produced a gross annual income from
agriculture or $200.00 per acre of cleaned and
fillable land; or
c. A farm designated by the Michigan Department
of Agriculture as a specialty farm, in one
ownership, which has produced a gross annual
income from agriculture of $2,000.00.
(Parcels of land in one ownership, which are
contiguous but which constitute an integral part of a
farming operation being conducted on land otherwise
qualifying as a farm, shall be considered as one for
the purposes or calculating the above acreage.)
7. The following uses are for the purposes of this
Ordinance, specifically enumerated as non-farm uses.
a. The keeping of fur bearing animals;
b. Apiaries when not associated with and secondary
to another bonafide farming operation;
c. Fish hatcheries;
d. Stock yards, slaughter houses and meat
processing operation;
e. Milk pasteurization plants when not associated
and secondary to a single farming operation;
f. Stone quarries, gravel or sand pits;
g. Stables; and
h. Intensive livestock operations meaning any
livestock operation if it involves the confined
feeding and or production of any one or more of
the following:
1) 300 or more cattle
2) 600 or more swine, goats or sheep
3) 30,000 or more fowl
Farm Buildings:
Any non-dwelling, building or structure on a farm which is
essential and customarily used on farms of that type for
the purposes of their agricultural activities.
Farmland Preservation Residential Subdivision or Site
Condominium: (Ord No 3 of 2010; 3/10/10)
A development in the Farmland Preservation District in
which small lot sizes are permitted to be clustered in
return for the permanent protection of farmland.
Farmer’s Market: (Ord No 8 of 2011; 6/23/11)
A location with fixed and/or removal booths, parking,
outdoor gathering, and vending spaces for the sale of
produce, plants, meats, cheeses, breads, and other
perishable items.
Fence:
Any permanent barrier, partition, or structure erected as
a dividing structure, or as an enclosure, and not part of a
structure requiring a building permit. Fence does not
include a retaining wall.
Flood Plain:
Those areas which are subject to inundation at a high
flood water level in a flood of one (1) percent yearly
probability as determined by an engineer or agency
designated by the Township Board.
3-10
CHAPTER 3
Definitions
Flood Hazard Area:
That area subject to flooding on the average once in every
hundred years based on information supplied by the U.S.
Geological Survey, or the Michigan Department of Natural
Resources.
Floor Area, Net - Non Dwellings:
The area of all floors in a building computed by measuring
the dimensions of the outside walls of a building excluding
elevator shafts, stairwells, hallways, bulk heads, floor
space used for basic utilities such as lavatories, and
heating and cooling equipment, mezzanines, attics or
portions thereof with headrooms of less than seven (7)
feet, verandas, porches, patios, carports, parking garages,
terraces, atriums, and decks.
Floor Area of Dwellings:
The area of all floors computed by measuring the
dimensions of the outside walls of a building excluding
porches, patios, terraces, breezeways, carports,
verandahs, garages, basements, or portions thereof not
meeting Township Building Code requirements for ingress
and egress and attics or portions thereof with headroom
of less than seven (7) feet.
Floor Area Ratio:
The net floor area, as defined by this Ordinance, divided
by the total lot area of the subject parcel or lot. (See
Figure 3-5)
Garage - Private:
An accessory building or a portion of a dwelling used
primarily for the storage of passenger vehicles by the
occupants of the premises.
Garage - Public or Commercial:
Any building not a private garage, used for commercial
parking, storing, caring for, renting, servicing repairing,
refinishing, equipping, adjusting or estimating, hire or sale
any vehicle.
Gasoline Service Station:
See "Automobile Service Station", as defined in this
Chapter.
Grade - Average Grade:
A reference plane representing the average of finished
ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls.
When the finished ground level slopes away from the
exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by
the lowest points within the area between the building
and the lot line or, when the lot line is more than 6 feet
from the building, between the building and a point 6 feet
from die building. (See Figure 3-6)
Max. Floor Area
Figure 3-5
FLOOR AREA RATIO (F.A.R.)
F.A.R =
Total Net Building Floor Area
Total Lot Area
©birchlerarroyo
Example:
Given a 40,000 sq. ft. lot,
the Max. Floor Area Ratio
for a F.A.R. of 0.25
= 10,000 sq. ft.
Grade -
Average
Grade
6 ft.
Building
Height
Figure 3-6
GRADE – AVERAGE GRADE
©birchlerarroy
3-11
CHAPTER 3
Definitions
Home Occupation:
Any profession or other occupation conducted in a
residential district or dwelling which is clearly incidental
and secondary to the use of the lot or dwelling and which
conforms to the provisions of Section 4.20.
Junk Yard, Salvage Yard:
A place where junk, waste, discarded, salvaged or
salvageable materials are bought, sold, exchanged,
stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including
but not limited to, wrecked motor vehicles, used building
materials and equipment and other manufactured goods
that are worn, deteriorated or obsolete.
Kennel:
Any place on which five (5) or more dogs, cats or other
household pets four (4) months of age or older are kept
either temporarily or permanently for any reason other
than veterinary medicine, including board, breeding, or
sale.
Landscaping:
Any combination of living plants (such as grass, ground
cover, shrubs, vines, hedges, or trees) and non-living
landscape material (such as rocks, pebbles, mulch, walls,
fences or decorative paving materials).
Live/work: (Ord No 8 of 2011; 6/23/11)
A building, or a part of a building, used both as a
residence and for any nonresidential use permitted in the
zoning district in which it is located.
Lot:
A plot or parcel of land having frontage and access upon a
public street or approved private street whether or not
the plot or parcel is part of a recorded plat.
Lot Area:
The total area encompassed within the lines of a lot
excluding street or road fights-of-way.
Lot, Corner:
A corner lot shall mean a lot of which the entirety of at
least two (2) adjacent sides abut a street, provided that
the interior angle at the intersection of such two (2) sides
is less than 135 degrees. (See Figure 3-7).
Lot Coverage:
That area of a lot which is covered by buildings or other
structures, including porches, arbors, breezeways,
balconies, patios and any other structure or building,
whether open, box type or lathe roofs, or fully roofed, but
not including fences, walls, hedges used as fences, or
swimming pools.
Lot, Depth:
The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines, as measured along the midpoint between side lot
lines. (See Figure 3-8) (This definition added by Ordinance #9 of
1993.)
Lot, Interior:
A lot other than a corner lot. (See Figure 3-7)
Lot, Through:
An interior lot having frontage on two (2) streets. (See
Figure 3-7)
Lot Width:
The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured
parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required
setback line. The width of a corner lot shall be determined
as being the entire length of the front lot line, which is
opposite the rear lot line (See Figure 3-8). (This definition
added by Ordinance #9 of 1993.)
Through
Corner
Interior
Corner
Interior
(Flag)
©birchlerarrroy
Figure 3-7
CORNER, INTERIOR, AND THROUGH LOT
3-12
CHAPTER 3
Definitions
Lot Line, Front:
Front lot line, in the case of a lot abutting only one street,
shall mean the line separating such lot from the street; in
the case of a through lot or a corner lot, any lot line
adjacent to a street right-of-way shall he considered a
front lot line. In all cases in which the street widths have
not been specifically recorded, the front lot line shall be
considered to be thirty-three (33) feet from the center of
the street. (See Figure 3-8).
Lot Line, Rear - Interior Lots:
That lot line which is opposite and most distant from the
front lot line. The rear lot line in any irregular or triangular
lot, for the purpose of this Ordinance, shall be a line
entirely within the lot, at least ten (10) feet long and
generally parallel to and most distant from the front lot
line. (See Figure 3-8)
Lot Line, Rear - Corner Lots:
For a comer lot, the building inspector shall at the time of
application for a building permit on the principal building,
designate a lot line opposite one of the two front lot lines
which shall be considered the rear lot line. The remaining
lot line also being opposite a front lot line, shall be
considered a side yard line. In the case of a nonresidential
corner lot or permitted non-residential uses on
a residential corner lot the Planning Commission shall
make such determination and designation prior to final
site plan approval.
Lot Line, Side:
Any lot line not a front lot line nor a rear lot line. (See
Figure 3-8)
Lot of Record:
A tract of land which is part of a subdivision shown on a
plat or map which has been recorded in the Office of the
Register of Deeds for Kent County, Michigan, prior to the
effective date of this Ordinance; or a tract of land
described by metes and bounds which is the subject of a
deed or land contract recorded at the Office of the
Register of Deeds prior to the effective date of this
Ordinance.
Major Mineral Resource Extraction:
Mineral resource extraction which occurs on a parcel of
property where the excavation disturbs an area which is 5
acres or larger.
Massage:
An alcohol rub, fomentation, bath, common massage,
magnetic massage procedure, manual manipulation of the
body or any method treating external parts of the body
for remedial or hygienic purposes, consisting of rubbing,
stroking, kneading, adjusting or tapping with the hand,
elbow, fingers or any instrument, electric, magnetic or
otherwise, with or without supplementary aids. (This
definition amended by Ord. #5 of 2001)
Massage Establishment:
Any building, turkish bath parlor, steam bath, sauna bath,
room, premises, place, institution or establishment where
body massage is regularly practiced on the human body,
to club members or to the general public for a charge or
consideration, but the term “massage establishment”
shall not include licensed hospitals, nursing homes,
medical clinics, office of a physician, surgeon, osteopath
or chiropractor. (This definition amended by Ord. #5 of 2001)
Lot Width
Rear Lot Line
Lot Depth
Side Lot Line
Side Lot Line
Figure 3-8
LOT WIDTH, DEPTH, LINE
Right-of-
Way Line
Street Centerline
33’ Min.
©birchlerarroyo
3-13
CHAPTER 3
Definitions
Material:
Anything tangible, whether through the medium of
reading, observation, sound, or in any other manner,
including, but not limited to, anything printed or written,
any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, picture,
drawing, pictorial representation, motion picture,
photograph, video tape, video disk, film, transparency,
slide, audiotape, audiodisk, computer tape, holographic
images, or any other medium used to electronically
produce or reproduce images, or any mechanical,
chemical, or electronic reproduction. Material includes
undeveloped photographs, molds, printing plates, and
other latent representational objects whether or not
processing or other acts are required to make the content
of the material apparent. This definition is intended to
include material which is the product of any technology,
whether that technology is available on the effective date
of this Ordinance or becomes available after that date.
(This definition amended by Ord. #5 of 2001)
Merchandise:
Any material and novelties. (This definition amended by Ord. #5
of 2001)
Mezzanine:
An intermediate level or levels between the floor and
ceiling of any story with an aggregate floor area of not
more than 33 percent of the floor area of the story in
which the level or levels are located. (See Figure 3-9)
Microbrew:
A facility at which beer, ales or other similar beverages
are manufactured and primarily consumed on site. The
volume of production is over 5,000 but may not exceed
60,000 barrels a year. (Ord. No. 11 of 2014)
Micro distillery:
A facility at which spirts, wine or other similar beverages
are manufactured and primarily consumed on site. The
volume of production may not exceed 50,000 gallons a
year. (Ord. No. 11 of 2014)
Mineral:
Any substance, organic or inorganic, found in nature as
part of the earth, and has sufficient value away from its
natural location to be mined, quarried, or dug for its own
sake or for its own specific use. This does not include
trees or vegetation.
Mineral Resource Extraction Site:
The property from which a mineral resource extraction
takes place.
Mini-Food-Mart Stations:
A retail establishment which primarily emphasizes the
sale of convenience foods, snacks and sundries. Such
facilities may offer the incidental sale of motor vehicle
fuels and other petroleum products (less than 3 gas pump
islands) to their customers on a full service or self service
basis. A mini-food-mart does not include a restaurant. (This
definition added by Ordinance #9of 1993.)
Minor Mineral Resource Extraction:
Mineral Resource extraction which occurs on a parcel of
property where the excavation disturbs an area which is
less than 5 acres.
Attic
Mezzanine*
2nd Story
1st Story
Basement**
Figure 3-9
MEZZANINE
* Area not to exceed 1/3 of floor below
** Habitable basement shall count as floor area ©birchlerarroy
3-14
CHAPTER 3
Definitions
Mobile Home:
See "Dwelling Unit, Mobile Home" as defined in this
Chapter.
Mobile Home Park:
Mobile home park means a parcel or tract of land under
the control of a person upon which three (3) or more
mobile homes are located on a continual non recreational
basis and which is offered to the public for that purpose
regardless of whether a change is made therefore,
together with any building, structure, enclosure, street,
equipment, or facility used or intended for use incident to
the occupancy of a mobile home and which is not
intended for use as a temporary trailer park in accordance
with the Mobile Home Commission Act, being Act 419 of
the Michigan Public Acts of 1976 as amended.
Mobile Home Subdivision:
A mobile home park except that the mobile home lots are
subdivided, surveyed, recorded, and sold in accordance
with Act 419 of 1976, as amended.
Modular Home:
A dwelling consisting of prefabricated units, designed to
be incorporated at a building site into a single residential
structure on a permanent foundation and meeting all the
requirements of the building code.
Motel:
A building or group of buildings providing transient
accommodations with motor vehicle parking contiguous
to the building, and individual entrances from outside the
building to serve each unit. The term, "Motel", shall
include: drive-in hotel, tourist court, motor hotel, tourist
room, motor court, tourist cabin, motor inn, motor lodge,
or transient cabin. For the purpose of this Ordinance,
"Motel" and "Hotel" are considered synonymous.
Nonconforming Curb Cut or Driveway:
An existing curb cut or driveway providing access to a lot
or parcel from a public or private street which at the time
of the effective date of this Ordinance does not meet the
minimum spacing and/or design requirements applicable
to the district in which it is located.
Nonconforming Lot:
A lot existing prior to the effective date of this Ordinance
(and not created for the purposes of evading the
restrictions of this Ordinance) that does not meet the
minimum area requirement of the district in which the lot
is located.
Nonconforming Project:
Any structure, development, or undertaking that is
incomplete on the effective date of this Ordinance and
which would be inconsistent with any regulation
applicable to the district in which it is located if completed
as proposed or planned.
Nonconforming Sign:
A sign that does not conform to one or more of the
regulations set forth in Cascade Township Sign
Ordinance.
Nonconforming Use:
A nonconforming situation that occurs when property is
used for a purpose or in a manner made unlawful by the
use regulations applicable to the district in which the
property is located. (For example, a commercial office
building in a residential district may be a nonconforming
use.) The term also refers to the activity that constitutes
that use made of the property. (For example, all the
activity associated with running a bakery in a residentially
zoned area is a nonconforming use.)
Nonconforming Situation:
A situation that occurs when, on the effective date of this
Ordinance, an existing lot, structure or curb cut, or use of
an existing lot or structure or curb cut does not conform
to one or more of the regulations applicable to the district
in which the lot, curb cut or structure is located. Among
other possibilities, a nonconforming situation may arise
because a lot does not meet minimum acreage
requirements, because structures exceed maximum
height limitations, because the relationship between
existing buildings and the land (in such matters as density
and setback requirements) is not in conformity with this
Ordinance, or because land or buildings are used for
purposes made unlawful by this Ordinance.
Novelty:
Any instrument, device, or paraphernalia which depicts or
describes any specific anatomical area or any specific
3-15
CHAPTER 3
Definitions
sexual act, or which is designed for use, or commonly
used, in connection with specific sexual activities,
excluding condoms and other birth control and disease
prevention products. (This definition amended by Ord. #5 of 2001)
Nude Model Studio:
Any place where a person who displays any specified
anatomical area is provided to be observed, sketched,
drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by any other person who pays money or any
form of consideration. (This definition amended by Ord. #5 of
2001)
Nursery:
An unclosed place where young trees, bushes or plants
are grown for the purpose of subsequent sale or
transplanting, but not including holding or storage areas
set aside for plants and trees awaiting re-planting off-site.
Open Air Business:
Includes uses operated for profit substantially in the open
air including:
1. Bicycle, utility truck or trailer, motor vehicle, boats or
home equipment sale, repair or rental services.
2. Outdoor display and sale of garages, motor homes,
mobile homes, snowmobiles, farm implements,
swimming pools, and similar activities.
3. Retail sales of trees, fruits, vegetables, shrubbery,
plants, seeds, top soil, humus, fertilizer, trellises, lawn
furniture, playground equipment, and other home
garden supplies and equipment.
4. Outdoor recreational establishments consisting of
uses on activities such as tennis courts, archery
courts, shuffleboard, horseshoe courts, rifle ranges,
miniature golf, golf driving ranges, amusement parks,
or similar recreation uses (transient or permanent).
Parking Area:
An off street open area for the parking of motor vehicles
for a fee or as an accommodation of clients, customers,
residents, visitors, occupants, or the general public.
Parking area shall include access drives within the actual
parking area.
Person:
An individual human being, or a business entity, including
a firm, association, co-partnership, partnership,
corporation, society, or organization.
Public Utility:
Any person, or governmental department, board or
commission duly authorized under township, state, or
federal regulations, to furnish electricity, gas, steam,
communications, transportation, water, wastewater
removal or similar essential services to the public;
provided, however, that those persons involved in the
reception or transmission of radio or television signals or
the provision of cellular communications and other
personal communications services shall not be considered
a Public Utility.
Recreation Center:
Buildings or facilities, owned by a "person", which are
available for use by the general public or on a
membership basis. Uses and activities shall include only
the following: theaters; exercise facilities; court games
such as tennis, paddleball, handball, and volleyball;
bowling alleys, archery; golf driving ranges; ice arenas;
pool and billiards; ping pong; swimming pools; roller
skating rinks; and restaurants and taverns when designed
as an integral part of the facility and incidental to one or
more of the other permitted uses.
Recreation Vehicle:
A vehicle primarily designed as temporary living quarters
for recreational, camping, or travel purposes, including a
vehicle having its own motor power or a vehicle mounted
on or drawn by mother vehicle, in accordance with Act 49,
Michigan Public Acts of 1975, as amended. Recreation
vehicles includes travel trailers, motor homes, pickup
campers, tent trailers, off road vehicles, house car, house
trailer, trailer home, trailer coach or other portable unit.
Residential above retail, business establishments or
personal service uses: (Ord No. 8 of 2011; 6/23/11)
A mix of land uses where dwelling units are located on
floors or stories above retail businesses, office uses, or
professional services uses.
3-16
CHAPTER 3
Definitions
Recreation Vehicle Park:
An area on which space is rented for "recreational
vehicles", on a temporary basis according to the
provisions of Act 243, Public Acts of 1959, as amended,
and the provisions of this Ordinance.
Restaurant:
A public eating place where food is prepared and sold for
immediate consumption.
Restaurant with brew pub as accessory use:
A public eating place where food is prepared and sold for
immediate consumption with at least 50% of the gross
annual receipts are from the sale of food and beverages
other than alcoholic beverages. (Ord. No. 11 of 2014)
River's Edge:
The mean annual waterline of the river or tributary.
Roadside Stand:
A farm building or structure used for the display or sale of
agricultural products grown or produced on the premises
upon which the stand is located.
Setback:
See "Building Setback" as defined by this Chapter.
Sexual Encounter Center:
An establishment, except that which is part of the practice
of and under the supervision and control of a physician,
psychologist, or psychiatrist licensed to practice in
Michigan that offers:
Activities between male and female persons and/or
persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons
exposes or displays any specified anatomical area; or
The matching and/or exchanging of persons for any
specified sexual activities. (This definition amended by Ord. #5 of
2001)
Signs:
A sign shall mean any structure so defined in the Cascade
Charter Township Sign Ordinance.
Site Plan:
A reproducible scale drawing which shows the location
and dimensions of all intended and existing buildings,
structures, parking, loading facilities, streets, driveways,
buildings, planting, landscaping, yard spaces, sidewalks,
signs, drainage facilities, water supply, sewage systems
and any other items that may be required by Chapter 21
of this Ordinance.
Special Use:
A use which may be permitted only after review of the
effect the use may have on adjoining lands and on the
general welfare of the township. It may require special
consideration and often also conditional regulations to
insure compatibility and proper development in
accordance with the intent of this ordinance.
Specified Anatomical Area:
This shall refer to the following:
1. Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, anus, or female breast at or below the top of
the areola; or
2. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even
if completely and opaquely covered. (This definition
amended by Ord. #5 of 2001)
Specified Sexual Activities:
This shall refer to the following:
1. The fondling or other erotic touching of human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female
breast; or
2. A sex act, actual or simulated, including intercourse,
oral copulation, or sodomy; or
3. Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
4. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with
any activities set forth in 1, 2 or 3 above. (This definition
amended by Ord. #5 of 2001)
Stable, Public:
A building used for housing horses or other domestic
animals for commercial enterprise.
Story:
That portion of a building included between the upper
surface of a floor and upper surface of the floor or roof
next above (also see “Mezzanine”). (See Figure 3-9)
3-17
CHAPTER 3
Definitions
Story Above Grade:
Any story having its finished floor surface entirely above
grade except that a basement shall be considered as a
story above grade when the distance from grade to the
finished surface of the floor above the basement is more
than 6 feet for more than 50 percent of the total
perimeter or more than 12 feet at any point. (See Figure
3-1)
Street, Private:
An irrevocable easement running with the land to one or
more owners of adjacent properties which provides
access to those adjacent properties and which is not
dedicated for general public use.
Street, Public:
Any public thoroughfare dedicated for the purpose of
traffic circulation and principle means of access to
abutting property, including any avenue, place, way,
drive, land boulevard, highway, road, or other
thoroughfare except an alley.
Street, Functional Classification:
1. Freeway/Expressway: Highways and parkway having
the sole purpose of carrying through traffic, and will
not provide direct land/property access. Freeway
access is fully controlled with carefully spaced high
speed exit/entrance ramps and grade separation with
intersecting roadways.
2. Arterial: Streets primarily intended to carry large
volumes of through traffic connecting major activity
centers to other major traffic generators. Access to
abutting properties must be limited to carefully
controlled points.
3. Major Collector: Streets having the primary purpose
of collecting traffic from intersecting local streets and
distributing this volume to the nearest arterial. A
secondary purpose is to carry moderate volumes
through traffic. Access to abutting land uses is a
secondary function which, with proper land planning,
can be limited.
4. Minor Collector: Streets having the primary purpose
of collecting traffic from intersecting local streets and
distributing this volume to the nearest major
collector and/or arterial. As such it provides the
linkage from neighborhoods (i.e. local streets) to the
arterial system and provides intra-neighborhood
access. Continuity of the minor collector beyond the
nearest major collector and/or arterial is not
desirable.
5. Local: The primary function of the local street system
is to serve adjacent properties. As such it provides
the linkage from adjacent land uses to the collector
street system. Thru volume service is in conflict with
these functions and must be prohibited in the design
of the street network.
Street Right-of-Way:
A general term denoting land, property or a property
interest usually in a strip, acquired for or devoted to
transportation purposes which has been dedicated to the
public.
Structure:
Anything constructed, erected, or placed, or a
combination of materials with a fixed location above, on,
or below the ground, or attachment to something having
such location, including buildings, signs, billboards, signs,
light posts, utility poles, radio and television antennas,
swimming pools, gazebos, tennis courts, sheds, storage
bins, but excluding fences, sidewalks, driveways, and
streets.
Swimming Pool:
An artificially constructed basin for the holding of water
for swimming and aquatic recreation and does not include
any plastic, canvas, or rubber portable pools temporarily
erected upon the ground with less than two (2) feet of
water.
Tavern:
An establishment with an occupant load of under 100 that
serves alcoholic beverages in which the principal business
is the sale of such beverages for consumption on site.
(Ord No. 11 of 2014)
Theater:
Any building or place used for presentation of dramatic
spectacles, shows, movies, or other entertainment, open
to the public with or without charge.
Use:
Any purpose for which a building or other structure or a
tract of land may be designed, arranged, intended,
maintained, or occupied; or any activity occupation,
3-18
CHAPTER 3
Definitions
business or operation carried on, or intended to be
carried on, in a building or other structure or on a tract of
land.
Use, Accessory:
A use of a structure or premises which is customarily
incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the
structure or premises. (See Use, Principal)
Use, Permitted by Right:
A use or uses which, by their very nature are allowed
within the specified Zoning District provided all applicable
regulations of Cascade Township are met. Permitted uses
include the principal use of the land or structure as well as
accessory uses unless specifically stated to the contrary.
Use, Principal:
The primary purpose for which land or a structure or
building is used.
Use, Temporary:
A use or activity which is permitted only for a limited
time, and subject to specific regulations.
Yard:
A space open to the sky and unoccupied or unobstructed,
except by encroachments specifically permitted under the
provisions and terms of this Ordinance, on the same lot
with a building or structure. Yard measurements shall be
the minimum horizontal distance.
Yard, Front:
The yard between front lot line or street right-of-way line
and the nearest point of any part of the main building
thereon. (See Figure 3-10)
Yard, Rear:
The yard between the rear lot line and the nearest point
of the main building thereon. (See Figure 3-10)
Yard, Side:
The yard between the side lot line and the nearest point
of the main building thereon. (See Figure 3-10)
Zone:
See “District” as defined by this Chapter.
Zoning Board:
The Cascade Charter Township Zoning Board of Appeals
Zoning Permit:
See also “Certificate of Zoning Compliance” as defined by
this Chapter. (This Section amended by Ordinance No. 2 of 1997)
©birchlerarroy
3-19
Intentionally left blank
CHAPTER 4
General Provisions
4-1
Section 4.01 Title:
General Provisions
Section 4.02 Extent of Regulations:
These general provisions shall apply to all zoning districts
except as otherwise noted.
Section 4.03 Effect of Zoning:
No building, structure, premises, lot or parcel and parcel
of land in the township shall hereafter be used or
occupied, and no building or part thereof or other
structure shall be erected, raised, moved, placed,
reconstructed, extended, enlarged, or altered, except in
conformity with this Ordinance.
Section 4.04 Unlawful Use Not Authorized:
Nothing in the Ordinance or any amendment shall be
interpreted as authorization for or approval of the
continuance of the unlawful use of a structure, land or
premises on the effective date of this Ordinance or any
amendment.
Section 4.05 Continuation of Existing Lawful
Land Uses:
Any building, structure or use, lawfully in existence at the
time of the effective date of this Ordinance may be
continued except as provided in "Chapter 22,
Nonconforming Uses.
Section 4.06 Ascribed Principal Use of Property:
No more than one principal building with the customary
accessory buildings and structures shall be erected on any
individual lot or parcel of land.
Section 4.07 Registration of Property:
The description of and the deed for every parcel of land
shall be required to be on record with the Kent County
Register of Deeds, prior to the authorization of any use of
the lot or parcel of land by the Township.
Section 4.08 Accessory Buildings and Structures
- General:
For the purposes of maintaining orderliness, aesthetics
and property values, especially in the residential areas,
the following provisions are intended to regulate the
location and character of accessory structures normally
incidental to permitted principal uses. The following
regulations are therefore intended to pertain to all
accessory buildings and all accessory structures other
than buildings, including but not limited to playground
equipment, children's play houses, sports courts,
swimming pools, pet accommodations, radio and
television antennas and similar structures. Sidewalks,
driveways, fences, light posts, utility poles and signs are
excluded from these regulations unless specifically stated.
In any zoning district an accessory building or structure
may be erected from the permitted principal building or
an integral part of the permitted principal building.
Unless specifically regulated by other provisions of this
Ordinance, accessory buildings and structures erected as
an integral part of the principal building shall comply in all
respects with the requirements of this Ordinance
applicable to the principal building. In addition, the
following general standards shall apply to all accessory
structures.
1. The architectural character of all accessory buildings
in excess of 200 square feet shall be compatible and
similar to the principal building.
2. No accessory building or structure shall be
constructed on any parcel on which there is no
principal building. If an accessory structure and
principal building are to be erected concurrently, a
building permit for the accessory structure shall not
be issued until such time that construction of the
principal building has been at least fifty (50) percent
completed.
3. Accessory structures other than attached porches
and garages shall not be located in the front yard
area of any lot except as allowed in Chapter 17,
Section 17.03(b) or for a lot having water frontage
where a customary detached private garage is
permitted if it is located behind the applicable
required front yard setback line for the district.
4. Accessory buildings and structures may be located in
the side or rear yard under the following provisions:
a. They shall not be located closer to any side or
rear lot line than the principal building is
CHAPTER 4
General Provisions
4-2
permitted, except that boat houses may be
permitted at or near the water's edge provided
that the required side yard placement is
maintained and all other applicable local and
state permits are obtained prior to construction.
b. Those not classified as buildings, and buildings
containing 200 square feet or less, may not
project closer than 10 feet to any side or rear
property line. Not withstanding the foregoing,
boat docks, patios and pump houses may be
located at or near the water's edge, provided
that the required side yard placement is
maintained and all other applicable local and
state permits are obtained prior to their erection
and placement. (Section amended by Ordinance #1 of
1992)
5. The distance between accessory buildings in excess of
200 square feet and any principal building shall not
be less than ten (10) feet. Accessory buildings shall
be considered attached to the principal building when
the area between the two is wholly or partially
covered by a continuous breezeway, portico, covered
colonnade, or similar architectural device.
Section 4.09 Accessory Buildings - Residential:
Accessory buildings or structures on residential lots shall
not directly or indirectly involve any business, trade,
occupation or profession. In addition the following
regulations shall apply: (Amended by Ordinance #6 of 2002)
1. Special Use Permits Required: Except as provided in
Subsection 2, the following Table 4-1 shall be used to
determine whether accessory buildings shall be
approved under the provisions of Chapter 17, Special
Use.
Table 4-1: Accessory Building – Residential, Permits
Maximum
Height to
Midpoint
of Roof
Min. Bldg.
Side Yard
Setback
Min. Bldg.
Rear Yard
Setback
Special Use
Permit Required
Up to 14’ 10’ Min. – 25’ Over 832 sq. ft.
15’- 18’ 40’ Min. – 40’ Over 832 sq. ft.
19’- 22’ 60’ Min. – 60’ Over 832 sq. ft.
The following Table 4-2 shall be used to determine the
number of accessory buildings permitted on a parcel.
Table 4-2: Accessory Buildings-Residential, Number
Acreage Number of Buildings
Allowed*
Up to three (3) acres 1
3-6 acres 2
6+ acres 3
*The number of buildings allowed is in addition to an
attached or detached private garage. (Amended by Ordinance
#12 of 2000)
2. Private Garage - Customary: A customary private
garage shall consist of any one (1) private garage
attached to a principal dwelling unit, or in its place,
any one (1) detached private garage. Subject to the
following limitations, one such accessory building is
permitted by right on any lot or parcel occupied for
residential purposes, upon approval of the building
inspector.
a. The maximum size of a detached private garage
permitted by right shall be limited to 832 square
feet of floor area. Detached private garages
exceeding 832 square feet shall only be approved
under the provisions of Chapter 15, Special Use.
b. The maximum size of a private garage attached
to a dwelling unit shall be limited to 832 square
feet for the first 1300 square feet of habitable
floor area contained in the dwelling. In addition,
for each whole increment of five (5) square feet
that the floor area of the dwelling unit exceeds
1300 square feet, the floor area of the attached
garage may be increased by one (1) square foot.
Section 4.09(3) has been deleted (Amended by
Ordinance #6 of 2002). (New Section added by Ordinance #1
of 1992)
CHAPTER 4
General Provisions
4-3
Section 4.10 Accessory Structures Other Than
Buildings:
The following provisions apply to accessory structures
other than buildings.
1. Antennas: Before any antenna is installed, the
provisions of this section must be satisfied. This
section shall not apply to any satellite dish antenna
that does not exceed one (1) meter in diameter in a
residential district or two (2) meters in diameter in a
commercial or industrial district. In addition, this
section shall not apply to any antenna that does not
exceed one (1) meter in width and does not exceed
the height of the principal building by more than sixty
(60) inches including the pole or post. Further, this
section shall not apply to wireless communications
equipment as defined in Subsection 3 of Article I,
Chapter 342, Part II of the Cascade Charter Township
General Ordinances. The use and installation of such
wireless communications equipment is governed by
Chapter 17 of this Zoning Ordinance and by Article I,
Chapter 342, Part II of the Cascade Charter Township
General Ordinances. Such antenna and/or wireless
communications equipment shall still be subject to
applicable building codes (if any). Except as provided
above or in subsection (j) below, no antenna shall be
installed outdoors until and unless a building permit
for the antenna has been issued by the Township
pursuant to this section. In order to protect the
public health and safety and to minimize the visual
impact of antennas, the Township adopts the
following regulations regulating antennas. Antennas
are permitted in all zoning districts subject to the
following requirements:
a. The antenna shall be permanently secured to a
stable foundation.
b. No portion of the antenna shall display any
advertising message or other graphic
representation other than a manufacturer's logo
or nameplate provided that such logo or
nameplate is of a size and character that is not
legible from adjacent properties.
c. Dish antennas shall be of a color and texture so
as to blend into the adjacent background
d. A free-standing antenna or tower (i.e., not
mounted on a roof) shall be located only in a rear
yard or a side yard and shall not be closer to the
property line than its height or the depth of the
required rear or side yard setback, whichever is
the greater.
e. All antennas must be grounded to protect
against damage from lightning.
f. In determining whether to issue a building permit
for an antenna, the township shall apply the
following standards:
1) The antenna shall be installed and placed so
as to not constitute a safety hazard due to
wind or storm.
2) The antenna shall not block areas that will
hamper fire-fighting equipment.
3) The antenna shall be placed so as not to be
too close to electrical lines or tree limbs.
4) The antenna shall not be located or placed
as to have a serious adverse impact or effect
on adjacent or nearby properties or land
uses.
5) A commercial or public antenna, including
accessory buildings or structures, shall
comply with the use regulations of the
zoning district where it is located and shall
be fully enclosed by a sturdy fence, securely
gated, the fence having such height as is
reasonably determined by the township. In
addition, any accessory buildings or
structures associated with the antenna shall
comply with the dimensional regulations of
the zoning district.
6) The antenna and the construction,
installation, maintenance, and operation
thereof shall comply with all federal, state,
and local laws, ordinances, and regulations.
g. The planning director or building official, in
his/her reasonable discretion, may impose other
terms and conditions regulating the construction,
installation, use, and maintenance of antennas.
Such other terms and conditions may include,
though need not be limited to, the following:
1) The screening or buffering of an antenna or
tower and any accessory building or
structures thereof.
2) The timely removal of unused or unsafe
antennas or towers or accessory buildings or
structures thereof.
3) For commercial or public antennas, the
prohibition on the construction or
CHAPTER 4
General Provisions
4-4
occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or
the construction or use of other structures
within a specified isolation distance from an
antenna or tower.
4) If an antenna tower is involved, shields,
fences, removal of ladders, or other safety
precautions can be required to prevent
unauthorized persons from climbing the
tower.
Notwithstanding the above, no condition shall be
imposed that would hinder the ability of the
antenna to receive or send signals.
h. An applicant for a building permit for an antenna
can appeal a decision of the planning director
and/or building official to the Township Board
pursuant to subsection (k) below.
i. A special use permit, under the provisions of
Chapter 17, shall be required prior to the
erection of antennas having one or more of the
following characteristics:
1) Any wireless communications support structure as
defined in Subsection 3 of Article I, Chapter 342,
Part II of the Cascade Charter Township General
2) Any dish antenna exceeding ten (10) feet in
diameter.
j. For purposes of this chapter, an "amateur radio
antenna" shall be defined as an antenna
operated for the purpose of receiving or
transmitting communication by radio stations as
described in Section 153(q) of Title 47 of the US
Code, and which is operated under license issued
by the Federal Communications Commission
("FCC"). Amateur radio antennas shall not be
subject to the requirements of this section,
except as follows. No outdoor amateur radio
antenna shall be installed until and unless
township approval is obtained and a building
permit for an amateur radio antenna has been
issued by the township for the amateur radio
antenna. Township approval for an amateur
radio antenna is not transferable and shall
automatically expire when the person granted
the approval no longer owns the property
involved or that person's license from the FCC is
no longer valid. The township shall not issue a
building permit for an amateur radio antenna
until the applicant has presented proof of a
current FCC license and the following
requirements are met:
1) If the antenna is to be installed in a rear yard,
side yard, or on the roof, the permit shall be
issued upon presentment of the FCC license to
the building inspector.
2) No permit shall be issued for the installation of
antenna in the front yard unless the
requirements of subsections (a) through (g)
above have been met.
If the effect of any of these requirements will be
to preclude or prevent the operation of an
amateur radio antenna, the antenna shall not be
subject to those provisions which preclude or
prevent such operation, and the township shall
grant approval and issue a building permit for the
amateur radio antenna.
k. Where the effect of any of the provisions of this
section would be to prevent or preclude the
effective operation of an antenna (including the
ability to send or receive signals where
applicable), such antenna may be approved by
the Township Board if it is reasonably
demonstrated that the effect of the application
of any of the provisions of this section would be
to preclude or prevent the operation of such
antenna. In granting approval for an antenna,
the Township Board may impose reasonable
conditions upon such approval, but such
conditions shall not interfere with the reasonable
use of the antenna and such conditions, if any,
shall be no more than the minimum practicable
regulations necessary to accomplish the
Township's legitimate purpose in regulating such
antennas. (This section amended by Ordinance #12 of
1996)
2. Swimming Pools: Prior to the issuance of a building
permit for the construction of an outdoor swimming
pool in any zoning district the following provisions
must be satisfied.
a. An application for permit, accompanied by a
complete and detailed set of plans and
specifications of the swimming pool, fencing and
related equipment, meeting as a minimum the
following standards.
i. Adherence to the locational requirements
for structures not classified as buildings,
[Section 4.08(4)(b)].
ii. Any electrical wiring within twenty-five (25)
feet of the water's edge of the pool shall be
CHAPTER 4
General Provisions
4-5
placed underground and in an appropriate
conduit approved for such purposes. No
electric wires of any kind shall cross or be
over the water surface. Any underwater
lighting shall be accomplished by the use of
methods and materials approved for such
purposes. All electrical equipment and
related components shall conform to the
current National Electrical Code, as adopted
by the Cascade Charter Township Board.
iii. There shall be no cross-connections of any
public water supply with any other source of
water supply for the pool. The line from the
public water supply to the pool shall be
protected against back flow of water by
means of an air gap and shall discharge at
least six (6) inches above the maximum highwater
level of the makeup tank or the pool.
iv. The drain line for the pool shall be
connected to a storm sewer if one is
available. Where a storm sewer is not
available, the pool drain may be drained in a
manner approved by the Township's Building
Inspector or Engineer. No pools shall drain
into public or private sanitary sewer or
septic systems. All drain connections shall
be approved by the Building Inspector or
Township Engineer before final approval is
given.
v. All swimming pools shall be enclosed by a
barrier in compliance with the building code
as adopted by Cascade Charter Township
Board.
(Amended by Ord #9 of 2018)
b. Before a permit shall be issued, the plans and
specifications shall be approved by the Building
Inspector, and before any swimming pool shall
be used, a final inspection and approval must be
obtained from the Building Inspector. The
Building Inspector shall have the right at any
reasonable hour to inspect any swimming pool
for the purpose of determining that all provisions
of this Ordinance are fulfilled and complied with.
3. Accessory Structures Mounted on Buildings:
Accessory structures customarily located on the roofs
of buildings such as antennas, chimneys, stacks and
necessary mechanical appurtenances such as air
exchange units and elevator bulkheads shall be, to
the extent practical, effectively screened as viewed
from a distance of 300 feet by a parapet wall or
similar feature constructed of materials having a
similar exterior appearance as materials used on the
front exterior of the building. (See Section 4.14)
Section 4.11 Animals and Fowl, Domesticated -
Keeping of:
On any R-1 residential lot the keeping of domesticated
animals such as horses, cattle, goats, hogs, sheep, llamas
and fowl shall be permitted under the following
provisions:
1. The number of such animals shall not exceed one
animal for the first three acres of lot area and one
additional animal for each additional acre of land
area.
2. Any building or confined feeding area in which such
animals are kept or fed shall be at least 100 feet from
any adjoining property or street line.
3. The foregoing provisions shall not apply to the
keeping of ordinary household pets, such as dogs,
and cats or other animals or fowl customarily kept in
cages within a dwelling or structure.
Section 4.12 Area or Space Required:
1. No lot being part of a recorded plat and no parcel of
unplatted land or site shall be so reduced that the
yard, setback, open space or area is less than the
minimum requirements of this Ordinance in effect at
the time of such reduction.
2. Accessory buildings, whether attached or unattached
to the main building, including enclosed and
unenclosed porches and garages attached to a
CHAPTER 4
General Provisions
4-6
dwelling or other main buildings shall be deemed a
part of the main building for the purpose of
determining yard space areas and setbacks.
3. In determining lot area or land area requirements, no
area shall be ascribed to more than one main building
or use, and no area necessary for compliance with
the space requirements therefore shall be ascribed to
any other building or use.
Section 4.13 Basement and Illegal Dwellings:
The use of a basement or any portion of a basement as a
dwelling or as sleeping quarters is prohibited unless it
meets the Township Building Code (BOCA) requirements
for ingress and egress. The use of the basement of a
partially completed building as a dwelling unit is
prohibited. Buildings erected as garages or other
accessory buildings shall not be occupied for dwelling
purposes.
Section 4.14 Building and Structure Height,
Maximum - Determination of and Exceptions:
(Amended by Ord No 5 of 2011; 5/11/11)
The maximum height limitations imposed on buildings
and structures within the various zoning districts shall be
the lesser amount between the maximum number of
stories permitted and the height in feet that is permitted.
The maximum number of stories permitted shall refer to
stories above grade, as defined in Chapter 3. The height
of accessory structures customarily mounted on the roofs
of buildings may exceed the building height limitation
provided that such structures (as identified in Section
4.10) are effectively screened by a parapet wall or similar
structure which may exceed the building height limitation
by no more than 4 feet provided the materials used for
screening are similar to the materials used on the front
exterior of the building. (See Section 4.10, Subsection 3)
These height limitations do not apply to spires or steeples.
The allowable spire or steeple height shall be determined
based upon the distance the base of the spire or steeple is
from any adjoining single-family residential lot line (see
Figure 4-1). In the event the church property abuts more
than one single-family residential lot line, the lesser
distance will be used to calculate the allowable steeple
height. In no case shall any spire or steeple be more than
87 feet high. Spire or steeple height shall be measured
from the average grade to the peak of the spire or steeple
not intended for human occupancy (see Figure 4-2).
(Amended by Ordinance #11 of 2001)
Figure 4-1
ALLOWABLE HEIGHT OF STEEPLE/SPIRE
Lot Line Adjoining Single Family Residential Zoning
Building
Setback
Setback from
residential
zoning district
Steeple
©birchlerarroyo
Figure 4-2
ALLOWABLE HEIGHT OF STEEPLE/SPIRE
Steeple
Base
Height =
setback, but
maximum height
is 87’
©birchlerarroyo
CHAPTER 4
General Provisions
4-7
Section 4.15: Building Setback, Front Yard -
Determination
The line from which the minimum front yard building
setback is measured shall be established under the
following provisions, based on the type of street on which
the property has frontage as classified on the Cascade
Charter Township Major Street Plan contained in
Appendix A.
1. Platted Local Streets, Private Streets: Established
from the platted front property line or the edge of
the private street easement.
2. Collector Streets: Established from the platted front
property line or 45 feet from the nominal centerline
of the street right-of-way.
3. Arterial Streets: Established from the platted front
property line or 60 feet from the nominal centerline
of the road right-of-way.
Section 4.16 Buildings, Moving:
The moving of a building to a new location shall be
considered as the erection of a new building, and all
provisions, regulations, or requirements relative to the
erection of a new building shall apply.
Section 4.17 Buildings, Razing:
No building shall be razed until a permit has been
obtained from the Building Inspector who shall be
authorized to require a performance guarantee in an
amount equal to 120 percent of the cost estimate for the
razing. The guarantee shall be conditioned on the
applicant completing the razing with such reasonable
period as shall be prescribed in the permit and complying
with such reasonable regulations as to health and safety
as the Building Inspector may reasonably require and this
ordinance may, from time to time, prescribe, including
filling of excavations and proper termination of utility
connections.
Section 4.18 Buildings and Structures,
Temporary:
Mobile homes, mobile offices, tents or other movable or
erected structures intended for temporary use or
occupancy incidental to construction work, or special
events shall be situated or erected upon land or premises
within the Township and used according to the following
provisions.
1. Permits for temporary construction trailers, sheds
and offices may be issued by the Building Inspector
according to the following criteria:
a. Unless involved with a major public
improvements project, temporary structures may
only be located in commercial districts, industrial
districts, or approved Planned Unit
Developments.
b. No temporary permit may be issued prior to the
issuance of a building permit. Temporary
permits shall expire when the building permit
expires.
c. A temporary structure shall be located on the
same site as the construction.
d. A temporary structure shall be located on the
site such that:
1) On and off-site traffic hazards are minimized.
2) The aesthetic impacts are reasonably
minimized.
3) It is not closer than ten (10) feet to any
property line.
4) All applicable safety, health and fire codes
are met.
e. No final inspection shall be issued until all
temporary structures have been removed from
the site.
f. Where alternate on-site locations are available,
no temporary structure shall be located next to
developed residences.
2. Permits for temporary structures such as tents used
in conjunction with special short term outdoor events
may be issued by the Building Inspector upon
approval of Planning Director according to the
following criteria:
a. On and off-site traffic hazards are minimized.
b. The structure is not placed with any required
front or side yard green area of an existing
building or otherwise within 25 feet of any
adjoining property or public or private street
right-of-way.
c. The structure shall be anchored according to
manufacturer's specifications and the Township
is indemnified by the property owner against all
property damage or personal injury that may
result from potential hazards caused by the
erection and placement or failure of the
structure.
CHAPTER 4
General Provisions
4-8
d. The structure will be in place for less than 72
hours.
e. Any event that directly or indirectly involves the
sale, distribution or consumption of alcoholic
beverages must provide a copy of the temporary
liquor license permit for the event prior to the
Township signing off on the event. (amended by
Ord #10 of 2018)
f. The event is a public service event or an event
sponsored by an existing business located on or
adjacent to the parcel on which the structure is
to be located and that the merchandise, services
or goods displayed within the structure are of the
variety normally offered by an existing business.
3. Permits for the temporary placement of mobile
homes for occupancy on property at which a principal
dwelling has been damaged or destroyed by fire,
wind, flood or Act of God may be issued by the
Building Inspector upon approval by the Planning
Director according to the following criteria:
a. Sufficient domestic water supply and toilet
facilities are provided.
b. All construction and all plumbing, electrical
apparatus and insulation within the mobile home
shall be of a type and quality conforming to or
exceeding the "Mobile Home Construction and
Safety Standards", as promulgated by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban
Development, (24 CRF 3280), as amended. All
dwellings shall meet or exceed all applicable roof
snow load and strength requirements. All
plumbing and electrical connections shall meet
BOCA requirements.
c. The mobile home shall be located to conform to
all locational requirements otherwise applicable
to accessory buildings in the applicable zoning
district except that it may be placed in the front
yard.
d. The permit shall specify that the mobile home is
temporary and that the permit shall expire after
a reasonable specific time.
e. An occupancy permit for a rehabilitated or
reconstructed dwelling unit damaged or
destroyed by such causes that warrant the
issuance of a permit for a temporary mobile
home for occupancy shall not be issued until it
has been removed or an approved performance
guarantee for its removal is deposited with the
Township Clerk.
2. Other Temporary Structures:
Other temporary structures not permitted or
regulated above or by other provisions of this
Ordinance may be permitted by the Zoning Board of
Appeals. An application for such temporary structure
shall set forth the purposes of the construction. The
Zoning Board of Appeals shall determine whether
such structure is intended as a temporary building
and that its use thereof shall be terminated at a
specified time. The application shall not be granted if
the structure is not served with a sufficient and
healthful water supply and toilet facilities. The
temporary structure shall be so constructed and
maintained that it shall conform to the minimum
requirements for safety, health, and general public
welfare and for the prevention of fire hazards as
provided by the terms of this Ordinance or any other
ordinance of the Township, not in conflict herewith
for such districts in which the temporary structure
shall be located. The temporary building shall not be
injurious to the value of the surrounding property or
neighborhood.
Section 4.19 Dwellings - Single-Family:
Single-family dwelling erected or placed on a lot or parcel
of property in the Township shall meet the following
minimum criteria:
1. It shall have a minimum width across any front, side
or rear elevation of twenty (20) feet.
2. There shall be a minimum habitable floor to ceiling
height of 7.5 feet.
3. The dwelling must be aesthetically compatible in
design and appearance with other dwellings in the
district, and conform to the minimum floor area
requirements for the district in which it is located.
4. The dwelling shall be connected to a public sewer and
water supply, or to such private facilities approved by
the Kent County Health Department.
5. All construction and all plumbing, electrical apparatus
and insulation within the dwelling shall be of a type
and quality conforming to the Township Building
Code (BOCA) or the "Mobile Home Construction and
Safety Standards", as promulgated by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban
Development, being 24 CFR 3280, and as from time
to time such standards may be amended. The
dwelling shall meet or exceed all applicable roof snow
CHAPTER 4
General Provisions
4-9
load and strength requirements. All plumbing and
electrical connections shall meet BOCA requirements.
6. The placement installation and construction of a
mobile home in the ARC District shall meet the
following additional requirements.
a. It shall have either a sloped roof with shingles, or
a flat roof containing built-up roofing.
b. Additions to the mobile home shall comply with
the construction standards of the BOCA Code.
The exterior of the addition shall be visually
compatible with the exterior appearance of the
mobile home.
c. It shall be attached to a permanent foundation
wall, constructed on the site in accordance with
the BOCA Code. It shall be installed pursuant to
the manufacturer's setup instructions and shall
be secured to the premises by an anchoring
device complying with the rules and regulations
of the Michigan Mobile Home Commission. The
entire perimeter shall be enclosed by a
foundation wall and shall be installed with the
wheels removed. Exposed towing mechanism,
under-carriage or chassis are not permitted.
d. If a particular mobile home is excluded from
placement in the ARC District other than
designated mobile home parks, it must be
because the mobile home fails to satisfy the
above requirements, which were designed to
assure that the mobile home will compare
aesthetically with other housing types allowed on
the site, and not merely because it is a mobile
home.
7. No construction required herein shall be commenced
before a building permit has been obtained.
Section 4.20 Home Occupations:
Cascade Township recognizes that certain business
activities might be carried on in the home, which under
certain conditions could have a deleterious or disrupting
effect on adjoining properties or the residential
neighborhood in general. In permitting certain home
occupations and the limited use of dwellings for business
purposes it is the intent of this Ordinance to establish a
general threshold of acceptable, non-residential activity,
beyond which the activity shall not be permitted or shall
require special use approval.
To be permitted, the use of a dwelling for home
occupation purposes and the activity must meet the
following criteria.
1. Only those persons residing on the premises shall be
engaged in the home occupation.
2. The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation
shall be clearly secondary to its use for residential
purposes by its occupants and with the exception of
adult or child family day care homes, not more than
twenty (20) percent or 300 square feet of the floor
area of the dwelling, whichever is the lessor amount,
shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation.
3. There shall be no change in the outside appearance
of the dwelling and with the exception of adult or
child family day care homes where fencing may be
required and outdoor play activity may occur, there
shall be no change in the appearance of the premises,
or other visible evidence of the conduct of the home
occupation.
4. No home occupation shall be conducted in any
accessory building or garage.
5. No more than four (4) motor vehicles shall be
permitted on the premises where a home occupation
is conducted, exclusive of motor vehicles stored in a
completely enclosed building.
6. No motors other than electrically operated motors
shall be used in conjunction with the home
occupation. The total horse power of all electrical
motors utilized in the home occupation shall not
exceed three (3) horsepower. No single electrical
motor used in the home occupation shall exceed one
(1) horsepower. All electrical motors and equipment
used in the conduct of the home occupation shall be
shielded so as not to cause radio or television
interference for adjoining properties. Only
mechanical equipment which is similar to that used
for household purpose and hobbies and does not
affect insurance rates in the premises shall be
allowed.
7. If the home occupation is one involving the teaching
of music, it shall be restricted to piano, organ, and
unamplified instruments conducted in closed
quarters.
8. No article of merchandise shall be sold or displayed
on the premises in the conduct of the home
occupation.
CHAPTER 4
General Provisions
4-10
Section 4.21 Lots, Corner:
If a lot is bounded by two (2) streets, the front yard
requirements of the district shall be maintained for each
street. In the case of residential corner lots, the Building
Inspector shall at the time of application for a building
permit on the principal building, designate a lot line
opposite one of the two front lot lines which shall be
considered the rear lot line. The remaining lot also being
opposite a front lot line shall be considered a side yard
line. In the case of non-residential corner lots or
permitted non-residential uses on residential corner lots,
the Planning Commission shall make the determination
and designation prior to final site plan approval.
Section 4.22 Lot, Double Frontage:
A building on a lot having frontage on two (2) non
intersecting streets shall have applicable front yard and
setbacks on both streets.
Section 4.23 Model Units, Temporary Real
Estate Sales Offices:
The use of a building or dwelling unit as a model for the
purpose of selling real estate may be permitted on a
temporary basis subject to the following.
1. The building or unit is part of a larger contiguous
development in which the construction of other
similar buildings or units is being actively carried out
by the person having a legal interest in the model
building or unit.
2. No more than 450 square feet of floor area contained
within the model is devoted to sales office use, with
the remainder being utilized for show or display of
salient interior design and architectural features.
3. The address of the building or unit used as a model is
not used as a principal business address for real
estate transactions, and the properties offered, listed
and sold from the model/temporary real estate office
are contained entirely within the same contiguous
development.
4. The use of a building or unit for such purposes shall
be authorized under the provisions of Chapter 17,
Special Use. In approving such use, the Planning
Commission may establish reasonable time
limitations.
Section 4.24 Motor Vehicle Repair:
Normal and customary maintenance work (e.g. car
washing, changing of oil, etc.) on motor vehicles in
residential districts shall be permitted, provided such
vehicles are not used primarily for racing. A vehicle must
be owned by the occupant of the dwelling. All major
mechanical work (e.g. substantial engine or body repair)
must be performed within a building, and no parts or
vehicles not in legally operating condition may be stored
outside.
Section 4.25 Essential Public Services:
1. It shall be lawful for public utilities, municipal
departments or commissions to erect, construct, alter
or maintain defined essential services, but not
including buildings reasonably necessary for the
furnishing of adequate services by such public utilities
or municipal departments or commissions for the
public health and safety, and general welfare of the
public anywhere in the Township.
2. The Township Board of Appeals is granted the power
to permit any public service corporation
contemplated in the foregoing paragraph, to erect
and use a building or an addition to an existing
building or a structure for the aforesaid public utility
purposes in any district and to permit such building at
greater height or of a greater area than the district
requirements herein established; provided such
Board of Appeals shall find such use, height, area,
building structure or use is designed, erected and
landscaped to conform harmoniously with the
general architecture and plan of such district.
Section 4.26 Outdoor Lighting:
Outdoor lighting located on privately owned property
shall be so arranged that it will not shine directly on
nearby dwellings or interfere with the vision of traffic.
Section 4.27 Right-of-Way:
No building shall be erected unless the premises upon
which it is to be constructed shall abut upon a public or
private street.
CHAPTER 4
General Provisions
4-11
Section 4.28 Mineral Resource Extraction:
1. Purpose/Intent - It is the intent of this Section to
permit and regulate the orderly extraction,
processing and utilization of mineral resource
deposits of current economic importance to the
township and region; to require reclamation and
restoration of extraction and processing sites to a
useful, environmentally stable condition; and to
establish regulations and performance standards for
the extraction, processing, utilization, and transport
of mineral resources and products in such a manner
as to ensure maximum protection to surrounding
properties and the physical environment.
2. Districts in Which Mineral Resource Extraction is
Permitted
a. Minor mineral resource extractions shall require
a Type II Special Use Permit as regulated in
Chapter 15 and may be permitted in all zoning
districts except R1, Residential and R2,
Residential.
b. Major mineral resource extractions shall require
a Planned Unit Development rezoning as
regulated in Chapter 16.
3. Submission of Plans- All applicants seeking approval
of a mineral resource extraction site shall be required
to submit a mineral resource extraction plan and
reclamation plan consistent with the requirements of
this Section. The applicant shall also submit
information which establishes the following:
a. That a valuable resource is present on the
property.
b. That no serious traffic problems will result from
the extraction.
c. That noise and other disruptions will not result
from the extraction.
d. That the mineral resource extraction will not
decrease the property values in the surrounding
area.
4. Exemptions - The following, to the extent specified
herein, are exempt from the requirements of this
Section:
a. Excavation as part of the construction or
alteration of a building or the grading incidental
to a building if a building permit is obtained prior
to the commencement of excavation and/or
grading incidental to a building:
1) A building permit shall not be issued until
the Building Inspector determines the
purpose of the excavation and/or grading
and until a specific grade plan is submitted
and approved. The permit shall specify the
terms and conditions for excavation and/or
grading.
2) A building permit to commence excavation
and/or grading for one or more single family
homes that would require extensive
excavation and the removing and hauling of
material over public streets for a period of
time exceeding 10 days, shall only be
authorized by the Zoning Board of Appeals,
unless such site preparation has been
specifically authorized as part of the
Township Board's approval of a final
preliminary plat or in its approval of a
division of an unplatted or platted parcel of
land, or a planned unit development.
b. Excavation in connection with normal lawn
preparation and maintenance.
c. Excavation in connection with the construction
or alteration of a street or utility improvement.
d. Excavation in connection with farming
operations.
e. Excavation which by nature is of limited duration;
e.g. graves, septic tanks, swimming pools, etc.,
for a period of time not to exceed 15 days.
f. Regrading of property for aesthetic purposes that
does not affect existing drainage, if no material is
removed from the property.
5. Development Standards - All mineral resource
extraction sites shall conform to the following
development standards:
a. No excavation shall be made closer than 200 feet
from a residential property or any public right-ofway
or 50 feet from any abutting or adjoining
non-residential property.
b. A mineral resource extraction site shall maintain
the required lot frontage of the zoning district in
which it is located.
c. The tops of all open excavations shall be
enclosed by a fence erected and maintained at
least 25 feet outside the excavation. Such fence
shall not be less than six feet in height and shall
effectively control access to the site.
CHAPTER 4
General Provisions
4-12
d. No grading, removal, or disturbance of plant
material shall be permitted within 50 feet of any
lot line or road frontage: provided, however,
that existing vegetation and/or grading shall be
supplemented as required with additional plant
material and/or berming so as to provide an
effective year-round landscape screen, except at
the point of access. All of the requirements of
this subsection must be in place prior to
commencement of extractive operations;
provided, however, that the creation of berms as
landscape screening using material from the site
may follow the commencement of extractive
operations.
e. After the minerals have been removed from the
site, the property shall be restored by the
replacement of topsoil where feasible. The
excavation area shall be planted with a suitable
ground cover sufficient to prevent erosion.
f. The maximum depth of excavation shall not be
below existing groundwater, except in such cases
where the reclamation plan indicates that a lake
or lakes will be part of the final use of the land or
where such plan indicates that adequate fill from
overburden is to be used to refill such
excavations for conformance to the approved
reclamation plan.
g. Mineral resource extractions shall be conducted
only during the hours from 7:00 A.M. to 5:00
P.M., Monday through Friday, except when
needed during a public emergency.
h. A road from the entrance and exit of the
excavation site, a distance not less than 300 feet
from the Right-of-Way line into the area of
operation, shall be provided in order to minimize
the deposit of dirt and gravel from trucks onto
the public highway. If the road is located within
300 feet of an occupied residence or commercial
or industrial establishment, the road shall be
kept dust-free by hardtopping with cement or
bituminous substances.
i. Not more than one entrance and one exit from a
highway or road shall be provided to the area of
operation.
j. Any soil that may be deposited on any public
street or public place from any vehicle
transporting materials from the mineral resource
extraction site shall be immediately removed
without damage to the public street or public
place at the expense of the applicant.
6. Plan Requirements - Mineral resource extraction
plans shall conform to the site plan requirements
contained in Chapter 21 in addition to the following
requirements:
a. Truck hauling routes from the excavation site to
major through streets shall be identified.
b. A Soil Erosion and Sedimentation control plan
shall be approved by the Township Engineer
prior to final approval.
c. All stormwater control and drainage plans shall
be reviewed and approved by the Township
Engineer and Kent County Drain Commission
prior to final approval.
d. Work depths must be identified.
e. Overburden and debris disposition areas must be
identified.
f. A description of natural resource extraction and
processing operations proposed for the site.
g. An estimate of the quantity of minerals to be
removed from the site and timetable for
removal, with supporting calculations
conforming to generally accepted engineering
principles.
h. A list of the types, numbers, and sizes of major
equipment to be used on site at any time.
i. Any other information the Planning director
determines is reasonably necessary for a
complete review of the project.
7. Performance Standards- The Township may require
performance standards where, because of peculiar
conditions, it deems them necessary for the
protection of the healthy, safety, morals and well
being of the residents of the Township.
These performance standards may be measures to
control dust, noise, visual screening, water standards,
vibration, storm drainage, and flooding, in addition to
any other standards the Township deems necessary.
8. Reclamation Plan Requirements - A reclamation
plan, at the same scale as the site plan, prepared by a
registered professional civil engineer, shall be
submitted before final approval is granted. The
reclamation plan, at a minimum, shall contain the
following information:
a. Final contours, at two foot or less contour
intervals, of the site after restoration. The banks
CHAPTER 4
General Provisions
4-13
of all excavation sites shall be sloped at a grade
of not less than 2.5 feet horizontal to 1 foot
vertical.
b. Complete extent of areas which will be backfilled
and depth of backfill shown with spot elevations.
c. Areas and depth of areas to be restored with top
soil and other overburden.
d. Areas which will contain either standing or runoff
water and measures which will be taken to avoid
stagnation and erosion.
e. Phasing diagram(s) for reclamation.
f. A complete landscape plan indicating location
and type of proposed and existing landscape
features.
g. Description of the proposed final use of the site,
with discussion of how the proposed use relates
to the General Development Plan and zoning
districts within the vicinity of the property.
h. Estimated timetable clearly expressing the
maximum time required for various phases of the
reclamation plan.
9. Financial Guarantee The Township may require the
posting of a financial guarantee consistent with
Section 21.09 of this Ordinance.
10. Existing Mineral Resource Extraction Sites- Mineral
Resource Extraction sites which are actively mined or
which have been actively mined within 180 days of
enactment of this Section shall be limited to the lot
on which the activity exists at the date of enactment
of this Section. Further, all existing mineral resource
extraction sites which are currently being mined shall
be required to submit a reclamation plan consistent
with the requirements of this Section within one
hundred eighty (180) days following the adoption of
this Section. (New Section added by Ordinance #19 of 1990)
Section 4.29 Traffic Visibility Across Corners:
In any residential, business, or industrial district on any
corner, no fence, structure or planting over thirty (30)
inches in height shall be erected or planted within a
twenty foot radius of the corner property lines so as to
interfere with traffic visibility across the corner.
Section 4.30 Walls and Fences:
This Section shall apply to all boundary fences, walls,
hedges, gatehouses and entrance gates which are not
specifically exempted herein. This Section shall not apply
to seawalls as regulated by the Michigan Department of
Natural Resources.
1. Construction
a. All fences and walls shall be of sound
construction.
b. No barbed wire, spire tips, sharp objects, or
electrically charged fences shall be erected in or
abutting any residentially zoned district.
c. Bona fide agricultural uses may use barbed wire
or charged fences to control livestock when
located in the ARC, Agricultural Rural
Conservation zoning district.
d. Fence posts and vertical supports must be inside
of the fence and facing inside of the property on
which the fence is located.
2. Location and Height
a. Agricultural, Office and Residential Zoning
Districts - Unless specifically exempted by a Type
I special Use Permit, all walls or fences in the
front yard shall be limited to a maximum height
of four (4) feet at final grade. The maximum
fence or wall height in the side yard or rear yard
shall be limited to six (6) feet in height as
measured from average grade.
b. All Other Zoning Districts - Unless specifically
exempted by a Type I special Use Permit, all walls
or fences in these zoning districts shall be limited
to a maximum heights of eight (8) feet. The use
of barbed wire strands is permitted provided the
strands be restricted to the uppermost portion of
the fence and shall not extend lower than a
height of six (6) feet from the average grade.
c. Architectural Features - Fences, walls and hedges
for residential, office or commercial use may
include architectural features such as columns,
cupolas, fountains, parapets, etc. at a height not
exceeding 1.5 times the permitted height wall or
fence height. Such features must be compatible
with the project and abutting properties.
CHAPTER 4
General Provisions
4-14
3. Location Requirements - Except as specified below,
fences, walls and hedges may be erected, placed and
maintained along any property line provided:
a. It shall be unlawful to construct any wall or fence
in any public right-of-way or within the right-ofway
easement for private roads.
b. No wall, fence, structure or planting over thirty
(30) inches in height shall be erected or planted
within a twenty (20) foot radius of the corner
property lines so as to interfere with traffic
visibility across the corner.
4. Additional Requirements for Commercial, Office and
Industrial Areas - All commercial, office and industrial
uses shall provide a continuous visual screen of at
least eight (8) feet in height along any lot line
abutting a residential use. Such screen shall be
installed by the non-residential user and shall be
maintained in a sightly manner.
a. An entrance gate or gatehouse not approved as
part of a Planned Unit Development (PUD) may
be permitted by right for security purposes to
any development provided the gate or gatehouse
is:
1) Not located on a public street or right-of-way;
and
2) Located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet
back from any public right-of-way or
easement; or
3) Designed in such a manner that a minimum of
three (3) vehicles can pull safely off the public
street while waiting to enter; or
4) The development provides a decelerationturning
lane adjacent to the existing pavement
for a minimum distance of three hundred (300)
feet leading into the access road, unless more
stringent requirements are specified by the
Kent County Road Commission.
b. Access for emergency vehicles shall be provided.
Should an emergency necessitate the breaking of
an entrance gate, the costs of repairing the gate
and the emergency vehicle (if applicable) shall be
the responsibility of the owner and/or operator
of the gates.
5. Conditions for Special Use Permit Approval
Due to the unusual circumstances related to the
property location or use of the fence, the height of a
fence may be increased to a height of eight (8) feet as
measured from final grade in all agricultural, office
and residential zoning districts and up to ten (10)
feet, as measured from average grade in all other
zoning districts. Upon review of a special use permit
for additional fence height the Planning Commission
shall consider the following:
a. To what extent the impact of additional height
has on adjoining property owners.
b. Whether the additional height severely impacts
light and ventilation from flowing onto the
adjoining properties.
c. Whether the increased height creates a traffic
hazard.
d. Whether the increased height creates a fire,
safety hazard.
e. Whether the increased height violates any
known property restrictions (i.e. plat restrictions,
deed restrictions, covenants, etc.). (New Section
added by Ordinance #5 of 2012).
Section 4.31 Residential Front Yard Averaging:
In any ARC, R1 or R2 zoning district where the average
front yard setback of two (2) or more buildings within two
hundred (200) feet of the lot or parcel in question and on
the same side of the street is less than, or greater than,
the minimum front yard setback prescribed for the
specific zoning district, then the required front yard
setback of such lot or parcel shall not be less than the
average existing front yard setback or such buildings. In
any event, the front yard setback on any lot or parcel shall
not be less than ten (10) feet. (New Section added by Ordinance
#14 of 1989).
Section 4.32 Resubmission of Applications
No application for a rezoning, planned unit development,
special use permit, site plan approval, variance or other
zoning approval or project shall be submitted to the
Township or be formally considered by a Township board
or official (i.e. Township Board, Zoning Board of Appeals,
Planning Commission or Planning Director) where such
application or project has been previously denied or
turned down by the Township unless the new application
or project is substantially changed from the prior one.
With regard to whether or not substantial changes have
occurred since the prior application or project was denied,
the Planning Director shall make the determination in the
first instance. If the applicant disagrees with the Planning
Director's determination, the applicant shall have thirty
(30) days to appeal the Planning Director's determination
CHAPTER 4
General Provisions
4-15
to the Township board involved. In determining whether
substantial changes have occurred, the Planning Director
(or on appeal, the Township board involved) shall
consider:
1. Whether the application or project has been
substantially modified from the earlier one;
2. Whether external conditions or circumstances have
changed significantly so as to warrant a
reconsideration of the application or project; or
3. Whether new and material evidence has been
discovered which would justify a reconsideration of
the application or project and the failure to present
such evidence at the first consideration was not the
fault of the applicant. (New Section added by Ordinance #20
of 1995).
Section 4.33 Keyhole Development (Section
amended by Ordinance #11 of 2005; 12/14/05) (Section amended by
Ord No 10, 2010; 7/14/10)
The following restrictions are intended to limit the
number of users of lake, river or stream frontage in order
to preserve the quality of the waters, to promote safety,
and to preserve the quality of recreational use of all
waters within the Township.
1. In all zoning districts there shall be at least one
hundred (100) feet of lake, river or stream frontage
as measured along the normal high water mark of the
lake, river or stream for each single-family home,
dwelling unit, cottage, condominium unit, site
condominium unit, or apartment unit utilizing or
accessing the lake, river or stream frontage.
2. Any multiple-unit residential development in any
zoning district that shares a common lake, river or
stream front area or frontage may not permit lake,
river or stream use or access to more than one (1)
single-family home, dwelling unit, cottage,
condominium unit, site condominium unit, or
apartment unit for each one hundred (100) feet of
lake, river or stream frontage in such common lake,
river or stream front area, as measured along the
normal high water mark line of the lake, river or
stream.
3. Any multiple-unit residential development shall have
not more than one (1) dock for each one hundred
(100) feet of lake, river or stream frontage, as
measured along the normal high water mark of the
lake, river or stream, in any zoning district in the
Township. All such docks and docking or mooring
shall also comply with all other applicable Township
ordinances.
4. The restrictions contained in this section shall apply
to all lots and parcels on or abutting any lake, river or
stream in all zoning districts, regardless of whether
access to the lake, river or stream waters shall be by
easement, park, common-fee ownership, single-fee
ownership, condominium arrangement, license or
lease.
5. In all zoning districts, no lake, river or stream access,
boat ramp, shorestation, dock, or boat launch shall be
installed or utilized nor shall any shoreline abutting a
lake, river or stream be utilized for commercial,
business or non-residential uses or purposes unless
such use is authorized by the zoning district within
which the property is located and such use is
additionally approved pursuant to a special use or a
Planned Unit Development (PUD) approval.
6. The lake, river and stream access and use regulations
contained in this section shall be fully applicable to all
planned unit development (PUD) and special use
projects or developments.
7. In addition to the above limitations, no easement,
private park, common area, lot or access property
abutting or adjoining a lake, river or stream shall be
used to permit access to the lake, river or stream for
more than one (1) single-family home, dwelling unit,
condominium unit, site condominium unit, apartment
unit or any other use unless such additional access
use is approved as a special use or as a planned unit
development (PUD).
8. For purposes of meeting the minimum required
water frontages mentioned above, water frontage
around the shore of an island shall not be included as
part of the mainland.
9. These water access regulations shall be in addition to
and shall not negate any of the restrictions or other
requirements of this Zoning Ordinance or the zoning
district involved.
10. The nonconforming use provisions of Chapter 22 of
this Zoning Ordinance shall be applicable to this
Section (Section 4.33) except the following shall be
permissible notwithstanding the provisions of
Chapter 22 of this Zoning Ordinance:
a. Any lot of record having frontage on a body of
water may have one (1) dock for use by a single
family (who owns or occupies that lot) even
though the lot has less then one hundred (100)
CHAPTER 4
General Provisions
4-16
feet of frontage on the water. This Section 4.33
shall not be construed to prevent a dock for use
by a single family (who owns or occupies that
lot), even if no dock had ever been installed on
the property, where recorded vested rights were
obtained prior to November 21, 1995.
b. Any easement, private park, common area, or
access property having frontage on a lake, river,
or stream which provides access to such body of
water for more than one (1) single-family home,
dwelling unit, condominium unit, apartment unit,
lot, or parcel, and which lawfully existed for such
use as of November 21, 1995 shall not have any
dock, boat ramp, or boat mooring site unless
such use is approved as a special use.
c. If a given property, easement, park, common
area or access property has a right to have a dock
under this Section (Section 4.33) or Chapter 22,
that right to utilize a dock shall continue even if
the dock is seasonal in nature, has to be repaired
or replaced or is not utilized every year.
11. Although the owner of a property with frontage on a
lake, river or stream may permit family members and
occasional invitees to use the water frontage, dock
and watercraft owned by the owner as incidental to
the residential use of the property, the owner shall
not permit anyone other than a family member of a
person co-owning or residing on the property
fronting on the water to moor a watercraft overnight
at the dock on the property or in the waters adjacent
to the property. Nor shall the owner of such a
property enter into an agreement to permit anyone
to use the shoreline (or dock thereof) of water unless
such person is leasing a residence on the property
and is in possession of the entire waterfront
property. This subsection shall apply only to the
residential zoned districts.
12. Notwithstanding any of the requirements and
restrictions contained elsewhere in this Section 4.33,
the owners of lots or parcels within a river or lake
property owners association which have frontage on
the Thornapple River or lake within the Township (or
which have permanent access to the Thornapple
River or any lake through a waterfront property
within Cascade Charter Township by means of a
permanent easement, walkway, or similar river or
lake access device that lawfully existed, was recorded
with the Kent County Register of Deeds records, and
expressly benefited the off-water property involved,
all before November 21, 1995) can use a boat ramp,
boat launch, or similar facility that lawfully existed on
the Thornapple River or a lake prior to November 21,
1995, even though such additional waterfront lots or
parcels within the Township are not located within
the development or plat where the existing boat
ramp, boat launch, or equivalent is located (or are
not within the property owners association that owns
or controls such boat ramp, boat launch or
equivalent), so long as the river or lake property
owners association involved obtains special use
approval for such additional use of the existing boat
ramp, boat launch, or similar structure at issue from
the Township Board and the following requirements
are met:
a. Reasonable conditions may be attached to any
such special use approval hereunder, including,
but not limited to, limitations on hours of usage,
restrictions on the number of days per year that
such additional use can occur and limiting the
use of specific property owners outside the
development or plat at issue (for example,
limiting usage to one or more days for putting a
boat in during the spring and one or more days
for taking the boat out in late summer or fall).
b. Any such additional use of a boat ramp, boat
launch, or similar facility must also comply with
all applicable deed restrictions, restrictive
covenants, easement limitations, or the
equivalent (if any).
c. No individual property owner or owners can
apply for such a special use approval (or be
granted such special use approval); rather, only a
river or lake property owners association that
has been traditionally recognized as representing
waterfront property owners within Cascade
Charter Township along the Thornapple River or
a lake can apply for and potentially be granted
such special use approval. If such special use
approval is granted, the only members of the
river or lake property owners association given
such special use approval who can utilize the
boat ramp, boat launch, or similar facility
involved are members of that association who
own waterfront property within Cascade Charter
Township or have permanent access to the
Thornapple River or a lake through a waterfront
property within Cascade Charter Township by
means of a permanent easement, walkway, or
similar waterfront access device (where such
CHAPTER 4
General Provisions
4-17
waterfront access device lawfully existed, was
recorded with the Kent County Register of Deeds
records, and expressly benefited the off-river or
lake property involved, all before November 21,
1995). Any member of the association who does
not meet such qualifications cannot utilize the
boat ramp involved.
The Zoning Administrator shall have the
authority to determine whether a particular
member of a river or lake property owners
association that has been granted special use
approval hereunder can use the boat ramp, boat
launch, or similar facility based on the claim that
the member has the benefit of a permanent
easement, walkway, or similar river or lake
access device and whether such river or lake
access device lawfully existed, was recorded with
the Kent County Register of Deeds records, and
expressly benefited the off-river or lake property
involved (all of which must have occurred prior
to November 21, 1995).
d. Any river or lake property owners association
that has been granted special use approval
hereunder shall be responsible for ensuring that
all of its members utilizing the boat ramp, boat
launch, or similar facility involved comply with
the requirements of this subsection 4.33(12) as
well as any conditions attached to the approval
of the special use. (New Section added by Ordinance
#18) (New Section added by Ord 10 of 2010)
Section 4.34 Lighting (New section added by Ordinance #7 of
2005; 9/28/05)
Protecting the general public health, safety, and welfare
of the community shall be the top priority in all outdoor
lighting.
1. Outdoor Lighting
Outdoor lighting shall:
a. Protect motorists and pedestrians from the glare
of nonvehicular light sources.
b. Protect neighbors from nuisance glare and light
trespass from improperly selected or poorly
placed, aimed, applied, maintained, or shielded
lighting sources.
c. Protect and retain the intended visual character
of the community.
Outdoor lighting shall not:
a. Be used to draw undue and excessive attention
to buildings, properties, or appurtenances for
purposes other than protecting the general
public health, safety, and welfare of the
community.
b. Be used to compete for the attention of, or cause
distraction and physical discomfort to, motorists
and pedestrians by means of excessively
illuminated surfaces and unshielded, noncutoff
type lighting sources with a direct glare
component.
2. Downcast Lighting:
For parking lots, cutoff- type luminaries shall be used
and shall be equipped with devices, such as shields,
visors, hoods, for redirecting light. All outdoor
lighting on private, residential, commercial, industrial,
municipal, recreational, and intuitional property shall
be so equipped, aimed, located, designed, fitted, and
maintained. Directional luminaries such as spot
lights, and sign lights shall be so installed and aimed
that they illuminate only the task and do not shine
directly onto neighboring properties, roadways, and
distribute excessive light skyward.
3. Nonhorizontal Surface Lighting:
For the lighting of predominantly nonhorizontal
surfaces, such as, but not limited to, facades,
landscaping, signs,, fountains, displays, and statuary,
lighting fixtures shall be fully shielded and shall be
installed and aimed downcast so as to not project
their output into the windows of neighboring
residences, adjacent uses, past the object being
illuminated, or onto a public roadway. Ground
mounted lighting may be uplit for structures not
taller than five feet. Lighting fixtures with an
aggregate rated lamp lumen output per fixture that
does not exceed 1,000 lumens are exempt from the
requirements of this paragraph.
4. Flag Lighting:
The lighting of flags is allowed and cutoff fixtures are
not required so long as shielded and directional
fixtures are used. Fixtures must be installed and
aimed so as to minimize glare, sky glow, and light
trespass.
Intentionally left blank
CHAPTER 5
Mapped Districts
5-1
Section 5.01 Title:
Mapped Zoning Districts
Section 5.02 Mapped Zoning Districts:
For the purpose of this Ordinance, Cascade Charter
Township is hereby divided into the following zoning
districts:
ARC, Agricultural/Rural Conservation District
R-1, Single Family Residential District
R-2, Single Family Residential District
B-1, Village Business District
VO, Village Office/Service District
B-2, General Business District
ES, Expressway Service District
O, Office District
I, Industrial District
AC, Airport Commerce District
PUD, Planned Unit Development District
Section 5.03 Zoning Map:
The locations and boundaries of the zoning districts, are
shown upon the map, which is incorporated herein by
reference, and are established. This map is designated as
the "Zoning Map of Cascade Charter Township, Kent
County, Michigan." This map and all the notations,
references, and other information thereon shall be a part
of this Ordinance.
The official zoning map shall be located in the office of the
Township Clerk, and, together with official records, shall
be the final authority as to the current zoning status in the
Township.
The official zoning map shall be so identified by the
signature of the Township Clerk. The map shall be kept
current and shall be accessible to the general public.
Section 5.04 Boundaries of Districts:
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts
as shown on the official map, the following rules shall
apply:
1. Boundaries depicted as approximately following the
centerlines of streets shall be construed to follow
such centerlines.
2. Boundaries depicted as following shorelines shall be
construed to follow such shorelines, and in the event
of change in the shoreline shall be construed as
following such change. Boundaries indicated as
approximately following the centerlines of streams or
rivers shall be construed as following such
centerlines.
3. Boundaries depicted as approximately following lot
or property lines shall be construed as following such
lines.
4. Distances not specifically indicated on the Zoning
Map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
5. The Board of Appeals shall interpret the district
boundaries.
Intentionally left blank
CHAPTER 6
R-1 & R-2 Single Family Residential District
6-1
Section 6.01 Title:
Use Regulations Relating to the "R-1" and "R-2" Single
Family Residential Districts
Section 6.02 Intent:
These districts are intended to encourage a suitable
environment for residential and compatible supportive
uses. To this end they are the most restrictive residential
districts permitting low density single family homes and
uses and a controlled degree of recreational, religious and
educational facilities.
Section 6.03 Uses Permitted by Right:
In any "R-1" or "R-2" single family residential district no
building or land shall be used and no building shall be
erected except for one or more of the following specified
uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
1. Single family detached homes except mobile homes
and earth sheltered dwellings.
2. Home occupations, as provided for in Section 4.20.
3. Accessory buildings, structures and uses as provided
in Section 4.09.
4. Parks, playgrounds and related facilities, provided
such facilities are owned and operated by the public
or non-profit groups, but excluding those such
facilities intended to serve areas beyond the
immediate neighborhood, and outdoor facilities
which are designed and intended for use after natural
daylight hours.
5. Signs as provided in the Cascade Charter Township
Sign Ordinance.
6. Temporary buildings, structures and uses, as provided
in Section 4.18.
7. Essential Public Services, as provided in Section 4.25.
(Section renumbered as a result of Ord. No. #10 of 2001)
Section 6.04 Uses Permitted by Special Use
Permit:
The following uses may be permitted but are subject to
the provisions and conditions outlined in Chapter 17:
1. Public, parochial and other private elementary,
intermediate and high schools not operated for profit
excluding colleges and universities.
2. Child or adult day care centers, as defined in Chapter
3, whether free standing or in conjunction with a
principal permitted use.
3. Public or private non-profit parks and recreation and
activity centers including swimming pools, tennis
courts, baseball fields, community centers, libraries
and similar facilities intended to serve areas beyond
the immediate neighborhood and outdoor facilities
designed and intended for use after natural daylight
hours.
4. Churches and associated facilities normally incidental
thereto. Any use associated with the church use that
is further regulated by this ordinance shall also
require the church use to comply with any such
regulations as well. This would include but need not
be limited to uses such as child day care, adult day
care and group day care home facilities.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section,
churches which lawfully existed before the effective
date of this Ordinance shall for the purpose of this
Ordinance be considered conforming. Expansion of
such facilities shall however be subject to this
ordinance. (Ord. #10 of 2001)
5. Bed and Breakfast establishments.
6. Transitional uses.
7. Model units, temporary real estate offices, as
provided in Section 4.23.
8. The keeping of domestic animals and fowl may only
be permitted by Special Use Permit in the R-1,
Residential zoning district, as provided in Section
4.11. (This Section amended by Ordinance No. 12 of 1997)
9. Other uses determined by the Planning Commission
to be similar to the uses listed in Section 6.04 hereof
and for which a special use permit maybe approved
by the Township. (Section added by Ord. #3 of 2006;
5/10/06)
Intentionally left blank
CHAPTER 7
ARC Agriculture/Rural Conservation District
7-1
Section 7.01 Title:
Use Regulations Relating to the "ARC" Agriculture/Rural
Conservation District
Section 7.02 Intent:
This district is intended in part to conserve the rural open
space qualities of the community and to allow low density
residential development in areas where soil conditions,
topography, vegetation and or lack of existing or
programmed public utilities and urban services preclude
and will continue to preclude for an extended period,
more intensive development. It is the further intended of
this district to conserve large tracts of land suitable for
agricultural and other specialized rural uses and to
promote harmony between these uses and residences
and the uses permitted in adjacent districts. The
requirements of this district are such that if intense
development and land subdivision is to occur, it shall be
preceded by appropriate rezoning based on sound
planning principles and the efficient programming of
those public improvements and urban services necessary
to support the development.
Section 7.03 Uses Permitted by Right:
In any ARC district, no building or land shall be used, and
no building shall be erected, except for one or more of the
following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this
Ordinance:
1. Any use permitted by right in the R-1 and R-2
residential districts as enumerated in Chapter 6.
2. Single family earth sheltered and mobile home
dwellings Section 4.19
3. Agricultural uses and farming operations as defined in
Chapter 3, together with buildings and other
installations customary and necessary to such uses or
operations, except intensive livestock operations.
Section 7.04 Uses Permitted by Special Use
Permit:
The following uses may be permitted, but are subject to
the provisions and conditions outlined in Chapter 17:
1. Golf courses, country clubs and other public or
private outdoor recreational uses, excluding
miniature golf and amusement parks Section
17.07.2.c
2. Private airports and landing fields
3. Public, semi-public or private communications
transmitter and relay stations Section 17.07.2.g
4. Travel trailer parks and campgrounds
5. Outdoor storage centers for recreational vehicles
6. Public utility and private contractor storage and
service yards in association with specialized services
requiring bases of operation and short term outdoor
storage of equipment and material, excluding the
stockpiling of material and the major repair of
equipment Section 17.07.2.i
7. Kennels, animal hospitals and public stables Section
17.07.2.f
8. Limited retail and wholesale trade of landscape
products in association with greenhouses Section
17.07.2.j (This subsection amended by Ordinance #2 of 1997)
9. Roadside Stands Section 17.07.2.m
10. Milk pasteurization plants, fish hatcheries and
apiaries, and the raising of fur bearing animals when
associated and secondary to a farming operation.
11. Cemeteries
12. Any special use which may be permitted in the R-1
and R-2 zoning districts as enumerated in Chapter 6.
13. Group Day Care Homes Section 17.07.2.o (New
subsection added by Ordinance #14 of 1989)
14. Minor Mineral Resource Extraction Section 4.28 (New
subsection added by Ordinance #19 of 1990)
15. Antenna tower and masts for cellular phone and
other personal communication services Section
17.03.1.h (New subsection added by Ordinance #11 of 1996)
16. Nurseries with associated limited retail and wholesale
trade of nursery stock field-raised on the premises
and where at least 30% of the acreage of the facility is
dedicated to growing nursery stock. Section 17.07.2.j
17. Other uses determined by the Planning Commission
to be similar to the uses listed in Section 17.04 hereof
and for which a special use permit maybe approved
by the Township. (Section added by Ord. #3of 2006; 5/10/06)
Intentionally left blank
CHAPTER 7a
FP Farmland Preservation
Ord No 3 of 2010; 3/10/10
7a-1
Section 7.01a Title:
Use Regulations Relating to the "FP" Farmland
Preservation District:
Section 7.02a Intent:
This district is intended to maintain agricultural activity,
preserve open spaces, and encourage farming
operations, in part by precluding land uses that may
conflict with such objectives and by permitting uses
which complement farming and support agricultural
practices. The purpose of this district is to allow farm
establishments and encourage their viability. Areas
within this district have distinctive soils capable of
supporting productive agriculture and unique crops.
These lands are not served with public water or sanitary
sewer and non-residential development, nonagricultural
development, land subdivisions, site condominiums, or
multiple-family uses are not anticipated or appropriate.
Section 7.03a Uses Permitted by Right:
In the FP district, no building or land shall be used, and no
building shall be erected, except for one or more of the
following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this
Ordinance:
1. Single family detached homes except mobile homes
and earth sheltered dwellings.
2. Home occupations, as provided for in Section 4.20.
3. Agricultural uses and farming operations as defined in
Chapter 3, together with buildings and other
installations customary and necessary to such uses or
operations.
4. Accessory buildings, structures and uses as provided in
Section 4.09.
5. Farmland Preservation residential subdivision or site
condominium as provided in the Subdivision
Ordinance
6. Parks, playgrounds and related facilities, provided such
facilities are owned and operated by the public or nonprofit
groups, but excluding those such facilities
intended to serve areas beyond the immediate
neighborhood, and outdoor facilities which are
designed and intended for use after natural daylight
hours.
7. Signs as provided in the Cascade Charter Township
Sign Ordinance.
8. Temporary buildings, structures and uses, as provided
in Section 4.18.
9. Greenhouses.
Section 7.04a Uses Permitted by Special Use
Permit:
The following uses may be permitted, but are subject to
the provisions and conditions outlined in Chapter 17:
1. Kennels, animal hospitals and public stables.
2. Limited retail and wholesale trade of landscape
products in association with greenhouses.
3. Roadside Stands, as defined in Chapter 3.
4. Milk pasteurization plants, fish hatcheries and apiaries,
and the raising of fur bearing animals when associated
and secondary to a farming operation.
5. Nurseries with associated limited retail and wholesale
trade of nursery stock field-raised on the premises and
where at least 30% of the acreage of the facility is
dedicated to growing nursery stock.
6. Other uses determined by the Planning Commission to
be similar to the uses listed in Section 7.04a hereof
and for which a special use permit maybe approved by
the Township.
7. Private Street, unless part of an approved Farmland
Preservation residential subdivision or site
condominium
8. Public or private non-profit parks and recreation and,
tennis courts, baseball fields, and similar facilities
intended to serve areas beyond the immediate
neighborhood and outdoor facilities designed and
intended for use after natural daylight hours.
9. Churches and associated facilities normally incidental
thereto. Any use associated with the church use that
is further regulated by this ordinance shall also require
the church use to comply with any such regulations as
well. This would include but need not be limited to
uses such as child day care, adult day care and group
day care home facilities.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section,
churches which lawfully existed before the effective
date of this Ordinance shall for the purpose of this
Ordinance be considered conforming. Expansion of
such facilities shall however be subject to this
ordinance. (Ord. #10 of 2001)
Intentionally left blank
CHAPTER 8
B-1 Village Business District
Section 8.01 Title:
Use Regulations Relating to the “B-1” Village Business
District (Chapter amended by Ord. No, 8 of 2011; 6/23/11)
Section 8.02 Intent:
This district is intended to promote a village atmosphere,
which is built to human scale to encourage attractive
street fronts and connecting pedestrian walkways as a
first priority while still accommodating vehicular
movement. This district is intended to satisfy the land
needs for convenience, specialty and personal service
type shops and establishments primarily serving those
person residing in the surrounding residential areas of the
Township. The district is also intended to provide mixed
uses with residential above retail or office uses, live/work,
and stand-alone attached residential uses. The district is
not intended for the location of multi-tenant strict
commercial structures which when judged independently
would be classified as community wide or regional in
scale.
Section 8.03 Uses Permitted By Right:
In the “B-1” Village Business District, no building,
structure or premises, shall be erected, altered or used
except for one or more of the following uses unless
otherwise provided in this Ordinance:
1. Generally recognized retail businesses, which supply
commodities on the premises, such as, but not
limited to, groceries, meats, dairy products, bake
goods or other foods, drugs, dry goods, clothing and
notions of hardware.
2. Personal service establishments which perform
services on the premises, such as, but not limited to,
repair shops (watches, radios, television, shoes, etc.),
tailor shops, beauty parlors or barber shops,
photographic studios, flower shops and print shops.
3. Business establishments which perform services on
the premises, such as, but not limited to, banks, loan
companies, insurance offices and real estate offices.
4. Professional services, including offices of medical
doctors, dentists, osteopaths and similar or allied
professionals.
5. Post offices and similar governmental office buildings,
serving persons living in the adjacent residential area.
6. Restaurants, excluding drive-in or drive-through
service.
7. Publicly and privately-owned parks, parkway and
recreation facilities
8. Residential up to 3 dwelling units/acre, which may
include:
a. Residential above retail or other permitted
business establishments
b. Live/work
c. Single family dwelling
9. Farmer’s Market
10. Churches
11. Bed and Breakfast establishments
12. Art gallery and studio
13. Banquet and meeting halls
14. Music and Dance Academy
15. Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental
to the uses permitted in this Section subject to the
provisions of Section 4.08
16. Signs as regulated by the Cascade Charter Township
Sign Ordinance and consistent with the design
guidelines set forth in the Cascade Village Design
Plan. (This subsection amended by Ordinance #4 of 1993)
17. Temporary buildings, structures and uses and
essential public services as provided in Section 4.25.
18. Brew Pub
19. Restaurant with brew pub as accessory use
20. Tavern
Section 8.04 Uses Permitted By Special Use
Permit:
The following uses may be permitted, but are subject to
the provisions and conditions outlined in Chapter 17.
1. Any permitted use listed in Section 8.03 if all
business, service or processing is not conducted
wholly within a completely enclosed building, except
for automobile parking for customers or employees,
off-street loading spaces, outdoor “café” eating areas
and signs.
2. Dry cleaning establishments or pick-up stations,
dealing directly with the consumer. Central dry
cleaning plants serving more than one retail outlet
are prohibited.
3. Self-service laundries
4. Pet shops
5. Child or Adult Day Care Centers
8-1
CHAPTER 8
B-1 Village Business District
6. Drive-in service window or drive-through services for
businesses, not to include restaurants, as regulated in
Section 17.07. (This subsection added by Ordinance #8 of
1993)
7. Other uses determined by the Planning Commission
to be similar to the uses permitted in Section 8.03
hereof and for which a special use permit is issued by
the Township. (This subsection added by Ordinance #8 of
1993)
8. Other uses determined by the Planning Commission
to be similar to the uses listed in Sections 8.03 and
8.04 hereof. (Section added by Ordinance #3 of 2006; 5/10/06)
9. Residential over 3 dwelling units/acre but less than 9
dwelling units/acre, which may include:
a. Residential above retail other permitted,
business establishments
b. Live/work
c. Multi-family dwelling
d. Two family dwelling
e. Single family dwelling
10. Microbrew
11. Micro distillery
Section 8.05 Additional Conditions:
1. All business establishments shall be retail or service
establishments dealing directly with consumers. All
goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail
on the premises where produced, with the exception
that food produced as part of a catering operation
may be delivered off premises.
2. The Township shall have the ability to require
sidewalks in the B-1 district to be constructed at a
width determined by their intended function.
3. Sidewalks shall be allowed to wander around trees
and other fixed objects, without being overly rigid in
placement.
4. Any lighting proposed along the street as part of the
development shall be consistent with the existing
streetlights already in the village.
5. The Township may require that important landmark
places and areas that preserve important views and
vegetation remain. As shown in the Village Design
Plan Exhibit 2.
Section 8.06. Site Development Standards: (This
section added by Ordinance #4 of 1993)
1. Minimum Lot Area – No minimum required with an
approved site plan. Otherwise, minimum lot area
shall be 20,000 square feet.
2. Minimum Lot Width - 100 feet. The Planning
Commission may reduce the lot width requirement
with an approved site plan and upon a finding that
shared drives, shared access, cross access or other
access management techniques are provided to
ensure adequate spacing between driveways.
3. Maximum Height – Non-residential uses: 25 feet;
Residential uses (see permitted uses item 9): 30 feet
4. Maximum net floor area:
One-story Multiple-story
Single Building .25 F.A.R .50 F.A.R
Multiple Building .30 F.A.R .60 F.A.R.
5. The maximum floor area for a single building shall not
exceed 30,000 square feet. (This subsection was amended
by Ordinance #2 of 1994)
6. Setback Requirements: These building setbacks have
been established for all new development projects as
well as additions or modifications to existing buildings
in order to create a sense of enclosure. This leads to
a more pedestrian oriented street front. Awnings,
bays windows and eves may encroach into the
setback areas by no more than three (3) feet.
Table 8-A sets forth the minimum and maximum
building setback lines for the B-1 Zoning District:
Table 8-A: Minimum and Max Building Setback for
B-1 District
Minimum Maximum
Front Yard
Arterial*
Collector*
Local*
20
15
10
30
25
20
Side Yard 7, but the total
of the two yards
shall not be less
than 16 feet
--
Rear Yard 30 [see also Section 18.13(4)]
*See Appendix A (major street plan) in Zoning Ordinance.
8-2
CHAPTER 8
B-1 Village Business District
Section 8.07 Parking Area Location and
Screening:
All new, or expansion of existing, parking areas in the B-1
district constructed after the effective date of this
ordinance shall not be located within the front yard area.
Any business or property owner who has parking in the
front yard area as of the effective date of this ordinance
shall be considered lawful non-conforming.
In the event that the site requires Township approval
under the conditions of this Ordinance, the following
screening shall apply:
Existing parking lots located in the front yard shall be
required to be screened from view, in addition to the
requirements of the landscaping section of the zoning
ordinance, by one of the architectural/ landscape designs
described in this section. The Planning Commission may
waive the screening requirement when in its opinion the
intent of this section has already been met. The reasons
for the waiver would include but need not be limited to,
existing landscaping/screening, the topography of the
site, not adjacent to, or in the view of any sidewalk or
pedestrian path, type of business, etc.
1. Architectural/ landscape designs
a. Type I – Walls and similar structures used as a
screening element shall be constructed of
permanent, low maintenance materials such as
brick or concrete. These walls shall not be less
than 36 inches nor greater than 48 inches in
height and shall be at least five (5) feet from the
back of curb. (See Figure 8-1)
b. Type II – A decorative fence may be installed at
the property line if used in conjunction with a
landscape screen. The fencing shall be
constructed of painted decorative elements
between 36 and 48 inches in height and shall be
at least five (5) feet from the back of curb.
Wrought iron or similar fencing is preferred.
Chain link fencing shall be prohibited. (See
Figure 8-2)
c. Type III – A minimum of a 5 foot wide landscape
screen, consisting of hedges, shubbery, or other
planted materials having a minimum of 3 feet
when planted and maintained to form a visual
screen of 4 feet minimum height with 80 percent
summer opacity within 2 years after time of
planting. (See Figure 8-3)
Figure 8-2
DECORATIVE FENCE – TYPE II
Minimum Width: 5’
Min. – 36”
Max. – 48”
©birchlerarroy
Min. hedge
width: 3’
Figure 8-3
LANDSCAPE SCREEN – TYPE III
Min.
height: 4’
Min. width: 5’
©birchlerarroyo
Min – 36”
Max – 48”
Minimum
Width: 5’
Figure 8-1
SCREENING WALL –TYPE 1
©birchlerarroy
8-3
CHAPTER 8
B-1 Village Business District
Section 8.08 Building Design:
All new buildings and structures shall be so designed to
incorporate the following architectural design features:
1. The principal façade and front entry of the building
shall face the street and when present, the nonmotorized
pathway network.
2. Pedestrian connection to front and rear entrances
shall be provided via sidewalks, striping, textured
pavement or other mechanism.
3. Storefronts shall be directly accessible from the
sidewalks, walkways or non-motorized pathways.
4. At least 90% of the exterior finish material on all
facades shall be limited to the following: glass; brick;
stone; stucco; or wood.
5. No wall that faces a street or connecting walkway
shall have a blank, uninterrupted length exceeding
thirty 30 feet without including at least 2 of the
following: change in plane, change in texture or
masonry pattern, windows, or an equivalent element
that subdivides the wall into human scale
proportions.
6. All sides of the building shall include materials and
design characteristics consistent with those on the
front. Use of inferior or lessor quality materials for
side or rear facades shall be prohibited.
7. Each storefront must have transparent, non reflective
display windows on the street side, between one and
eight feet from the ground.
8. For residential uses or residential above retail or
office uses, 15% to 30% of surface area shall be
vertically oriented transparent windows at upper
floors measured from the line of the second (or third)
floor to the cornice or fascia.
9. The primary colors of the building’s exterior shall be
compatible with the colors of the adjacent buildings
and in character with those in the surrounding area.
10. Facades that face the street or connecting pedestrian
frontage shall be subdivided and proportioned using
features such as windows, entrances, arcades, arbors,
awnings, etc. along no less than 50 percent of the
façade.
11. Roofs shall be so designed to include a pitched roof or
a stepped parapet façade if a flat roof is proposed.
Roof shapes such as: gable, hip or gambrel are
considered appropriate. The use of a metal is
appropriate provided it has a dull finish. Roof styles
normally considered inappropriate include shed, or
mansard style roofs.
12. Exterior materials must project a traditional building
appearance. The exterior shall be constructed using
horizontal wood siding, wood, stone, brick, brick
veneer or masonry. The use of vinyl or aluminum
siding is acceptable provided it simulates the
appearance of horizontal wood siding.
13. Outside dining tables and “café” style eating areas
are permitted.
14. Porches that are constructed should be large enough
to be used as a gathering place.
15. Chain link fence shall be prohibited.
16. Dumpsters shall be located in the rear yard or side
yard and must be screened. These facilities shall be
enclosed with a solid fence or wall six (6) feet high
with solid doors having sufficient truck access for
dumpster service.
17. Rooftop mechanicals shall be screened from view
using parapet wall or other suitable screening
materials.
The requirements contained in Section 8.08 above, shall
apply to the entire building, including any addition, when
any of the following conditions are met.
1. A proposed exterior addition or expansion has a
project construction valuation* of $60,000 or more.
2. The project involves a change in the use of the
building or property which results in the remodeling
or reconstruction of the existing building and has a
project valuation1 of $60,000 or more.
3. A proposed exterior addition or expansion increases
the size of the building or structure by at least 25
percent of the existing size of the building or
structure at the effective date of this amendment.
*Project construction valuation shall be based upon
the Square Foot Construction Cost Table, as
administered by The Cascade Charter Township
Building and Inspections Department and adopted by
the Cascade Charter Township Board. The amount of
the project valuation shall be increased each year by
the same percent as set by the Consumer Price Index
(CPI) from 2001. (Phased construction can not be used
to avoid compliance with this standard or break up
8-4
CHAPTER 8
B-1 Village Business District
construction such that the $60,000 threshold is
avoided).
Section 8.09 The Village Design Review
Committee:
The Village Design Review Committee (VDRC) is a
Township Board appointed committee made up of 5
Cascade Township citizens. The VDRC shall be made up of
at least one member of the Township Board, Planning
Commission, DDA and Zoning Board of Appeals.
The purpose of the VDRC is to foster a working
partnership between property owners, developer and the
Township in achieving the objectives/intent of the B-1
zoning district. This committee may recommend to the
Planning Commission departures from section 8.08 of this
chapter of the Zoning Ordinance, which may, on occasion,
work against the overall objectives of this chapter.
When considering a variation which has been
recommended by the VDRC, the Planning Commission
shall consider the following: the impact the modification
has on future and existing development; the benefit to
the community the modification will have; and the public
purpose to be served by permitting the modification.
Section 8.10 Village Design Review Committee
Procedure:
The applicant shall submit at least 6 copies of the site plan
together with all other related detail showing what items
he/she would like to be considered for a modification
from Section 8.08 of this chapter. Scaled building
elevations shall be provided depicting all sides of the
building. At the request of the VDRC, or when the building
height is in excess of twenty five (25) feet, the applicant
shall provide a 3D photo simulation or similar graphic
representation in AutoCAD, or similar software, and of
accurate scale and dimension, using the most recent
topographic survey establishing base elevations, that
depicts building height and the relationship of proposed
structures to existing or proposed structures on site and
those within three hundred (300) feet of the planned unit
development.
Once an applicant has submitted a complete application
for review The Township Planner shall call a meeting of
the VDRC within 10 days. The VDRC shall consider the
application and give its recommendation to the Planning
Commission or Township Board at this meeting.
Although project review by the VDRC is mandatory for all
projects that are requesting modifications from Section
8.08 of this chapter, compliance with the
recommendations is voluntary.
A quorum shall consist of three members of the VDRC and
is required to render a recommendation. A concurring
vote of three members of the VDRC is required to render
any recommendation to the Planning Commission or
Township Board. The Township Planner shall
communicate to the Planning Commission or Township
Board and applicant the recommendations of the VDRC.
Section 8.11 Site Plan Review:
A site plan shall be required for all uses permitted in this
zoning district according to the requirements of Chapter
21 of this Ordinance.
8-5
Intentionally left blank
CHAPTER 9
VO Village Office/Service District
9-1
Section 9.01 Title:
Use Regulations Relating to the "VO" Village
Office/Service District
Section 9.02 Intent:
The "VO" Village Office/Service District is intended to
provide for the development of a variety of neighborhood
office and personal service uses that generate low
volumes of traffic and involve limited size buildings,
parking needs and operations.
The regulations contained herein are designed to ensure a
harmonious relationship between the Village
Office/Service district and abutting land uses. The district
is also intended to promote the opportunity for economic
vitality in the village area by concentrating compatible
land uses which encourage interaction between adjoining
like uses. Additionally, the regulations are intended to
maintain and strengthen the identity, traditional
character and appearance of Cascade Village as a focal
point and center of community activity for Cascade
Township residents.
Section 9.03 Uses Permitted by Right:
The uses permitted by right in the "VO" District are as
follows:
1. The following office establishments which perform
services on the premises:
a. Financial institutions, not including drive through
facilities.
b. Insurance offices.
c. Real estate offices, offices for attorneys,
accountants, architects, engineers and similar
professionals.
d. Photographic studios.
2. Professional service establishments providing human
health care on an outpatient basis, excluding medical
clinics.
3. The following establishments customarily related to
medical and dental uses:
a. Pharmacies or apothecaries
b. Medical, dental and optical laboratories.
c. Stores offering supportive or corrective garments
and prosthetic appliances.
4. The following miscellaneous business service
establishments:
a. Consumer credit reporting agencies.
b. Mailing list and stenographic services.
c. Business management consulting services.
d. Duplicating services.
5. Governmental offices and libraries.
6. Offices of non-profit organizations, such as
professional membership organizations, labor unions,
civic, social and fraternal associations, political
organizations and religious organizations.
7. Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental
to the uses permitted in this Section, subject to the
provisions of Section 4.08.
8. Signs accessory to a permitted use as regulated by
the Cascade Charter Township Sign Ordinance and
consistent with the design guidelines set forth in the
Cascade Village Design Plan.
9. Temporary buildings, structures and uses and
essential public services are provided in Section 4.25.
10. Churches (Ord. No. #10 of 2001)
Section 9.04 Uses Permitted by Special Use
Permit:
The following uses may be permitted as special uses but
are subject to the provisions and conditions outlined in
Chapter 17 of this Ordinance.
1. Personal service establishments primarily engaged in
providing service generally involving the care of the
person or his/her apparel, including but not limited
to:
a. Barber and beauty shops.
b. Tailor and dressmaking shops.
c. Shoe shine and shoe repair shops.
d. Dry cleaning and laundry establishments.
2. Personal service agencies including but not limited to:
a. Babysitting.
b. Dating services.
c. Debt counseling or adjustment services to
individuals.
d. Portrait copying.
e. Shopping services.
f. Tax return preparation services.
3. Child or Adult Day Care Centers.
CHAPTER 9
VO Village Office/Service District
9-2
4. Office uses which perform services on the premises
other than those listed in Section 9.03(1), above.
5. Establishments customarily related to medical and
dental uses other than those listed in Section 9.03 (3),
above.
6. Miscellaneous business service establishments other
than those listed in Section 9.03 (4), above.
7. Roof and ground mounted communications
antennas, excluding towers.
8. Minor Mineral Resource Extraction as regulated in
Chapter 17 and Section 4.28 of Chapter 4.
9. Funeral homes, not including crematories, subject to
the following restrictions:
a. Sufficient off-street automobile parking and
assembly area shall be provided for vehicles to
be used in funeral processions. The
assembly area shall be provided in addition to
otherwise required off-street parking area.
b. Loading and unloading areas used by
ambulances, hearses, or other such service
vehicles shall be obscured from view with an
opaque fence or wall not less than six (6) feet in
height.
10. Drive-in facilities related to any of the uses listed in
this zoning district, subject to the requirements in
Section 17.07.
11. Antenna tower and masts for cellular phone and
other personal communication services, when
authorized as a special use by the Planning
Commission subject to conformance with the
standards of Section 17.03(h). (This subsection added by
Ordinance #11 of 1996)
12. Other uses determined by the Planning Commission
to be similar to the uses listed in Sections 9.03 and
9.04 hereof. (Section added by Ord #3 of 2006; 5/10/06)
Section 9.05 Site Development Standards
1. Minimum lot area - 40,000 square feet.
2. Minimum lot width - 200 feet.
3. Maximum height - 25 feet or 2 stories whichever is
the lessor.
4. Setback Requirements:
Front: 40 feet
Side: 25 feet
Rear: 50 feet [See also Section 18.13(4)]
5. New parking areas in the Village Office/Service
district, constructed after the effective date of this
amendment, shall not be located within the first 50
feet of the required front setback area.
6. Maximum net floor area for any individual property:
a. Single Building - .25 F.A.R
b. Multiple Buildings - .30 F.A.R
c. The maximum floor area for a building shall not
exceed 45,000 square feet. After October 1, 1994
the maximum floor area for a single building shall
not exceed 30,000 square feet. (This subsection
was amended by Ordinance #2of 1994.)
7. All new buildings and structures shall be so designed
to incorporate the following architectural design
features:
a. Roof Shape - All roofs shall be so designed to
include a pitched roof. Roof shapes such as:
gable, hip or gambrel are permitted. Shed and
mansard style roofs are not permitted.
b. Exterior Building Materials - Exterior materials
must project a natural appearance. The exterior
shall be constructed using horizontal wood
siding, wood, stone, brick, brick veneer or
masonry. The use of vinyl or aluminum siding is
acceptable provided it simulates the appearance
of horizontal wood siding.
c. Dumpsters - Dumpsters shall be located in the
rear yard or side yard and must be screened.
These facilities shall be enclosed with a solid
fence or wall six (6) feet high with solid doors
having sufficient truck access for dumpster
service.
8. The requirements contained in Section 9.05 (7)
above, shall also apply to exterior additions,
expansions, reconstruction or remodeling of existing
buildings or structures when any of the following
conditions are met:
a. The proposed exterior addition, expansion,
reconstruction or remodeling activity has a
project construction valuation of $10,000 or
more. Project construction valuation shall be
based upon the Square Foot Construction Cost
Table, as administered by The Cascade Charter
Township Building and Inspections Department
and adopted by the Cascade Charter Township
Board.
b. The proposed exterior addition or expansion
increases the size of the building or structure by
at least 25 percent of the existing size of the
building or structure at the effective date of this
amendment (April 16, 1993).
CHAPTER 10
B-2 General Business District
Section 10.01 Title:
Use Regulations Relating to the "B-2" General Business
District
Section 10.02 Intent:
This district is intended to satisfy the land needs for a
wide range of business uses and to cater to needs of a
larger consumer population than is served by the "B-1"
Village Business District. This district recognizes the
economic value or potential value of these lands as well
as various problems often encountered in the
development of these areas, including hazardous traffic
conditions, traffic congestion, over development of lands,
shopper inconvenience, and potential lack of amenities
necessary to maintain long-range property values.
Additionally, this district can be a suitable area for mobile
home park development due to it being served by
adequate public facilities such as access streets, public
water, sanitary sewer and storm water drainage.
Section 10.03 Uses Permitted By Right:
In any "B-2" General Business District no building
structure or premises shall be erected, altered or used
except as one or more of the following specified uses
unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
1. Any retail business or service establishment allowed
as a use permitted by right in the "B-1" Village District
(Chapter 8).
2. Amusement Enterprises.
3. Appliance Stores.
4. Athletic Clubs and Health Spas.
5. Automobile Supply, Parts and Accessories.
6. Business or Trade Schools.
7. Building Trades, excluding heavy equipment.
8. Emergency Medical Clinics.
9. Funeral Homes.
10. Furniture Stores.
11. Laundromats and Dry Cleaners.
12. Lodge Hall, Private Clubs, Veteran's Clubs.
13. Musical Instruments Sales and Lessons.
14. Office Machines & Computers Sales and Service.
15. Theaters.
16. Veterinary Clinics.
17. Adult Oriented Business subject to the provisions of
Section 21.05.7 (Amended by Ord. # 5 of 2001)
18. Massage Establishments Section 21.05.7 (Amended by
Ord. # 5 of 2001)
19. Shopping Centers & Department Stores containing
one or more permitted or special uses, excluding sale
at wholesale level.
20. Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental
to the uses permitted in this district Section 4.08.*
21. Mobile Home Parks Section 21.05.6 (amended by
Ord. #3 of 2000).*
22. Churches Section 17.07.2.a (Ord. #10 of 2001).*
23. Brew Pub
24. Restaurant with brew pub as accessory use
25. Tavern
*Section renumbered as a result of Ord #3 of 2006; 5/10/06
Section 10.04 Uses Permitted by Special Use
Permit:
The following uses may be permitted, but are subject to
the provisions and conditions outlined in Chapter 17.
1. Any use that may be allowed by Special Use Permit in
the "B-1" Village District.
2. Lumber Yards and new building material sales.
3. Outdoor Recreation Centers excluding amusement
parks Section 17.07.2.d
4. Sign Painting and Service Shops.
5. New Or Used Automobile Sales and Service Section
17.07.2.l
6. Recreational Vehicle Sales and Service.
7. Restaurants having drive in or drive through service.
8. Any permitted use if all business, storage, service or
processing is not conducted wholly within a
completely enclosed building, except for automobile
parking for customers or employees, off-street
loading spaces and signs.
9. Boarding houses, motels, hotels and transient lodging
facilities not including trailer camps or tent sites. (New
Section added by Ordinance #14 of 1989).
10. Minor Mineral Resource Extraction as regulated in
Chapter 17 and Section 4.28 of Chapter 4. (New Section
added by Ordinance #19 of 1990).
11. Antenna tower and masts for cellular phone and
other personal communication services, when
authorized as a special use by the Planning
10-1
CHAPTER 10
B-2 General Business District
Commission subject to conformance with the
standards of Section 17.03(h). (This subsection added by
Ordinance #11 of 1996)
12. Other uses determined by the Planning Commission
to be similar to the uses listed in Section 10.03 and
Section 10.04 hereof. (Section added by Ord. #3 of 2006;
5/10/06)
13. Microbrew
14. Micro distillery
10-2
CHAPTER 11
ES Expressway Service District
11-1
Section 11.01 Title:
Use Regulations Relating To The "ES" Expressway Service
District
Section 11.02 Intent:
The Expressway Service District is designed to provide for
servicing the needs of automobile highway traffic at
certain interchange areas of feeder roads and expressway
facilities.
The avoidance of undue congestion on feeder roads, the
promotion of smooth traffic flow at the interchange areas
of the expressway and the protection of adjacent
properties in other zones from adverse influences of
traffic are prime considerations in the creation of the "ES"
District.
Section 11.03 Uses Permitted By Right:
In an ES, Expressway Service District, no building,
structure or premises, shall be erected, altered or used
except for one or more of the following uses, unless
otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
1. Any retail business or service establishment allowed
as a use permitted by right in the "B-2" General
Business District, Chapter 10.
2. Boarding houses, motels, hotels and transient lodging
facilities not including trailer camps or tent sites.
3. Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental
to the uses permitted in this district, subject to the
provisions of Section 4.08.
4. Churches (Ord #10 of 2001)*
*Section renumbered by Ord. #3 of 2006; 5/10/06
Section 11.04 Uses Permitted By Special Use
Permit: (Ord No 7 of 2011; 6/23/11)
The following uses may be permitted, but are subject to
the provisions and conditions outlined in Chapter 17.
1. All uses that may be allowed by Special Use in the "B-
2" General Business District, Chapter 10.
2. Minor Mineral Resource Extraction as regulated in
Chapter 17 and Section 4.28 of Chapter 4. (New Section
added by Ordinance #19 of 1990).
3. Antenna tower and masts for cellular phone and
other personal communication services, when
authorized as a special use by the Planning
Commission subject to conformance with the
standards of Section 17.03(h). (This subsection added by
Ordinance #11 of 1996)
4. Other uses determined by the Planning Commission
to be similar to the uses listed in Sections 11.03 and
11.04 hereof. (Section added by Ord #3 of 2006; 5/10/06)
5. Buildings in excess of maximum height standards.
Intentionally left blank
CHAPTER 12
O Office District
12-1
Section 12.01 Title:
Use Regulations Relating to the "O" Office District
Section 12.02 Intent:
The "O" Office District is intended to provide for the
development of a variety of office uses of a business and
professional nature as well as to provide for the
development of certain related activities in proximity to
office uses. It is also the intent of this district to locate
office uses in proximity to expressways and major arterial
streets. The regulations contained in this Section are
designed to ensure a harmonious relationship between
the Office District and abutting land uses and to promote
efficient functioning for uses located within the Office
District.
Section 12.03 Uses Permitted By Right:
The uses permitted by right in the "O" District are as
follows:
1. Executive and administrative offices, data processing
centers and business offices such as real estate,
insurance, and non-profit organizations.
2. Professional offices for medical doctors, dentists,
architects, engineers, accountants, attorneys and
similar professions.
3. Medical and dental laboratories.
4. Radio and television stations, not including towers
and antennas.
5. Funeral homes, not including crematories, subject to
the following restrictions:
a. Sufficient off-street automobile parking and
assembly area shall be provided for vehicles to
be used in funeral processions. The assembly
area shall be provided in addition to otherwise
required off-street parking area.
b. Loading and unloading areas used by
ambulances, hearses, or other such service
vehicles shall be obscured from view with an
opaque fence or wall not less than six (6) feet in
height.
6. Publicly owned buildings, exchanges, and public
utility offices not including storage yards,
maintenance facilities, substations, regular stations,
and materials handling facilities.
7. Banks, credit unions, savings and loan institutions,
not including drive-in and outdoor automatic teller
facilities.
8. The following personal service establishments when
located within an office building and provided that;
a. Such establishments are limited to basement and
ground floors of the building.
b. The total gross floor area collectively occupied by
personal service establishments shall not exceed
ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of the
building's ground floor.
c. The gross floor area occupied by any single
personal service establishment shall not exceed
ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of the
building's ground floor or 1500 square feet,
whichever is the lessor amount.
1) News Stands, tobacco stands and
confectioneries
2) Barber and beauty shops
3) Tailor and dressmaker shops
4) Shoeshine and shoe repair shops
5) Dry Cleaning and laundry pickup stations
6) Photographic studios and print shops
7) Cafeterias or food services operated during
normal business hours and primarily catering
to on premises employees.
8) Other personal service establishments
including child care and day nurseries which
are compatible with, subservient to and
which cater to, on premises or neighboring
businesses and employees.
9) Accessory structures and uses customarily
incidental to the uses permitted in this
Section, subject to the provisions of Section
4.08.
10) Signs are regulated by the Cascade Charter
Township Sign Ordinance.
11) Temporary buildings, structures and uses
and essential public services as provided in
Section 4.25.
12) Churches (Ord. #10 of 2001)
CHAPTER 12
O Office District
12-2
Section 12.04 Uses Permitted by Special Use
Permit:
The following uses may be permitted but are subject to
the provisions and conditions outlined in Chapter 17.
1. Athletic clubs and health spas and other indoor and
outdoor recreation facilities including tennis,
racquetball and handball courts and similar facilities,
but not including bowling alleys, ice rinks, and athletic
fields.
2. Drive-in banking, loan and finance facilities.
3. Roof and ground mounted communications
antennas, excluding towers.
4. Medical clinics and veterinarian clinics excluding
emergency services.
5. Minor Mineral Resource Extraction as regulated in
Chapter 17 and Section 4.28 of Chapter 4. (New Section
added by Ordinance #19 of 1990).
6. Antenna tower and masts for cellular phone and
other personal communication services, when
authorized as a special use by the Planning
Commission subject to conformance with the
standards of Section 17.03(h). (This subsection added by
Ordinance #11 of 1996)
7. Other uses determined by the Planning Commission
to be similar to the uses listed in Sections 12.03 and
12.04 hereof. (Section added by Ord #3 of 2006; 5/10/06).
CHAPTER 13
I Industrial District
13-1
Section 13.01 Title:
Use Regulations Relating to the "I" Industrial District
Section 13.02 Intent:
This zone is intended to permit industrial uses which are
not unreasonably offensive, hazardous, or debilitating to
surrounding property or the community through the
effects of noise, smoke, odor, dust, dirt, noxious gases,
vibration, glare, heat, fire hazards, industrial wastes, or
traffic. In those instances where there may be doubt
regarding the effect of the operation, the Planning
Commission may require the prospective operator to
demonstrate, through the use of qualified technical
persons and acceptable testing techniques, that
protective devices shall be utilized that will categorically
assure the control of the questioned factor.
All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials, and
products for every use, as enumerated and limited herein,
located less than one hundred (100) feet from any other
district, shall be enclosed by a solid fence or wall, not less
than eight (8) feet in height.
Section 13.03 Uses Permitted by Right: Amended
by Ord #5 of 2010; 3/10/10
Land and/or buildings in this district may be used for the
following purposes:
1. "A" Grouping Basic Manufacturing: Manufacturing,
compounding, processing and/or fabrication of the
following materials provided that any structure used
therefor shall not be located less than four hundred
(400) feet from any residential district or use:
a. Agricultural products.
b. Food and kindred products.
c. Chemicals and chemical products such as
plastics, synthetic fibers and cosmetics.
d. Wood and wood products, including sawmills
and planing mills.
e. Metals and metal products, including metal
plating.
f. Glass and glass products.
g. Paper and paper products.
h. Foundries and forge plants.
i. Insulation manufacture.
j. Rubber and rubber products.
2. "B" Groupings - Non-Basic Manufacturing: Facilities
for manufacturing, processing fabrication, packaging
treating or assembling from previously prepared
materials provided that any structure used therefor
shall be located not less than two hundred (200) feet
from any residential district or use.
a. Automotive and aircraft parts (not including
tires) and metal working.
b. Automotive assembly, including major repair.
c. Textile mill products such as woven fabric,
knitted goods, floor coverings, yarn and thread.
d. Apparel and similar products made from fabrics,
leather, fur, canvas and similar materials.
e. Prefabricated structural wood products,
containers and lumber yards but excluding
sawmills.
f. Furniture and fixtures.
g. Paper and paperboard containers and products.
h. Printing, publishing, and allied industries.
i. Chemical products such as plastics, synthetic
fibers, and cosmetics.
j. Drugs and pharmaceutical products.
k. Electrical machinery, equipment, and supplies.
l. Fabricated metal products.
m. Glass products.
n. Tool and die shop and screw machine products.
o. Metal bending and welding.
p. Central dry cleaning or laundry.*
q. Building trades contractors.*
r. Research and development, and testing
laboratories.*
s. Warehousing and general storage.*
t. Truck and trailer and heavy equipment sales,
leasing and rental.*
u. Mini warehouses and self storage.*
v. Wholesale establishments.*
w. Retail sales where such use is clearly incidental to
the primary use and where the area devoted to
retail sales does not exceed fifteen (15) percent
of the total floor area, and provided that the
building used for such purpose is located a
minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet from a
residential district or use.*
CHAPTER 13
I Industrial District
13-2
x. Offices, provided they are incidental to an
industrial use located on the same site.*
y. Churches* (Ord. #10 of 2001)
3. Accessory buildings and uses: As provided in Section
4.08.
4. Signs As provided in the Cascade Charter Township
Sign Ordinance.
5. Temporary structures and essential public services:
As provided in Section 4.25.
*Sections renumbered by Ord #3 of 2006; 5/10/06
Section 13.04 Uses Permitted by Special Use
Permit:
The following uses may be permitted but are subject to
the provisions and conditions outlined in Chapter 17,
Special Use:
1. Auction houses if operation ceases before midnight
and is wholly enclosed within a building.
2. Contractor's yards for vehicles, equipment, materials
and/or supplies, provided that such yards shall be not
less than five hundred (500) feet from any residential
district or residential use.
3. Gasoline service stations, provided building used for
such purposes shall not be nearer than five hundred
(500) feet to any residential district or residential use.
4. Kennels not nearer than five hundred (500) feet to
any residential district or residential use.
5. Livestock auctions not closer than five hundred (500)
feet to any residential district or residential use.
6. Parking and/or storage yards for motor vehicles
(excluding junked vehicles) and including transport
equipment, provided such yards shall be not less than
five hundred (500) feet from any residential district.
7. Trucking freight terminal and yards, provided such
yards shall not be less than five hundred (500) feet
from any residential district.
8. Veterinary clinic not less than five hundred (500) feet
from any residential district.
9. Free standing office buildings located on substandard
parcels or lots in existence prior to the effective date
of this Ordinance.
10. Temporary cement or asphalt batch plants.
11. Billboard signs as provided in the Cascade Charter
Township Sign Ordinance.
12. Minor Mineral Resource Extraction as regulated in
Chapter 17 and Section 4.28 of Chapter 4. (New Section
added by Ordinance #19 of 1990).
13. Antenna tower and masts for cellular phone and
other personal communication services, when
authorized as a special use by the Planning
Commission subject to conformance with the
standards of Section 17.03 (h). (This subsection added by
Ordinance #11 of 1996)
14. Other uses determined by the Planning Commission
to be similar to the uses listed in Sections 13.03 and
13.04 hereof. (Section added by Ord #3 of 2006; 5/10/06)
CHAPTER 13a
TI Transitional Industrial District
Section 13.01a Title:
Use Regulations Relating to the "TI" Transitional Industrial
District
Section 13.02a Intent:
The Transitional Industrial District is intended to allow for
low-impact industrial uses and supportive, ancillary
service and commercial activities. This zoning district is
meant to provide the transition from more conventional,
heavy industrial uses to commercial, retail, and other
uses. Land use activity in the TI District will be compatible
with uses in adjacent zoning districts and will
accommodate appropriate non-industrial uses in specified
locations. The TI District is designed specifically for three
potential redevelopment areas within Cascade Township:
north of 36th Street and west of I-96; the Meadowbrook
industrial area southwest of 52nd Street and Kraft Avenue;
and south of 48th Street and west of M-6.
Section 13.03a Uses Permitted by Right:
Land and/or buildings in this district may be used for the
following purposes:
1. Facilities for manufacturing, processing fabrication,
packaging treating or assembling from previously
prepared materials provided that any structure used
therefor shall be located not less than two hundred
(200) feet from any residential district or use, and
certain other uses, including the following:
a. Automotive and aircraft parts (not including
tires) and metal working.
b. Automotive assembly, including major repair.
c. Textile mill products such as woven fabric,
knitted goods, floor coverings, yarn and thread.
d. Apparel and similar products made from fabrics,
leather, fur, canvas and similar materials.
e. Prefabricated structural wood products,
containers and lumber yards but excluding
sawmills.
f. Furniture and fixtures.
g. Paper and paperboard containers and products.
h. Printing, publishing, and allied industries.
i. Chemical products such as plastics, synthetic
fibers, and cosmetics.
j. Drugs and pharmaceutical products.
k. Electrical machinery, equipment, and supplies.
l. Fabricated metal products.
m. Glass products.
n. Tool and die shop and screw machine products.
o. Metal bending and welding.
p. Central dry cleaning or laundry.
q. Building trades contractors.
r. Research and development, and testing
laboratories.
s. Warehousing and general storage.
t. Truck and trailer and heavy equipment sales,
leasing and rental.
u. Mini warehouses and self storage.
v. Wholesale establishments.
2. Churches (Ord. #10 of 2001)
3. Retail sales where such use is clearly incidental to the
primary use and where the area devoted to retail
sales does not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the total
floor area, and provided that the building used for
such purpose is located a minimum of one hundred
fifty (150) feet from a residential district or use.
4. Executive and administrative offices, data processing
centers and business offices such as real estate,
insurance, and non-profit organizations.
5. Professional offices for medical doctors, dentists,
architects, engineers, accountants, attorneys and
similar professions.
6. Medical and dental laboratories.
7. The following uses shall be permitted when the front
yard is located in the Transitional Industrial Zoning
District and along Kraft Ave or within 1000’ of 36th
and Patterson Ave., and when the area devoted to
such uses does not exceed thirty (30) percent of the
site, and provided that the building used for such
purpose is located a minimum of one hundred fifty
(150) feet from a residential district or use. If any
portion of a property falls within the 1000 feet of the
intersection it shall be deemed to have met the
requirement.
a. Generally recognized retail businesses, which
supply commodities on the premises, such as,
but not limited to, groceries, meats, dairy
products, baked goods or other foods, drugs, dry
goods, clothing and notions or hardware.
b. Personal service establishments, which perform
services on the premises, such as, but not limited
13a-1
CHAPTER 13a
TI Transitional Industrial District
to, repair shops (watches, radios, television,
shoes, etc), tailor shops, beauty parlors or barber
shops, photographic studios, flower shops and
print shops.
c. Restaurants, including drive-in or drive through
service.
d. Business establishments which perform services
on the premises, such as, but not limited to,
banks, insurance offices and real estate offices.
e. Brew Pub
f. Restaurant with brew pub as accessory use
g. Tavern
8. Accessory buildings and uses: As provided in Section
4.08.
9. Signs As provided in the Cascade Charter Township
Sign Ordinance.
10. Temporary structures and essential public services:
As provided in Section 4.25.
11. Microbrew
12. Micro distillery
Section 13.04a Uses Permitted by Special Use
Permit:
The following uses may be permitted but are subject to
the provisions and conditions outlined in Chapter 17,
Special Use:
1. Auction houses if operation ceases before midnight
and is wholly enclosed within a building.
2. Contractor's yards for vehicles, equipment, materials
and/or supplies, provided that such yards shall be not
less than five hundred (500) feet from any residential
district or residential use.
3. Gasoline service stations, provided building used for
such purposes shall not be nearer than five hundred
(500) feet to any residential district or residential use.
4. Kennels not nearer than five hundred (500) feet to
any residential district or residential use.
5. Livestock auctions not closer than five hundred (500)
feet to any residential district or residential use.
6. Parking and/or storage yards for motor vehicles
(excluding junked vehicles) and including transport
equipment, provided such yards shall be not less than
five hundred (500) feet from any residential district.
7. Trucking freight terminal and yards, provided such
yards shall not be less than five hundred (500) feet
from any residential district.
8. Veterinary clinic not less than five hundred (500) feet
from any residential district.
9. Free standing office buildings located on substandard
parcels or lots in existence prior to the effective date
of this Ordinance.
10. Temporary cement or asphalt batch plants.
11. Antenna tower and masts for cellular phone and
other personal communication services, when
authorized as a special use by the Planning
Commission subject to conformance with the
standards of Section 17.03 (h).
12. Public, parochial and other private elementary,
intermediate and high schools not operated for profit
excluding colleges and universities.
13. Other uses determined by the Planning Commission
to be similar to the uses listed in Sections 13.03 and
13.04 hereof. (Section added by Ord #3 of 2006; 5/10/06)
13a-2
CHAPTER 14
AC Airport-Commerce District
(Chapter amended by Ord. No. 10 of 2002)
14-1
Section 14.01 Title:
Use Regulations Relating to the "AC" Airport-Commerce
District
Section 14.02 Intent:
This district recognizes that certain aeronautical facilities
are exempt from Township zoning under current state
law, and also that a portion of the airport property is
under the jurisdiction of the City of Grand Rapids. This
district is intended to accommodate and promote
aeronautical progress for the public good, while
protecting the public health and welfare of the citizens in
the Cascade Charter Township.
Because of the intensity of existing aeronautical uses and
uses located directly adjacent to aeronautical facilities,
this district permits non-aeronautical facilities within the
district both to compliment airport operations, and in
recognition that aeronautical activities already taking
place in the district tend to be more consistent with
commercial than with non-commercial uses.
This district shall be divided into two subzones with each
subzone being considered a separate zoning district,
Subzone 1 shall be described as, the area generally
surrounding the runways, hangars and control tower.
Subzone 2 shall be described as, the remaining portions of
the Airport Commerce Zoning District. The following
figure (Figure 14-1) further depicts each subzone:
SUBZONE 1
Section 14.03 Uses Permitted by Right in
Subzone 1:
In the “Airport Commerce-subzone 1” District no building,
structure or premises shall be erected altered or used
except as one or more of the following specified uses
unless otherwise provided by this ordinance:
1. Airport Operations Facilities:
a. Any Aeronautical Facility as defined in Section 3
of the Michigan Aeronautics Code (MCL 259.3).
b. Aircraft cleaning and janitorial services
c. Aircraft flight training and flying clubs
d. Aircraft landing facilities
e. Aircraft refueling and fuel storage facilities
f. Aircraft/aviation related servicing, repair,
painting and restoration facilities
g. Aircraft sales
h. Air freight handling facilities
i. Airline reservation centers
j. Airport terminal, and all uses within the terminal
building, including but not limited to restaurants,
cocktail lounges, etc.
k. Airport parking facilities
l. U.S. Customs clearance offices
m. Flying charter services
n. Hangar operations and aircraft storage
o. Sightseeing airplane service
p. Aeronautical and other administrative offices
q. Airport maintenance facilities
r. Any facility required by Federal, State, or Local
permits.
2. Airport museum
3. Airport viewing areas
4. Hotels/Motels
5. Rental Establishments - primarily engaged in renting,
leasing, or servicing automobiles, small vans, trucks
or other similar vehicles
6. Restaurants
7. Banks, credit unions, savings and loans, and similar
financial institutions (including drive-through and
outdoor automatic teller facilities)
Figure 14-1
SUBZONE MAP
Subzone 1
Subzone 2
CHAPTER 14
AC Airport-Commerce District
(Chapter amended by Ord. No. 10 of 2002)
14-2
8. Used car sales engaged only in the sale of car rental
fleet on the premises. Said activity shall also have the
approval of the property owner.
9. Business service centers providing services such as
telecommunications services, computer services,
copying and fax services, temporary office space, or
similar business - related services.
10. Automobile Service Stations
11. Personal service establishments that perform service
on the premises including, but not limited to, beauty
parlor, barbershop, photographic studio, dry cleaning
establishments, flower shops, print shops, and repair
shops (watches, radio/TV, shoes, etc).
12. Specialty retail shops
13. Freight terminals
14. Parking Structures
15. Warehousing and general storage.
16. Intermodal transportation facilities.
17. Any governmental buildings, offices, or other facilities
including, but not limited to, law enforcement
facilities and County Road Commission facilities.
18. Any public utility buildings, structures or facilities.
19. Any building, structure or facility used in the
abatement/mitigation of environmental issues
including the capture, storage and treatment of deicing/
anti-icing or other agents used for aviation
purposes, including facilities/structures required for
environmental compliance.
20. Any use or activity incidental to or related to
“Aeronautics” as defined in Section 2 of the Michigan
Aeronautics Code (MCL 259.2)
Section 14.04 Uses Permitted by Special Use
Approval in Subzone 1.
The following uses may be permitted as a special use in
subzone 1:
1. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
Ordinance, Minor Mineral Resource Extraction and
Major Mineral Resource Extraction in accordance
with the requirements of only subsections 3 through
10 of Section 4.28 of this Ordinance. Major Mineral
Resource Extraction in this subzone will not require
Planned Unit Development rezoning pursuant to
Chapter 16.
SUBZONE 2
Section 14.05 Uses Permitted by Right in
Subzone 2:
In the “Airport Commerce-subzone 2” District no building,
structure or premises shall be erected altered or used
except as one or more of the following specified uses
unless otherwise provided by this ordinance:
1. Airport Operations Facilities:
a. Any Aeronautical Facility as defined in Section 3
of the Michigan Aeronautics Code (MCL 259.3).
b. Aircraft cleaning and janitorial services
c. Aircraft flight training and flying club
d. Aircraft landing facilities
e. Aircraft refueling and fuel storage facilities
f. Aircraft/aviation related servicing, repair,
painting and restoration facilities
g. Aircraft sales
h. Air freight handling facilities
i. Airline reservation centers
j. Airport terminal, and all uses within the terminal
building, including but not limited to restaurants,
cocktail lounges, etc.
k. Airport parking facilities
l. U.S. Customs clearance offices
m. Flying charter services
n. Hangar operations and aircraft storage
o. Sightseeing airplane service
p. Aeronautical and other administrative offices
q. Airport maintenance facilities
r. Any facility required by Federal, State, or Local
permits.
2. Airport viewing areas
3. Airport museum
4. Business service centers providing services such as
telecommunications services, computer services,
copying and fax services, temporary office space, or
similar business - related services.
5. Freight terminals
6. Parking Structures
7. Warehousing and general storage
8. Any governmental buildings, offices, or other facilities
including, but not limited to, law enforcement
facilities and County Road Commission facilities.
CHAPTER 14
AC Airport-Commerce District
(Chapter amended by Ord. No. 10 of 2002)
14-3
9. Within a foreign trade zone as established pursuant
to the Foreign Trade Zone Act (19 USCA §81a et seq.),
any use permitted in a foreign trade zone by Federal
law including, without limitation, the storage, sale,
exhibition, repacking, assembly, distribution, or
manufacture of goods or merchandise.
Section 14.06 Uses permitted by Special Use
Approval in Subzone 2
The following uses may be permitted, but are subject to
the provisions and conditions outlined in Chapter 17.
1. Hotels/Motels
2. Rental Establishments - primarily engaged in renting,
leasing, or servicing automobiles, small vans, trucks
or other similar vehicles.
3. Automobile Service Stations.
4. Intermodal transportation facilities
5. Restaurants
6. Banks, credit unions, savings and loans, and similar
financial institutions (including drive-through and
outdoor automatic teller facilities).
7. Specialty retail shops
8. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Zoning
Ordinance, Minor Mineral Resource Extraction and
Major Mineral Resource Extraction in accordance
with the requirements of only subsections 3 through
10 of Section 4.28 (Mineral Resource Extraction of
this Ordinance. Mineral Resource Extraction in this
Subzone will not require Planned Unit Development
rezoning as regulated in Chapter 16 of this
Ordinance).
9. Antenna tower and masts for cellular phone and
other personal communication services, when
authorized as a special use by the Planning
Commission subject to conformance with the
standards of Section 17.03(h).
10. Personal service establishments that perform service
on the premises including, but not limited to, beauty
parlor, barbershop, photographic studio, dry cleaning
establishments, flower shops, print shops, and repair
shops (watches, radio/TV, shoes, etc).
Section 14.07 Site Plan Review:
Due to the unique nature of the airport, the level of
review by the Township within both subzones of the
Airport Commerce Zoning District shall be limited to
certain uses in Subzone 2. Furthermore these subzones
shall also be used for determining the level of review
needed by the Township.
All the uses in section 14.03 that fall within Subzone 1,
whether non-aeronautical or not shall be permitted as of
right and shall not require Township Site Plan review
approvals. However, the applicant shall be responsible to
submit a site plan indicating the location of any new curbcut
to a public street in order to ensure that it meets the
minimum Township standards as regulated in this
Ordinance.
For those areas in Subzone 2, the uses in Section 14.05.1
are not subject to site plan review but are required to
submit a site plan indicating the location of any new curbcut
to a public street in order to ensure that it meets the
minimum Township standards in this ordinance.
All other uses listed in Subzone 2 (Section 14.05-2 thru 9)
shall require site plan review per Chapter 21 of this
Ordinance. All uses permitted by Special Use Permit in
Section 14.06 shall require site plan review per chapters 4,
17 and 21 as applicable.
If at any time any use is proposed and the location of
which crosses from one sub-zone to another, the more
stringent regulations shall apply.
Intentionally left blank
CHAPTER 15
MHP PUD Mobile Home Park Planned Unit Development
15-1
Section 15.01 Title:
Mobile Home Park Planned Unit Development - “MHP
PUD” (Section amended by Ordinance #3 of 2000)
Section 15.02 Intent:
The MHP PUD is intended to provide standards for the
submission, review and approval of applications for
Mobile Home Park Planned Unit Developments. It is
intended that mobile home parks be provided with
necessary community services in a setting that provides a
high quality of life for residents and residential
development standards consistent with all other
residential districts in Cascade Charter Township. This
district shall be located in areas where it will be
compatible with adjacent land uses.
Determining the appropriate location for a mobile home
park is a uniquely challenging task and may have a crucial
impact on adjacent and surrounding land uses. A mobile
home park contains specific site conditions unlike other
types of residential development. Sites with an
abundance of natural features such as forested areas,
wetlands, and steep slopes are not found to be suitable
for the development of a mobile home park. In light of
these parameters, the absence of a detailed resource
inventory in the Township, coupled with the limited
availability of public sewer and water facilities, the
Township has elected to allow this zoning district as a
Planned Unit Development. Requiring the developer to
rezone the property to “MHP PUD”. The Township and
residents rely on the Comprehensive Plan to determine
future use and judge/evaluate rezoning requests. Along
with the provisions of this Chapter the rezoning shall
comply with the PUD provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
The regulations established by state law, Michigan Public
Act 96 of 1987, as amended, the Michigan Manufactured
Housing Commission Rules, and this Ordinance shall
govern all mobile home park communities in the
Township. When the regulations in this Chapter exceed
the state law or the Michigan Manufactured Housing
Commission, the higher standards of this Ordinance are
intended to insure that mobile home parks meet the
development and site plan standards established by this
Ordinance for other comparable residential development
and to promote the health, safety and welfare of
Township’s residents.
Section 15.03 Standard Operation
Requirements:
1. State Permit: It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to
operate a manufactured housing community unless
that individual obtains a license for such operation in
compliance with the requirements of Michigan Public
Act No. 96 of 1987, as amended. The Planning
Department shall communicate their
recommendations regarding the issuance of such
licenses to the Director of the Manufactured Housing
Division, Corporation and Securities Bureau, Michigan
Department of Commerce.
2. Violations: If and when, upon inspection of any
manufactured housing community, the Planning
Department finds that there are existing conditions or
practices which violate provisions of this Ordinance or
other regulations referenced herein, they shall give
notice in writing by certified mail to the Director of
the Michigan Manufactured Housing Commission,
including the specific nature of the alleged violations
and a description of possible remedial action
necessary to effect compliance with the ordinance or
other regulations. The notification shall include such
other information as is appropriate in order to fully
describe the violations and potential hazards to the
public health, safety and welfare resulting from the
violation. A copy of such notification shall be sent by
certified mail to the last known address of the
community owner or agent. All other Township
penalties are still applicable.
3. Inspections: The Building Inspector or other
authorized Township agent is granted the authority,
as specified is PA No. 96 of 1987, as amended, to
enter upon the premises of any manufactured
housing community for the purpose of determining
compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance or
other regulations referenced herein.
4. Operation: A manufactured housing community shall
not be operated until a license has been issued by the
Michigan Department of Commerce. Buildings that
require a Township permit which are constructed onsite
shall require a Township Building Permit prior to
construction and a Certificate of Occupancy prior to
use.
CHAPTER 15
MHP PUD Mobile Home Park Planned Unit Development
15-2
Section 15.04 Development Standards:
Mobile home parks shall be subject to all the rules and
requirements as established and regulated by Michigan
law, PA 96 of 1987, as amended, and the Manufactured
Housing Commission, and shall also satisfy the following
minimum requirements:
PARCELS AND HOMESITES
1. Maximum Density and Minimum Parcel Area: Each
mobile home park shall be owned and operated as
one (1) entity or on a condominium basis. A mobile
home park shall contain a minimum of forty (40)
acres.
2. Minimum Homesite Area: The mobile home park
shall be developed with homesites consisting of at
least seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square
feet per each mobile home being served.
3. Home Placement: It is the intent of this ordinance to
require parallel placement of homes adjacent to the
perimeter of the community, and to encourage
parallel placement whenever possible, so as to
maintain consistency of standards and aesthetic
quality with other residential districts and adjacent
land uses in the township.
a. All homes within the community which are
adjacent to the perimeter of the community shall
be sited parallel to an internal road.
b. A home sited parallel to an internal road shall be
placed at least twenty (20) feet from any part of
an attached structure of an adjacent home that is
used for living purposes if the adjacent home is
sited next to the home on the same internal road
or an intersection internal road.
c. A home not sited parallel to an internal road shall
be placed at least twenty (20) feet from any part
of an attached structure of an adjacent home
that is used for living purposes.
d. It shall be unlawful to permanently or
temporarily locate or park a mobile home so that
any part of such home will obstruct any roadway
or walkway within a mobile home park.
e. It shall be unlawful to locate any mobile home to
be occupied in a mobile home park unless the
home is situated on a homesite.
f. A building permit shall be issued by the Township
Building Inspector before a manufactured home
may be placed on a homesite in a mobile home
park.
4. Minimum Living Area: No one story mobile home in
any mobile home park shall contain less than one
thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet of living
area, excluding hitch and eaves.No two story mobile
home in any mobile home park shall contain less than
one thousand four hundred (1,400) square feet of
living area, excluding hitch and eaves.
5. Setback Requirements: A mobile home shall comply
with the following minimum distances:
a. Twenty (20) feet from any part of an attached or
detached structure of an adjacent mobile home
which is used for living purposes.
b. Ten (10) feet from an on-site parking space of an
adjacent homesite.
c. Ten (10) feet from an attached or detached
structure or accessory of an adjacent mobile
home which is not used for living purposes.
d. One hundred (100) feet from any baseball,
softball or similar recreation field.
e. Fifty (50) feet from any permanent building.
f. Twenty (20) feet from the edge of an internal
road.
g. Twenty (20) feet from the right-of-way line of a
dedicated public road within the mobile home
park.
h. Seven (7) feet from any parking space.
i. Seven (7) feet from a common pedestrian
walkway.
j. All mobile homes, accessory buildings, and
parking areas shall be set back not less than
twenty (20) feet from any mobile home park
boundary line, except that a minimum setback of
fifty (50) feet shall be provided from existing and
future right-of-way lines of abutting roads and
highways.
k. Fifty (50) feet from the edge of any railroad rightof-
way.
CHAPTER 15
MHP PUD Mobile Home Park Planned Unit Development
15-3
STRUCTURES AND AREAS
6. Maximum Building Height: The maximum height of a
building shall not exceed two (2) stories or twentyfive
feet. Storage sheds shall not exceed a height of
fourteen (14) feet and the height of the
manufactured home they are intended to serve.
7. Accessory and Site-built Structures: Accessory and
site-built structures constructed for use as
management offices, public works facilities, storage
buildings laundry facilities, recreation or community
centers, and other similar facilities shall be designed
and operated for use by residents of the mobile
home park only. Site-built structures within a
community shall be constructed in compliance with
the Township building codes and shall require all
applicable permits.
8. Canopies and Awnings: Canopies and awnings may
be attached to any mobile home provided they meet
the current building code standards. Canopies and
awnings shall comply with the setback and distance
requirements set forth in this Chapter and shall
require a building permit.
9. Storage:
a. Sheds: One (1) storage shed may be permitted
for each homesite. Each storage shed shall
comply with all Township regulations and
requirements and shall require all applicable
permits. Storage sheds need not be supplied by
the owner of the mobile home park.
b. Recreation Vehicle: Common areas for the
storage of boats, motorcycles, recreation
vehicles, and similar equipment may be provided
by the community owner, but shall be limited to
use only by residents of the manufactured
housing community. If proposed, the location of
such storage areas shall be shown on the
preliminary site plan. No part of any such
storage area shall be located in any required yard
or on the perimeter of the mobile home park.
The placement of the storage area shall be
located internally in the park to help screen it
from adjacent land uses. Such storage area shall
be screened from view from adjacent residential
properties with an opaque wooden fence or a
masonry wall measuring six (6) feet in height
above average grade, or a landscaped greenbelt.
The landscaped greenbelt, if used, shall consist of
closely—spaced evergreen plantings, no less than
fifteen (15) feet apart, and shall provide a
complete visual barrier at least six (6) feet in
height above grade within two (2) years of
planting.
10. Landscaping:
a. Perimeter: Perimeter screening from any
adjacent residential land use shall consist of a
masonry wall or densely planted landscaped
area. If provided, the masonry wall shall
measure six (6) feet in height from the average
grade and shall be placed inside and adjacent to
the lot line. The wall may be setback from the
property line a sufficient distance in the event
that underground utilities would interfere with
the placement of the wall or where the wall
would unreasonably obstruct the use of adjacent
property. The landscaped greenbelt, if used, shall
consist of closely—spaced evergreen plantings,
no less than fifteen (15) feet apart, and shall
provide a complete visual barrier at least six (6)
feet in height above grade within two (2) years of
planting.
b. Road Frontage: A landscaped berm measuring 2
½ to 3 feet in height from the average grade shall
be provided for every lineal foot adjacent to a
right-of-way. The berm shall be constructed with
slopes no steeper than one (1) foot vertical for
each three (3) feet horizontal. Landscaping of
the berm shall include one (1) deciduous tree for
every forty (40) lineal feet of road frontage and
one (1) deciduous or evergreen shrub for every
three (3) lineal feet of road frontage.
c. Homesite: Landscaping shall consist of one (1)
deciduous or evergreen tree for every one (1)
homesite.
d. Parking Area: An interior landscaped area of 10
square feet per parking space shall be provided
for any parking lot, bay, or area within the
community consisting of more than 15 parking
spaces. Landscaped areas shall measure at least
150 square feet and shall include plantings of
grass, ground cover, shrubs or other live plant
material. At least one (1) deciduous tree shall be
planted for each parking landscaped area.
11. Open Space: Each mobile home park in excess of fifty
(50) acres shall include an open space area equal in
size to two percent (2%) of the site. All open space
areas shall be centrally located, well drained, and
accessible to all residents of the community. Up to
twenty-five percent (25%) of the required open space
CHAPTER 15
MHP PUD Mobile Home Park Planned Unit Development
15-4
may consist of wetlands, swamps and similar use
areas.
MOTORIZED/NONMOTORIZED FACILITIES
12. Access: Each community shall have a minimum of
two (2) access roads provided there are more than
twenty (20) homesites. If two (2) access roads are
required, they must meet the spacing requirements
of Chapter 19. The main entrance to the community
shall have access to a public thoroughfare or a
recorded easement meeting the private road
standards with access to a public thoroughfare. The
public thoroughfare shall be connected to a public
collector or arterial road.
13. Internal Roads: All internal roads shall be hardsurfaced
and may be constructed with curbs and
gutters. Internal roads shall be constructed of
materials suitable for subgrades and hard surface in
compliance with the standards of the American
Association of the State Highway and Transportation
Officials (AASTO). All internal roads, walkways,
driveways, and permanent foundations shall be
maintained in such a manner that they are of a sound
and reasonably smooth surface for either walking or
driving. Surfaces shall be maintained reasonably free
of cracks, holes, upheavals, buckling, depressions,
rutting, or channeling of the wearing surface, or
shifting of the pavement base and sub-base, or both.
An adequate clear vision zone shall be provided at
intersections (see Section 4.29 Traffic visibility across
Corners). An offset at an intersection or an
intersection of more than two (2) internal roads is
prohibited. The minimum width of internal roads
shall be no less than twenty-three (23) feet. One-way
traffic shall not be permitted. All entrances to the
community shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet in
width.
14. Parking: All homesites shall be provided with two (2)
parking spaces in accordance with the Manufactured
Housing Commission Rules. One (1) additional
parking space for every three (3) homesites shall be
provided for visitor parking and located convenient to
the area served. Visitor parking shall be counted
separately from those parking spaces required for
employees or community facilities. No unlicensed or
inoperable vehicle of any type shall be parked in this
district at any time except within a covered building.
Parking shall not be permitted in any required
landscaped area.
15. Sidewalks: A three (3) foot wide concrete sidewalk
may be required to be constructed on at least one
side of all internal roads within the manufactured
housing community.
OTHER
16. Lighting: Sufficient lighting shall be provided within a
community in order to promote safe and convenient
movement from all homesites to principal
destinations within the community and connections
to public thoroughfares and walkways. Such lighting
shall meet the standards of Section 19.19.
17. Mailbox Clusters: The United States Postal Service
may require that mobile home parks be served by
clusters of mailboxes serving several homesites
rather than individual mailboxes. If mailbox clusters
are required, they shall be located at least two
hundred (200) feet from any intersection of a mobile
home park internal road and a public road.
18. Sale of Mobile homes: The business of selling new or
used mobile homes as a commercial operation shall
be prohibited after 75% complete occupancy of a
new or expanded mobile home park has been
achieved. Thereafter, new or used mobile homes
located on homesites within the community to be
used and occupied on that site may be sold by a
licensed dealer or broker. This section shall not
prohibit the sale of a used mobile homes by a
resident of the community provided the community
regulations permit such activity.
19. School Bus Stops: School bus stops shall be located
in an area that is acceptable to the school district and
the manufactured housing community developer or
owner.
20. Signs: Any and all such signs provided within the
community shall not exceed a height of five (5) feet
measured from the average grade, and shall be set
back (10) feet from any property line or road right-ofway.
a. Primary entrance: One (1) sign not to exceed an
area of thirty-two (32) square feet, shall be
permitted at the primary access of the
manufactured housing community.
b. Identification: One (1) identification sign not to
exceed an area six (6) square feet shall be
permitted for management offices and
community buildings.
CHAPTER 15
MHP PUD Mobile Home Park Planned Unit Development
15-5
21. Trash Dumpsters: Trash dumpsters, if provided, shall
be located in a location that is clearly accessible
to the servicing vehicle. Each dumpster shall be
set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from the
perimeter of the mobile home park, and shall be
placed at least fifteen (15) feet from any building
within the community. Dumpsters shall be
screened on three (3) sides with a decorative
masonry wall or wood fencing not less than six
(6) feet in height. The fourth side of the
dumpster screen shall be equipped with an
opaque lockable gate not less than six (6) feet in
height. Dumpsters shall be placed on a concrete
pad which shall extend six (6) feet in front of the
dumpster enclosure. Bollards (concrete filled
metal posts) shall be installed at the opening of
the dumpster enclosure to prevent damage to
the screening wall or fence.
22. Utilities:
a. Fuel Oil and Gas: Any fuel oil and gas storage
shall be placed in underground tanks and located
a safe distance from all homesites. All fuel lines
servicing homesites shall be placed underground
and designed in conformance with the
Manufactured Housing Commission Rules and
other applicable local county and state
regulations.
b. Telephone and Electric Service: All telephone,
electric, cable TV, and other lines within the
community shall be placed underground.
23. Water and Sewer Service: All mobile home parks
shall be served by an approved water and sewage
systems which shall meet the requirements of the
County Health Division and the Michigan Department
of Health. The plumbing connections to each
homesite shall be constructed so that all lines are
protected from freezing, accidental bumping, or from
creating any nuisance or health hazard.
24. Storm Drainage: All developed portions of the
mobile home park shall be served by adequate storm
drainage facilities which are designed and
constructed in accordance with applicable local,
county, and state regulations.
25. Skirting and Anchoring: The siding of the home shall
be required to extend to grade. Anchoring of the
mobile home shall comply with sections R125.1604
Rule 604 and R 125.1605 Rule 605 of PA 419 of 1976,
as amended.
26. Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants shall be included in the
site plan of any proposed community whenever
hookups are available (see R 125.1702a Rule 702a(b).
If fire hydrants are available within the community,
then vehicular parking on internal roads is prohibited
within ten (10) feet of a hydrant.
27. Additional Standards: The Planning Commission shall
have the right to impose additional reasonable
conditions to a site plan approval in order to meet
the intent of this ordinance.
Intentionally left blank
CHAPTER 16
PUD Planned Unit Development District
16-1
Section 16.01 Title:
PUD - Planned Unit Development District
Section 16.02 Intent:
This Chapter provides enabling authority and standards
for the submission, review and approval of applications
for Planned Unit Developments. It is the intent of this
Chapter to authorize the consideration and use of
Planned Unit Development Regulations for the following
purposes:
1. To encourage the use of land in accordance with its
character and adaptability.
2. To promote the conservation of natural features and
resources.
3. To encourage innovation in land use planning and
development.
4. To promote the enhancement of housing,
employment, shopping, traffic circulation and
recreational opportunities for the people of the
Township.
5. To promote and ensure greater compatibility of
design and use between neighboring properties.
6. To provide for the regulation of legal land uses not
otherwise authorized within this Ordinance.
The provisions of this Chapter are not intended as a
device for ignoring the Zoning Ordinance or the planning
upon which it has been based. To that end, provisions of
this Chapter are intended to result in land use
development substantially consistent with the underlying
zoning, with modifications and departures from generally
applicable requirements made in accordance with
standards provided in this Chapter to insure appropriate,
fair and consistent decision making. A Planned Unit
Development must comply with this Chapter.
Section 16.03 PUD Use Regulations:
A Planned Unit Development may be approved in any
location within Cascade Township. Any land use
authorized in this Ordinance may be included in a Planned
Unit Development, as a principal or accessory use, as well
as any other legal land use not otherwise authorized in
this Ordinance, subject to adequate public health, safety
and welfare protection mechanisms being designed into
the development, and the following:
1. Minimum Size: In order to be eligible for PUD
rezoning the proposed area shall consist of a
minimum of two (2) acres except in the case of a twofamily
or multiple family dwelling project for which
there is no minimum area requirement.
2. Demonstration of Applicability: A proposed Planned
Unit Development must demonstrate that:
a. Granting of the Planned Unit Development
rezoning will result in a recognizable and
substantial benefit to the ultimate users of the
project and to the community, where such
benefit would otherwise be unfeasible or unlikely
to be achieved.
b. In relation to underlying zoning, the proposed
type and density of use shall not result in a
material increase in the need for public services,
facilities and utilities, and shall not place a
material burden upon the subject or surrounding
land or property owners and occupants or the
natural environment.
c. The proposed development shall be compatible
with the General Development Plan of the
Township, and shall be consistent with the intent
and spirit of this Chapter.
d. In relation to underlying zoning, the proposed
development shall not result in an unreasonable
negative economic impact upon surrounding
properties.
e. The proposed development shall contain at least
as much green area and usable open space as
would otherwise be required by this Ordinance
with respect to the most dominant use in the
development.
f. The proposed development shall be under single
ownership or control such that there is a single
person or entity having responsibility for
completing the project in conformity with this
Ordinance. This provision shall not prohibit a
transfer of ownership or control, upon due
notice to the Planning Director of the Township.
CHAPTER 16
PUD Planned Unit Development District
16-2
Section 16.04 Project Design Standards:
1. Density: Residential uses of up to six (6) units per
gross acre may be considered in any underlying
residential zoning district except the ARC District. In
each case the maximum density for residential uses
shall be determined at the discretion of the Township
Board, after review by the Planning Commission,
based on consistency with the General Development
Plan, The Master Plan for Sewer and Water,
standards contained in this Ordinance, and the
impact such density would have upon the character
of the area, water and sewer services, storm water
drainage, road capacity, traffic safety and circulation,
parks and recreation, police and fire services, schools
and any planned public improvements in the area.
2. Mixed Uses: In underlying residential zoning districts,
non-residential uses may be permitted to the extent
the applicant demonstrates by expert analysis and
the Township Board finds at its discretion that the
non-residential uses shall principally serve the
persons residing in the residential units in the project.
Non-residential uses including parking and vehicle
traffic ways shall be separated and buffered from
residential units in a manner consistent with good
land and community planning principles, and the
minimum standards set forth in Chapter 20
(Landscape and Buffer Regulations) of this Ordinance,
provided, it is recognized that this provision may have
limited application to multi-use buildings.
3. Applicable Regulations
a. Unless specifically waived by the Township
Board, upon the recommendation of the
Planning Commission through the provisions of
paragraph 16.04(3.b) below, all regulations of the
underlying zoning district relative to lot size, lot
width, yard area, structure height, setback,
parking and loading, landscaping, general
provisions and to other improvements and
facilities shall apply, except that in projects
within an underlying residential district which
contain mixed uses, the most restrictive district
regulations within this Ordinance under which
each non-residential use would otherwise be
permitted shall apply.
b. Consistent with the Planned Unit Development
concept, and to encourage flexibility and
creativity in development, departures from
compliance with the regulations outlined in the
immediately preceding paragraph 16.04(3.a) may
be granted at the discretion of the Township
Board as part of the approval of a Planned Unit
Development. Such departures may be
authorized if there are features or planning
mechanisms designed into the project for the
purpose of achieving the objectives intended to
be accomplished by each of the regulations from
which a departure is sought.
4. Natural Resources and Features: The development
shall be designed to incorporate and promote the
preservation of natural resources and natural
features. Natural resources and natural features may
not be impaired or destroyed unless it is in the public
interest to do so. The removal or extraction of sand,
gravel, soil, rock, minerals, and similar natural
resources or the reshaping, enlarging, straightening,
damming or diminution of lakes, waterways, ponds or
other bodies of water may only be permitted when
such action will prepare or render the premises
suitable for an ultimate use permitted under the
terms of this Chapter. In determining whether such
action is in the public interest, the benefit which
would reasonably be expected shall be balanced
against the reasonably foreseeable detriments of the
activity. The extent to which the proposal is able to
replace or ameliorate impaired or lost resources and
features shall be considered in making this
determination.
5. Compatibility: A proposed Planned Unit
Development shall take into account the following
specific design considerations, as they are necessary
to insure compliance with all applicable regulations as
well as the compatibility of the project with adjoining
properties and the general area in which the property
is located.
a. Perimeter setbacks.
b. Street drainage and utility design with respect to
location, availability, ownership and
compatibility.
c. Underground installation of utilities.
d. Insulation of pedestrian ways from vehicular
streets and ways.
e. Achievement of integrated and harmonious
development with respect to signs, lighting,
landscaping and construction materials.
f. Noise reduction and visual screening
mechanisms for adjoining residential uses.
CHAPTER 16
PUD Planned Unit Development District
16-3
g. Ingress and egress to the property with respect
to automotive and pedestrian safety and
convenience, traffic flow and control, street
capacity and emergency access.
h. Off street parking, loading, refuse and other
service areas with respect to ingress and egress
and the potential effects of noise, glare, vibration
and odor emanating from such facilities on
adjoining properties and uses.
i. Screening and buffering with respect to
dimensions and character.
j. Yard areas and other open space.
k. Density and intensity of development expressed
in terms of percent of gross and net land area
coverage and or gross and net housing units per
acre and the height of buildings and other
structures.
Section 16.05 Procedure for Review and
Approval: (This Section amended by Ordinance #20 of 1995)
1. Effects.
The granting of a Planned Unit Development rezoning
application shall require an amendment of the Zoning
Ordinance and the Zoning Map constituting a part of
this Ordinance. An approval granted under this
Chapter, including all aspects of the final plan and
conditions imposed, shall constitute an inseparable
part of the zoning amendment.
2. Basic Plan - Submission and Content.
The applicant shall submit plans to the Planning
Department at least two (2) weeks prior to the
meeting at which the applicant intends the Planning
Commission to review the basic plan. The basic plan
shall contain the following information:
a. Sketch plan of the Planned Unit Development;
b. A legal description of the property in question;
c. The total number of acres to be included in the
project;
d. A statement of the approximate number of
residential units and/or the approximate
number, type and square footage of nonresidential
units;
e. The approximate number of acres to be occupied
and or devoted to or by each type of use;
f. The known deviations from the Ordinance
regulations to be sought;
g. The number of acres to be preserved as open
space or recreation space, and
h. All known natural resources and natural features
proposed to be preserved, lost and/or replaced.
3. Basic Plan - Planning Commission Review.
The Planning Commission shall review the application
and basic plan submitted by the applicant to
determine if the materials comply with the
procedural requirements of this ordinance. If the
basic plan or supporting materials are incomplete,
the Planning Commission shall require that the
applicant revise the documents before the
application will be advanced to the preliminary
development plan review stage. If the basic plan and
application materials are adequate, the Planning
Commission shall advise the Planning Department to
set a public hearing to consider the merits of the
preliminary development plan. The Planning
Commission, upon request of the Planning
Department, may waive basic plan review of a project
provided all of the application materials are
submitted.
4. Preliminary Development Plan - Submission and
Content, Required Public Hearing.
Subsequent to basic plan review, three (3) copies of a
preliminary development plan, consisting of a
preliminary site plan conforming with this section,
shall be submitted. The submission shall be made to
the Planning Director who shall present it to the
Planning Commission for consideration. The Planning
Director shall notice the preliminary development
plan for a public hearing before the Planning
Commission as provided by Section 23.06 of this
Ordinance.
The preliminary development plan shall contain the
following information unless specifically waived by
the Planning Director or the Planning Commission:
a. A site plan meeting all the requirements for site
plan review under Chapter 21 of this Ordinance.
b. Common description of property and complete
legal description.
c. Statement of intent of proposed use of land and
any phasing of the project.
d. Name, address, and phone number of consulting
firm or individual who prepared the plan; owner
of the property; and applicant, if other than
owner.
e. Intentions with respect to utilities.
CHAPTER 16
PUD Planned Unit Development District
16-4
f. Gross and net density calculations, number of
types of units (if applicable), and floor area per
habitable space.
g. The number and location of areas to be
preserved as open or recreational space, and
each proposed use for such areas.
h. The Planning Director may require a
topographical map if the size of the project
and/or nature of the topography indicates that
such document would be meaningful to the
review.
i. A separately delineated specification of all
deviations from this Ordinance which would
otherwise be applicable to the uses and
development proposed in the absence of this
Planned Unit Development Chapter. This shall
include ordinance provisions from which
deviations are sought, and if the applicant elects
to be governed by Section 16.04(3.b.), the
reasons and mechanisms to be utilized for the
protection of the public health, safety and
welfare in lieu of the regulations from which
deviations are sought shall be specified.
j. In the event the property on which the project is
to be situated consists of three (3) or more acres,
the Township Planning Commission may require
one or more of the following as part of the
Planned Unit Development submission:
1) Evidence of market need for the use(s) and
economic feasibility of the project.
2) A community impact statement.
3) A traffic impact statement.
4) An environmental impact statement.
5) A fiscal impact assessment.
5. Preliminary Development Plan - Planning
Commission Review, Required Public Hearing.
The Planning Commission shall review the preliminary
development plan, shall hold a public hearing, and
shall make reasonable inquiries of the applicant. This
review shall begin within 30 days of receipt of all
materials required in the application, unless an
extension is mutually agreed upon between the
Planning Commission and the applicant.
The Planning Commission shall make its findings of
fact relative to Section 16.03 of this Chapter along
with any comments and recommended modifications
to the plan relative to Section 16.04 paragraphs 1
through 6 of this Chapter. These shall be made part
of the official minutes of the Planning Commission.
6. Preliminary Development plan - Drafting of
Ordinance.
Following review of the preliminary development
plan, the Planning Commission shall direct the
Planning Department to develop an ordinance if it
feels that the preliminary development plan is ready
to proceed to final planned unit development
approval. The Planning Department shall draft a
proposed planned unit development ordinance and
present the ordinance to the Planning Commission
for review within 30days of being directed to do so by
the Planning Commission.
7. Preliminary Development Plan - Planning
Commission Review of Ordinance and Decision.
The Planning Commission shall recommend approval,
approval with conditions, or denial of the preliminary
development plan and proposed planned unit
development ordinance. The effect of the approval,
or approval with conditions, shall be to authorize the
concept embodied in the preliminary development
plan, subject to submission, review and approval of a
final development plan as provided below. In
reviewing the preliminary development plan and
proposed planned unit development ordinance, the
Planning Commission shall make a finding and
determination with respect to compliance with the
PUD regulations set forth in Sections 16.03 and 16.04
of this Chapter, and generally review and determine
whether the basic concept of the proposal is
consistent with the intent and spirit of this Chapter.
Inasmuch as the specific details of a project plan are
at the very essence of the concept of Planned Unit
Development, approval of the preliminary
development plan shall not constitute a final
approval, and preliminary development plan approval
shall be subject to review and approval of the final
development plan as further provided for in this
Chapter.
8. Final Development Plan - Submission, Final Action.
Within six (6) months following receipt of preliminary
development plan approval, the applicant shall
submit to the Planning Department an application to
amend this Ordinance, and shall be noticed for public
hearing before the Township Board pursuant to
Section 23.06. If the final development plan has not
been submitted within such period, the preliminary
CHAPTER 16
PUD Planned Unit Development District
16-5
development plan approval shall lapse, and the
applicant must recommence the review process.
The Planning Department shall notify the developer
by certified mail at least (20) days before the
preliminary PUD approval is about to expire. The
Township Board may extend the time for submission
of the final development plan upon a showing by the
applicant that no material change of circumstances
has occurred.
9. Final Development Plan - Public Hearing, Final
Action, Ordinance Adoption.
The Township Board shall review the final
development plan and shall make reasonable
inquiries of the applicant. The Township Board shall
conduct a public hearing and solicit comments from
interested parties. The Township Board shall
approve, approve with changes, or deny the final
development plan and planned unit development
ordinance.
If the Township Board is not satisfied with the final
development plan and/or ordinance, or if additional
information not previously provided to either the
Planning Department or Planning Commission is
supplied by the applicant, the Township Board may
remand the final development plan and/or ordinance
back to the Planning Commission for further review.
If this occurs, the Planning Commission shall review
the final development plan, ordinance, or additional
information at their next available meeting. The
Planning Commission shall return the reviewed final
development plan and/or ordinance back to the
Township Board within 30 days for final
consideration.
Section 16.06 Performance Guarantees:
The Township Board after recommendation from the
Planning Commission, or at its own discretion, may
require reasonable performance guarantees, as
authorized under the Township Rural Zoning Enabling Act
to insure the completion of improvements.
Section 16.07 Conditions:
Reasonable conditions may be required with the approval
of a planned unit development, to the extent authorized
by law, for the purpose of:
1. Insuring that public services and facilities affected by
a proposed land use or activity will be capable of
accommodating increased demand caused by the
land use or activity;
2. Protecting the natural environment and conserving
natural resources and energy;
3. Insuring compatibility with adjacent uses of land; and
4. Promoting the use of land in a socially and
economically desirable manner.
Conditions imposed shall be designed to protect natural
resources and the public health, safety and welfare of
individuals in the project and those immediately adjacent,
and the community as a whole. They shall be reasonably
related to the matters affected by the Planned Unit
Development, shall be necessary to meet the intent and
purpose of this Ordinance, and be related to the objective
of insuring compliance with the standards of this
Ordinance. All conditions imposed shall be made a part of
the record of the approved Planned Unit Development.
Section 16.08 Phasing and Commencement of
Construction:
1. Phasing: If a project is proposed for construction in
phases, the planning and design shall be such that,
upon completion, each phase shall be capable of
standing on its own in terms of the presence of
services, facilities, and open space and shall contain
the necessary components to insure protection of
natural resources and the health, safety, and welfare
of the users of the Planned Unit Development and
the residents of the surrounding area. In addition, in
developments which include residential and nonresidential
uses, phasing shall contemplate that at
least 35 percent of all proposed residential units are
completed concurrent with the first phase of any
non-residential construction; completion of at least
75 percent of all proposed residential construction
prior to the second phase of non-residential
construction; and completion of 100 percent of all
residential construction prior to the third or final
phase of non-residential construction. The
percentages shall be approximations and determined
at the discretion of the Township Board. The
percentages may be significantly varied should the
CHAPTER 16
PUD Planned Unit Development District
16-6
Township Board determine that the applicant has
presented adequate assurances that the residential
component or components of the project shall be
completed within a specified period.
2. Commencement and Completion of Construction:
Construction shall be commenced within one (1) year
following final approval of a Planned Unit
Development, or within one (1) year of any other
necessary governmental approval for
commencement of the project, whichever is later,
provided all other necessary approvals have been
actively pursued. If construction is not commenced
within such time, approval of the final plan for the
project shall expire. An extension for a specified
period may be granted by the Township Board upon
good cause shown if such request is made to the
Township Board prior to the expiration of the initial
period. Moreover, in the event a final plan has
expired, the Township Board may rezone the
property in any reasonable manner.
If, at the discretion of the Township Board, the
property remains classified as Planned Unit
Development, prior to the commencement of
construction of a new application shall be required,
and shall be reviewed in light of the then prevailing
conditions and applicable law and ordinance
provisions.
Section 16.09 Effect of Approval:
The Planned Unit Development amendment, and all
conditions imposed, if any, shall constitute the land use
authorization for the property. All improvement and use
shall be in conformity with such amendment. The
applicant shall record an affidavit with the Kent County
Register of Deeds office containing the legal description of
the entire project, specifying the date of approval of the
Planned Unit Development, and declaring that all future
development of the Planned Unit Development property
has been authorized and required to be carried out in
accordance with the approved Planned Unit Development
and the provisions of Section 16.09(2) of this Chapter
unless an amendment thereto is duly adopted by the
Township upon the request and/or approval of the
applicant, or applicant's transferees and/or assigns.
Section 16.10 Fees:
There shall be an advance payment of fees at the time of
filing of the Conceptual Plan. The amount of such fees
shall be established by the Township Board by ordinance
or resolution.
Section 16.11 Site Condominium Subdivision
Approval:
Pursuant to authority conferred by Section 141 of the
Condominium Act, (MCLA 559.241), Public Act 59 of 1978,
as amended, all site condominium subdivisions must be
approved by the Cascade Township Board, upon
recommendation from the Planning Commission.
In determining whether to approve a site condominium
subdivision, the Township Board shall consult with the
Planning Commission, Township Attorney, Township
Engineer, Fire Marshall and Planning Department
regarding the adequacy of the site condominium plans,
deed restrictions, utility systems and streets, subdivision
layout and design, and compliance with all requirements
of the Condominium Act.
1. Definitions: The following terms are defined both in
the context of the Condominium Act and in a manner
intended to make comparison possible between the
terms of this Zoning Ordinance and the Subdivision
Ordinance (Ordinance No. 1 of 1978) with the
Condominium Act.
a. Condominium Act means Public Act 59 of 1978,
as amended.
b. Condominium dwelling means the building
constructed upon a lot or condominium unit
which is intended for residential purposes.
c. Condominium structure means a building or
structure constructed upon a lot or condominium
unit which is intended for office, industrial,
business, or recreational purposes.
d. Condominium unit means that portion of the
condominium project designed and intended for
separate ownership and use, as described in the
Master Deed, regardless of whether it is
intended for residential, office, industrial,
business, recreational, use as a time-share unit,
or any other type of use.
e. Lot shall mean the same as "Homesite" and
"Condominium Unit".
f. Mobile home condominium project means a
condominium project which mobiles homes are
CHAPTER 16
PUD Planned Unit Development District
16-7
intended to be located upon separate sites which
constitute individual condominium units.
g. Master deed means the condominium document
recording the condominium project to which is
attached as exhibits and incorporated by
reference the approved bylaws for the project
and the approved condominium subdivision plan
for the project.
h. Setback - Front Yard shall be equal to the
distance between the front yard area line and
the condominium dwelling or condominium
structure.
i. Setback - Rear Yard shall be equal to the distance
between the rear yard area line and the
condominium dwelling or condominium
structure.
j. Setback - Side Yard shall be equal to the distance
between the side yard area line and the
condominium dwelling or condominium
structure.
k. Site Condominium Subdivision - shall be a
division of land on the basis of condominium
ownership which is not subject to the provisions
of the Subdivision Control Act, Public Act 288 of
1967, as amended.
2. Zoning Compliance - Rezoning Required: All site
condominium subdivisions and structures therein
shall comply with all the use, size, sign, height and
area (setback) regulations of the underlying zoning
district in which the subdivision is located prior to
PUD, Planned Unit Development rezoning as required
by this Section. The developer shall rezone his
property to PUD, Planned Unit Development, the
permitted use(s) and density (if applicable) shall be
consistent with the Cascade Township General
Development Plan. Because of the unique nature of a
site condominium subdivision the review procedures
shall be governed by Section 16.12.(3) below.
Consistent with Section 16.b (MCLA 125.286b) of the
Township Rural Zoning Act, public notices shall be
sent to adjacent properties notifying them of the
proposed rezoning. A public hearing shall be
conducted before the Cascade Township Board.
3. Site Condominium Subdivision Review Procedures:
a. At least twenty-eight (28) days before the first
meeting of the Planning Commission at which
the proposal is to be considered, the developer
shall submit to the Township all the materials
required by Section 16.12(4), (hereinafter
referred to as "site condominium plans")
together with a fee in accordance with the
schedule adopted by the Township Board.
b. The Planning Commission, together with the
Township Planning Department, shall review the
site condominium plans and give its report and
recommendation to the Township Board not
more than seventy-five (75) days after
submission of the site condominium plans. This
seventy-five (75) day period may be extended by
a written agreement between the developer and
the Planning Director. Any such written
agreement shall contain a specific delineation of
the time period in which the Planning
Commission must act to either approve or
disapprove the site condominium plan. A copy of
any agreement reached by the Planning Director
and the developer with respect to an extension
of time shall be transmitted to the Planning
Commission. If no action is taken within seventyfive
(75) days, or within any agreed extension
thereof, the Planning Commission shall be
deemed to have recommended approval of the
site condominium plans.
c. The Township Board, within one hundred twenty
(120) days from the date of filing (unless the time
period for approval has been extended pursuant
to Section 16.12.(3.b) above), shall approve and
note its approval on a copy of the site
condominium plans to be returned to the
developer or set forth in writing its reasons for
rejection and the requirements that must be met
for site condominium plan approval.
d. The Township Board shall not review, approve or
reject a site condominium plan until it has
received a report and recommendation from the
Planning Commission; provided, however, that
the Township Board may act without a report
and recommendation from the Planning
Commission if the Planning Commission does not
issue such a report and recommendation within
seventy-five (75) days or within such extended
time period as may be agreed upon between the
developer and the Planning Director.
e. Approval by the Township Board shall guarantee
that the general terms and conditions under
which approval was granted will not be changed
by the Township and, further, shall confer
CHAPTER 16
PUD Planned Unit Development District
16-8
approval of lot sizes, lot orientation, and street
layout for a period of one (1) year from the date
of site condominium plan approval. Such plan
approval may be extended if applied for by the
developer and granted by the Township Board in
writing.
4. Site Condominium Plans - Required Content: All site
condominium plans shall include the following:
a. Project description which describes the nature
and intent of the proposed development.
b. A survey plan of the site condominium
subdivision.
c. A floodplain plan, if the site lies within or abuts a
floodplain area.
d. A site plan, consistent with Chapter 21, showing
the location, size, shape, area and width of all
condominium units.
e. A utility plan pursuant to Section 16.12(5.a)
below.
f. A street construction, paving, and maintenance
plan for all private streets within the proposed
site condominium subdivision.
g. A storm drainage and stormwater management
plan, including all lines, swales, drains, basins,
and other facilities.
h. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan
consistent with the Cascade Township Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Ordinance, (Ordinance
#4 of 1988).
i. A description of the common elements of the
project as will be contained in the Master Deed.
j. The use and occupancy restrictions as will be
contained in the Master Deed.
k. A "Consent to Submission of Real Property to
Condominium Project", stating all parties which
have ownership interest in the proposed site
condominium subdivision; or evidence of
authority or right that the developer has a legal
option to purchase the subject property from the
owner(s) of record.
5. Utilities:
a. The site condominium plans shall include all
necessary easements (i.e. sewer/water,
sidewalks, bike paths, etc.) granted to Cascade
Township and Kent County for the purposes of
constructing, operating, inspecting, maintaining,
repairing, altering, replacing, and/or removing
pipelines, mains, conduits and other installations
of a similar character (hereinafter collectively
called "public structures") for the purpose of
providing public utilities, including conveyance of
sewage, water and stormwater run-off across,
through and under the property subject to said
easement, and excavating and refilling ditches
and trenches necessary for the location of said
structures.
b. The Township Board may require the developer
to enter into an agreement with the Township
for the imposition of a special assessment for the
construction of sewer and water lines within all
easements and/or rights of way within the site
condominium subdivision. This requirement in
as much as it deals with the establishment of a
Special Assessment District under Act 188 of
1954, as amended, is not a waiver of any
developer's or his grantees rights to contest the
confirmation of any special assessment roll as
provided in the Act.
6. Private Streets: If a site condominium subdivision is
proposed to have private streets, the Township Board
may require that the private streets be developed to
the minimum design, construction, inspection,
approval and maintenance requirements of Kent
County Road Commission or as otherwise specified by
the Township Engineer. All private streets in a site
condominium subdivision shall have a paved driving
surface of asphalt or concrete.
7. Subdivision of Condominium Units: All subdivisions
of individual condominium units shall conform to the
requirements of this Ordinance and their particular
PUD Ordinance for minimum lot width, lot area, and
the building setback requirements, shall be approved
by Township Board, and these requirements shall be
made part of the bylaws and recorded as part of the
Master Deed.
8. Mobile Home Condominium Project: Mobile Home
condominium projects shall conform to all
requirements of this Ordinance.
9. Site Condominium Subdivision Layout - Design and
Approval: The Township Board may require site
condominium plans to conform to the plan
preparation requirements; review and approval
procedures; design, layout and improvement
standards of Sections 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4.1 through
4.4.5, 4.5, 4.6, 5.3.1.d through 5.3.1.k, 5.4, and 5.5 of
the Cascade Charter Township Subdivision Ordinance
CHAPTER 16
PUD Planned Unit Development District
16-9
(Ordinance 1 of 1978), as amended. The
requirements of final plat approval in Section 3.3 of
the Subdivision Ordinance shall not apply to site
condominium subdivision plans, except that a deposit
in the form of cash, certified check, or irrevocable
bank letter of credit shall be made with the Charter
Township of Cascade to guarantee the installation
and completion of any required public sanitary sewer,
water supply, and drainage facilities, within a length
of time agreed upon from the date of final approval
of the site condominium subdivision plan by the
Township Board. Nothing in this Section shall be
construed as requiring a site condominium
subdivision to obtain plat approval under the Cascade
Township Subdivision Ordinance or the Subdivision
Control Act.
Master Deed - Contents: All provisions of the site
condominium plans which are approved by the
Township Board pursuant to Section 16.12(3) must be
incorporated, as approved, in the Master Deed for
the site condominium subdivision. Any proposed
changes to the approved site condominium plans
must be reviewed and approved by the Township
pursuant to the procedure set forth in Section
16.12(3) for the approval of site condominium plans.
A copy of the Master Deed as filed with the Kent
County Register of Deeds for recording must be
provided to the Township within ten (10) days after
such filing with the County.
Section 16.12 Modification of PUD Plans:
Minor changes to a PUD site plan may be approved
administratively by the Planning Director provided the
changes comply with all applicable requirements of this
Zoning Ordinance and all other Township regulations or
state law. Minor changes subject to administrative review
are defined in Section 21.04 of this Ordinance. Any other
changes shall require an amendment or variance to the
developers PUD ordinance.
Link to Procedures Manual with
Forms, Applications, and Flowcharts
Intentionally left blank
Chapter 17
Special Uses
17-1
Section 17.01 Title:
Special Uses
Section 17.02 Intent:
The provisions of this Chapter are intended to set forth
the procedures and standards applicable to certain land
uses, structures or activities which because of their
unique characteristics require special consideration in
relation to the welfare of adjacent properties and/or the
community as a whole.
Because of these characteristics, the use of the land for
certain purposes in certain districts will not be permitted
without first obtaining special approval from the Planning
Commission or as the case may be from the Township
Board upon recommendation of the Planning
Commission.
Section 17.03 Applicability
For the purpose of this Ordinance the following special
use categories are identified which shall be governed by
the provisions of this Chapter:
1. Type I Special Uses: Type I special uses include the
following and may be approved by the Planning
Commission in accordance with the procedures
outlined in Section 17.04 of this Chapter.
a. Detached residential accessory buildings in
excess of two hundred (200) square feet, and
detached private garages in excess of 832 square
feet, as provided in Chapter 4. Upon review of
each Type I special use permit request for an
accessory building in excess of 200 square feet,
or a detached private garage in excess of 832
square feet, the Planning Commission shall
consider the following:
1) The intended use of the building.
2) The proposed location, type and kind of
construction, and general architectural
character of the building.
3) The size of the building in relation to the
house, lot, and zoning district.
4) The type and kind of principal and accessory
buildings and structures located on
properties which are adjoining and in the
general area.
5) The topography and vegetation of the
general area.
6) Whether the proposed building will affect
the light and air circulation of any adjoining
building or properties.
7) Whether the proposed building will
adversely affect the view of any adjoining
property owner or occupant.
8) Points of access to the proposed building
and their relationship to adjoining properties
and the view from adjacent streets. (New
Section added by Ordinance #1 of 1992)
b. Provided the required front and side yard
setback is maintained, accessory buildings may
be located in the front yard under the following
provisions: (Amended and renumbered as a result of Ord.
12 of 2000; 7/26/00)
1) A lot in which the topography of the
property makes it impossible to construct
the building in the rear or side yard, or
extensive grading and tree removal is
required which would significantly change
the landscape and views of the
neighborhood if required to located the
building in the rear or side yard.
2) A lot in which the property owner would
have to drive over a drain or septic field in
order to access the garage.
3) A lot in which the accessory building is
setback a minimum of two-hundred (200’)
feet from the Right-of-Way.
c. Satellite dish antennas located in Residential or
PUD districts which exceed ten (10) feet in
diameter or twelve (12) feet in total height.
d. Satellite dish antennas located in any zoning
district which are not permanently anchored to a
foundation located on the ground or which will
serve more than one (1) structure.
e. Roof or ground mounted communications
antennas (excluding towers) to be located in the
"O" Office District.
f. Parking and/or storage yards for motor vehicles
(excluding junk or salvageable vehicles) and
including transport equipment as an accessory
use to a principle permitted use in the I Industrial
Zone.
g. Model units, temporary real estate offices.
Chapter 17
Special Uses
17-2
h. Cellular Antenna Towers and Masts" as follows:
Prior to the issuance of a permit for the erection
of a cellular antenna tower or mast in any zoning
district, the following provisions must be
satisfied:
1) The application for special use approval for
the tower shall include a visual impact
analysis, prepared by the applicant, which
includes graphic depiction of the anticipated
visual appearance of the tower from
important vantage points in the surrounding
area. Methods used in preparing the
analysis shall be reviewed and approved by
the Planning Director.
2) A cellular phone or other personal
communications services antenna tower
shall be exempt from building height limits,
provided, however, that the tower height
shall be the minimum height necessary to
serve its intended function. Tower setbacks
shall be determined by the Planning Director
based on tower height and proximity to
residential areas.
3) The application shall include a list of all
properties investigated for placement of the
proposed tower and the rationale for
selecting the proposed location.
4) It is not feasible to provide equivalent
service by locating the antenna on an
existing tower or other existing structure in
the Township.
5) Subject to items (c) and (d) above, the
proposed tower shall be located the
maximum distance reasonable from an
existing tower supporting an antenna of the
same carrier.
6) The tower will not have an adverse impact
on significant views from properties within
one quarter (1/4) mile of the tower site. For
purposes of this section, a significant view is
defined as a view from a residential property
which has one or more of the following
characteristics:
i. A view from a residence and its
immediate perimeter which
encompasses landscape features
substantially free of man-made
alteration, as a result of the unique
topographic placement of the home.
ii. A view which is a dominant feature of a
residential building site, and which
contributes significantly to the value of
the residential building site as evidence
by the placement of a home on the site,
the size, number and orientation of
windows on the home, and the location
and orientation of improved outdoor
spaces on the home site, such as patios
and decks.
The fact that the proposed tower may
be visible from a residence shall not be
considered an adverse impact on a
significant view.
7) The tower and ancillary building housing
equipment needed for operation of the
tower shall be of a size, type, color and
exterior materials which are aesthetically
and architecturally compatible with the
surrounding area, and as minimally obtrusive
as possible. Landscape screening may be
required by the Planning Commission to
accomplish screening of ancillary equipment
buildings.
8) The applicant shall provide documentation
of any lighting to be installed on the tower.
If tower lighting is required or proposed, the
tower may not be approved unless the
Planning Commission determines that it will
not have a significant adverse aesthetic
impact on properties and residents of the
surrounding area.
9) The applicant shall provide documentation
of conformance with the Kent County
International Airport Zoning Ordinance.
10) The owner/operator of the tower shall agree
to permit use of the tower by other
communications services providers,
including local government agencies, on
reasonable terms, so long as such use does
not conflict with the owner/operator's use of
the tower.
11) If, for any reason, the tower ceases
operation or is abandoned, the Township
may order its removal from the site. The
owner of the tower and/or the property
owner will have three (3) months to remove
Chapter 17
Special Uses
17-3
the tower upon receiving notification from
the Township to do so. If the tower is not
removed within the specified time period
and an extension is not granted by the
Township, the Township may cause the
removal of the tower. After removal of the
tower by the Township, a notice shall be
mailed to the tower owner and the property
owner stating the nature of the work done
and demanding payment of the costs as
certified by the Building Official together
with an additional twenty (20)percent for
inspection and incidental costs.
If the amount specified in the notice is not
paid within ninety (90) days, it shall become
a lien against the property and will be
certified as an assessment against the
property.
12) If the height required for the tower to serve
its function decreases from the installed
height, due to technological advancement,
additional tower installations at other
locations, or other factors, the tower shall be
lowered to such decreased minimum height.
13) The applicant shall provide an affidavit
signed by the property owner(s), on a form
provided by the Township, indicating
approval from the property owner to allow
placement of the tower and ancillary
building at the proposed site and
acknowledging the Township's requirements
regarding removal of the tower as stated in
subsection i, above. (This section amended by
Ordinance #11 of 1996)
14) Cellular antennas and other appurtenances
on existing towers, buildings, church
steeples, schools, light poles at schools,
water towers and Consumers Energy lattice
towers are regulated as follows: (Amended by
Ord No 6 of 2006; 9/13/06)
i. Prior to the issuance of a permit for the
placement of an additional antenna or
other appurtenances on any existing
tower or mast, the following provisions
must be satisfied:
a) The applicant shall provide
documentation from the tower or
mast owner indicating approval to
allow the placement of the
additional antenna or appurtenance
and the structural integrity of the
tower or mast to support the
addition.
b) A visual impact analysis, including a
graphic depiction of the anticipated
visual appearance of the tower with
all existing and proposed antennas
or appurtenances from important
vantage points in the surrounding
area. Methods used in preparing
the analysis shall be reviewed and
approved by the Planning Director.
c) The ancillary building housing
equipment needed for operation of
the antenna or appurtenance shall
be of a size, type, color and exterior
materials which are aesthetically
compatible with any existing
ancillary buildings on the site as
well as with the surrounding area,
and as minimally obtrusive as
possible. Landscape screening may
be required by the Planning
Commission to accomplish
screening of ancillary equipment
buildings. (This section amended by
Ordinance #11 of 1996)
d) In addition to the above
requirements, in the R1 and R2
zoned districts (or any residential
Planned Unit Development) the
following regulations shall also
apply:
1. The height of the antenna shall
not exceed the height of the
existing structure unless
permitted by the Planning
Commission.
2. Consideration for additional
height will be considered
provided:
(i) The increase in height does
not require the need for
any lighting.
(ii) The increase in height is
needed for the antenna to
perform its intended
function.
Chapter 17
Special Uses
17-4
(iii) The height shall not exceed
the minimum height
required to function in
accordance with federal
state and local
requirements.
(iv) The Township Planning
Commission may hire an
expert consultant to
review the proposed
antenna and provide a
recommendation of
proposed height.
3. A visual impact analysis of any
ancillary buildings/structures
needed for the antenna shall
be provided, with special
attention given toward
minimizing any view of such
building/structure from
adjacent residential uses. The
Planning Commission may
require the building/structure
to have additional landscaping
and/or require the
building/structure to be located
in a different area on the
property in order to screen the
building/structure from any
adjacent residential uses.
4. Any structure that becomes
unused for its original purpose
and intent for a period of more
than 12 months shall be
considered abandoned. Under
such circumstance the
structure and antenna shall be
removed within 90 days of
written notice from the
Planning Director. (Amended by
Ord No 6 of 2006; 9/13/06)
2. Type II Special Uses: Type II special uses include all
uses classified as special use within the use provisions
of the various zoning districts or by Section 17.07 of
this Chapter which are not classified as Type I special
uses.
Type II special uses may only be approved by the
Township Board upon the review and
recommendation of the Planning Commission in
accordance with the procedures outlined in Section
17.04 of this Chapter.
Section 17.04 Procedures:
1. An application shall be submitted to the Planning
Department on a form for that purpose together with
a site plan prepared to the specifications contained in
Chapter 21 of this Ordinance. Each application shall
be accompanied by the payment of fee as
determined by the Township Board. In the event the
allowance of a proposed use requires both a rezoning
and a special use permit, the application for rezoning
shall be processed in its entirety prior to final action
on the special use.
2. Upon receipt of an application for a special use, a
notice that the Planning Commission will hold a
public hearing on the application shall be published
and sent by mail or by personal delivery to the
owners and occupants of property in compliance with
Section 23.06 of this Ordinance.
3. In the case of a Type I special use, the Planning
Commission shall, within a reasonable time after the
public hearing deny, approve or approve with
conditions the request.
In the case of a Type II special use the Planning
Commission shall within a reasonable period of time
after the public hearing, make and forward to the
Township Board, recommendations relative to the
denial, approval or approval with conditions of the
special use. Thereafter within a reasonable time, a
decision of the Township Board shall be made.
4. The decision by the Planning Commission or
Township Board, as the case may be, shall be
incorporated in a statement containing the
conclusions relative to the special use under
consideration which specifies the basis for the
decision and any conditions imposed.
5. A decision rendered by the Planning Commission with
respect to any Type I special use may be appealed to
the Township Board by any person or persons
aggrieved by such decision within ten (10) calendar
days of the date on which the contested decision was
rendered. Such appeal shall be made in writing to the
Planning Director who shall, upon receipt of the
appeal, provide notice of a second public hearing
pursuant to the procedures outlined in Paragraph 2
above, except that such notice shall specify that the
Chapter 17
Special Uses
17-5
hearing is to be held before the Township Board. A
decision rendered by the Township Board shall be
final unless such decision is reversed or modified by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
Section 17.05 Zoning Board of Appeals Action:
Owing to the discretionary nature of the decision to
approve or deny a request for special use the Zoning
Board of Appeals is without jurisdiction to accept appeals
or grant variances from the General Standards set forth in
Section 17.06 and the decision of the Planning
Commission or Township Board with respect to the
approval or denial of special uses.
Section 17.06 Special Use Approval Standards -
General:
In formulating recommendations or approving any special
use, the Planning Commission and Township Board shall
require that the following general standards be satisfied.
1. Upon review of each application there shall be a
determination as to whether each use on the
proposed site will:
a. Be designed, constructed, operated and
maintained so as to be harmonious and
appropriate in appearance with the existing or
intended character of the area in which the use is
proposed.
b. Be adequately served by essential facilities and
services such as highways, streets, police and fire
protection, drainage, refuse disposal, water and
sewer facilities and schools.
c. Not create excessive additional requirements at
public cost for public facilities and services.
d. Not cause traffic congestion, conflict or
movement in greater proportion to that normally
prevailing for the use in the particular zoning
district.
e. Not involve uses, activities, processes, materials,
equipment or conditions of operation that will be
detrimental to any persons, property, or the
general welfare by reason of noxious or offensive
production of noise, smoke, fumes, glare,
vibration, odor or traffic.
2. All applicable federal, state and local licensing
regulations shall be complied with. Initial and annual
proof of such compliance shall be a condition of
special use approval and the continuance thereof.
3. As a minimum or unless specifically modified by the
provisions in Section 17.07 the dimensional standards
and landscape, buffering and parking regulations
otherwise applicable to the use and/or zoning district
shall be maintained as outlined within the other
various applicable chapters of this Ordinance. For
uses permitted by right in one district, but which
require special use approval in another district, the
standards relating to the district in which the use is
permitted by right shall serve as the minimum
standards to which the site shall be designed. In such
cases where there the conflicting standards, the most
restrictive shall apply, unless specifically modified by
the provisions of Section 15.07 or the approving
body.
4. Upon review, the Planning Commission or Township
Board as appropriate may stipulate such additional
conditions and safeguards deemed necessary for the
protection of individual property rights and values,
the general welfare and for insuring that the intent
and objectives of this Ordinance are observed.
5. Upon finding that any condition, safeguard or
requirement has been breached, the Township Board
may automatically invalidate the special use approval.
Section 17.07 Type II Special Use Design
Standards:
The specific requirements set forth in this Section are
requirements which must be met by certain Type II special
uses in addition to the general standards outlined or
referenced in the above Section 17.06.
1. As a condition of approval each of the following uses
must be situated such that the proposed site has
direct primary access on at least one collector or
arterial street as classified by the Major Street Plan.
a. Public, parochial and other private elementary,
intermediate and high schools.
b. Public or private parks and recreation and
activity centers including swimming pools, tennis
courts, baseball fields, community center,
libraries and similar facilities intended to serve
areas beyond the immediate neighborhood.
c. Child or adult day care centers as defined in
Chapter 3, whether free standing or in
conjunction with a principal permitted use.
Chapter 17
Special Uses
17-6
d. Bed and Breakfast establishment, as defined in
Chapter 3.
e. Golf courses and country clubs.
f. Public utility and private contractors storage and
service yards and trucking terminals and freight
facilities.
g. Roadside stands as defined in Chapter 3.
2. The following uses shall be further subject to the
specific requirements outlined.
a. Churches requiring special use approval.
1) Churches With a Seating Capacity of Less
Than 200 Persons, (seating capacity shall be
determined by the seating capacity of the
sanctuary and auxiliary assembly halls
combined). Such facilities shall be located
on a lot or parcel of land having a minimum
area of two (2) acres and a minimum lot
width of 200 feet as measured at the front
property line. There shall be a minimum
front, side and rear yard building setback of
50 feet except that churches having frontage
on arterial streets shall have a front yard
building setback of at least 100 feet.
2) Churches with a seating capacity of more
than 200 persons: Such facilities shall be
located on a lot or parcel of land having at a
minimum lot size of three (3) acres and a
minimum lot width of 300 feet. Such
facilities shall also have frontage on at least
one collector or Arterial Street as classified
by the Major Street Plan. There shall be a
minimum front, side and rear yard building
setback of 50 feet except that churches
having frontage on arterial streets shall have
a front yard building setback of at least 100
feet.
3) Churches shall also be required to install
bufferyards according to section 18.06 of
this Ordinance. (Ord. No. #10 of 2001)
b. Bed and Breakfast establishments.
1) Location outside of a platted residential
subdivision.
2) Subordination to the principle use of a
single-family dwelling unit.
3) Occupancy of no more than fifty (50) percent
of the dwelling unit.
4) The premises shall be the principal residence
of the operations owner/operator when the
establishment is active.
5) The structure shall be erected or retained as
a single-family structure. Commercial food
preparation equipment and eating or
bathroom facilities within individual sleeping
quarters shall not be installed.
6) Meal services shall be limited to during
normal and customary breakfast hours and
shall be provided only to lodgers registered
at the establishment.
7) Two (2) off-street parking spaces for the
owner operator and one (1) off-street
parking space per room to be rented shall be
provided.
8) Signs shall be subject to the regulations
applicable to signs in the district in which the
use is located.
c. Golf courses, country clubs.
1) The minimum area shall be 40 acres for a par
3 course, 65 acres for a 9-hole course, and
120 acres for an 18-hole course.
2) No building or non-golfing use, with the
exception of parking, shall be located within
200 feet of the front property line or 400
feet of the side and rear property lines.
3) Parking areas shall be setback a minimum of
30 feet from all property lines and street
right-of-way. A buffer strip shall be required
if parking is located less than 50 feet from a
property line.
4) Signs shall be subject to the regulations
applicable to signs in the district in which the
use is located.
d. Outdoor recreational uses other than
campgrounds and golf courses and excluding
amusement parks.
1) A minimum lot area of three (3) acres.
2) Parking areas shall be setback a minimum of
thirty (30) feet from all property lines and
street right-of-way. A buffer strip shall be
required if parking is located less than fifty
(50) feet from a property line.
3) Front yard building setbacks shall be a
minimum of one hundred (100) feet and no
building or use other than parking shall be
Chapter 17
Special Uses
17-7
located within fifty (50) feet of any side or
rear property line.
e. Child or adult day care centers as defined in
Chapter 3.
1) A minimum lot size of 40,000 square feet.
2) Dormitory facilities are not permitted.
3) Based upon the established capacity of the
facility, there shall be provided and
maintained, on the premises, a minimum of
150 square feet of outdoor play area per
child with not less than 5,000 square feet per
facility.
4) The outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a
chainlink fence not less than four (4) feet in
height, and screened by natural or planted
vegetation to a height of at least five (5)
feet.
5) Signs shall be subject to the regulations
relative to signs for the district in which the
use is to be located.
6) Such facilities must be registered with the
Township and licensed by the State.
f. Kennels, animal hospitals and clinics and public
or semi-public stables.
1) The respective minimum lot area for these
special uses is as follows:
Kennels - Two (2) acres plus an additional
one-third (1/3) acre for each animal in
excess of six (6).
Animal hospitals and clinics - three (3) acres.
Public or semi-public stables - Ten (10) acres.
Such areas may not include area devoted to
living quarters or other uses not incidental to
the stable.
2) Buildings for the housing of animals, runs or
exercise area shall not be located within 100
feet of any property line or street right-ofway.
3) Areas for riding trails or riding purposes shall
be located on the same premises, provided,
however, that the owner may lease adjacent
lands for said purpose. Provided further,
that access to riding areas shall not
necessitate riding or leading of animals upon
or across a public road.
4) The premises shall include storage adequate
for the disposal of manure and refuse, have
proper insect control methods, and be
suitably fenced.
5) Adequate off-street parking shall be
provided on the site.
6) Signs shall be subject to the regulations
relative to signs for the district in which the
use is to be located.
g. Public, semi-public or private communication
transmitter, relay stations and towers.
1) Minimum lot size of three (3) acres.
2) Setbacks for each building or tower from
adjacent property lines or street rights-ofway
shall be a minimum of one and one-half
(1-1/2) times the height of the structure
above the ground at its base.
3) A chain link fence six (6) feet in height shall
be installed and maintained along all
property lines.
h. Temporary concrete and asphalt batch plants:
Temporary permits for concrete and asphalt
batch plants may be issued provided that the
operation does not involve the excavation and
removal of natural resources from the premises
and further provided that:
1) No fixed machinery shall be erected or
maintained within one hundred (100) feet of
any adjacent property or street line. No
stockpiling shall be made closer than fifty
(50) feet to any street right-of-way line or
property line in order to prevent the mass
movement of material onto surrounding
property.
2) Where it is determined by the Township
Board to be a public hazard, all uses shall be
enclosed by a fence six (6) feet or more in
height for the entire periphery of the
property or portion thereof. Fences shall be
adequate to prevent trespassing, and shall
be placed no closer than fifty (50) feet to the
top or bottom of any slope.
3) The Township Board shall establish routes
for truck movement to and from the site in
order to minimize the wear on public streets
and to prevent hazards and damage to
properties in the community. That portion
of access roads within the area of operation
shall be provided with a dustless surface.
Chapter 17
Special Uses
17-8
4) Proper measures shall be taken to minimize
the nuisance of noise and flying dust or rock.
Such measures may include, when
considered necessary, limitations upon the
practice of stockpiling material upon the site,
watering and paving.
5) When processing operations are completed,
all structures shall be removed and the
affected area shall be reconditioned to
support complete re-vegetation. No
gradients in disturbed earth shall be steeper
than a slope of 3:1(horizontal-vertical). A
layer of arable topsoil shall be spread over
the affected area to a minimum depth of
four (4) inches. The area shall be seeded
with a perennial rye grass and maintained
until the area is stabilized and approved by
the Planning Director.
6) In granting approval the Township Board
may require the posting of a letter of credit
or certified check to insure compliance with
this section.
7) Upon approval of the application and
approval of any required surety, the Building
Inspector shall issue any necessary building
permits and a temporary occupancy permit
for a one (1) year period.
8) An occupancy permit may be renewed for up
to one (1) year at a time or for the duration
of an accepted surety whichever is less,
upon a finding by the Township Board that
all conditions and plans are being complied
with and no nuisance has been created by
prior operations. Where any new area is to
be considered, or where any area not shown
by the original site plan is to be included, the
procedures for a new application shall be
followed.
9) The Building Inspector shall revoke an
occupancy permit where operations do not
conform to approved plans or special
conditions. All operations shall cease
fourteen (14) days following notification by
the Building Inspector of such violations
unless such conditions are corrected.
Reinstatement of a revoked permit shall
require a new application and approval
therefore.
i. Truck freight terminals and yards, public utility
and private contractor storage and service yards
in association with special services requiring
bases of operation and outdoor storage of
equipment and material, excluding the major
repair of equipment.
1) A minimum lot size of three (3) acres.
2) The minimum setback for use and structures
other than employee and customer parking
shall be 100 feet from the street right-of-way
and 50 feet from side or rear property line.
3) A buffer strip shall be required along all
property lines.
4) Repair of vehicles shall be done within a
totally enclosed building.
5) The storage of vehicle parts or inoperable
vehicles shall be done within an enclosed
building.
6) Except for visitor parking, operable vehicle
parking and storage and all material storage
shall be within a fenced area.
j. Nurseries and greenhouses with associated
limited retail and wholesale trade of nursery
stock raised on the premises.
1) Minimum parcel size shall be 15 acres.
2) All buildings shall be located a minimum of
100 feet from the front property line and 50
feet from any side and rear property lines.
3) All machinery and equipment, except for
motor vehicles and trailers used in the
conduct of business, shall be stored within a
completely enclosed building.
4) Motor vehicles and trailers shall be stored
indoors, out-of-view when not in use for
longer than a two-week period.
5) Motor vehicles, trailers, and stockpiled
materials, such as topsoil, wood mulch, bark,
stone, balled and burlapped plant materials
and "heeled-in" plant materials, shall be
stored a minimum of 100 feet from the front
property line and 50 feet from any side or
rear property line, in locations which
minimize visual impacts of such materials on
adjoining properties and adjoining public
roads. Permanent landscaping shall be
installed as needed to accomplish this
objective.
Chapter 17
Special Uses
17-9
6) Retail and wholesale sales on the premises
to the general public shall be limited to
nursery and/or greenhouse stock raised on
site.
7) No freestanding light poles shall be erected
or lights placed on buildings unless deemed
necessary in the special use permit review
process for safety reasons. Light poles shall
not exceed 20 feet in height. Light shall be
directed downward and shall not reflect off
the premises.
8) Activities on the premises shall be limited to
those associated with running a nursery or
greenhouse, unless prior special approval is
granted by the township.
9) The storage of any fertilizer, chemical or
loosely packed material shall be maintained
and contained so as to prevent adverse
effects upon adjacent properties. (This
subsection added by Ordinance #2 of 1997)
k. Auto repair shops and garages and car washes.
1) No subject facility existing on the effective
date of this Ordinance shall be altered so as
to provide a lessor degree of conformance
with the provisions of this section than
existed on said date.
2) All repair lubrication and service work shall
be done within an enclosed building.
3) All storage and display of equipment,
materials and merchandise, with the
exception of fuel shall be within the building.
4) All outside storage areas for trash, used
tires, auto parts and similar items shall be
enclosed by a six (6) foot high solid wall or
fence.
5) The storage of automobiles, trucks, or
trailers for a period in excess of 72 hours or
the sale or rental thereof is expressly
prohibited without specific approval as part
of the special use approval.
6) Vacuuming activities shall not be located in
the front yard and shall be at least 50 feet
from any adjoining side or rear property line.
7) No vehicle wash establishment shall permit
patrons to extend lines of vehicles off the
premises.
8) All washing activities must be within a
building.
9) No more than two (2) curb-cuts shall be
constructed to provide ingress and egress.
(This subsection amended by Ordinance #6 of 1993)
l. New and used car sales and rentals.
1) The display of new and used cars shall not be
carried out within any required front yard
greenstrip area.
2) All outdoor vehicle display areas shall be of
an improved paved surface.
3) Vehicle display or storage shall not be
carried out within areas required for visitor,
employee or service parking.
4) Vehicle service and repair shall be carried
out in accordance with the provisions of
Section 17.07(2k) above.
m. Roadside stands as defined in Chapter 3.
1) All structures and uses associated with the
operation which are of a temporary nature
shall be removed when the operation is not
active.
2) Adequate off-street parking maintained in a
dust free condition shall be provided.
3) The operation is located no less than one
hundred (100) feet from any adjacent
residential dwelling.
4) The minimum setback for all uses and
structures associated with the operation
shall be in accordance with the minimum
setbacks for residential buildings in the
district.
5) Signs shall be subject to the regulations
relating to signs in the district as regulated
by the Cascade Charter Township Sign
Ordinance.
n. Transitional Uses.
In addition to other permitted uses or special
uses which may be provided for, the first ARC, R-
1 or R-2 zoned lots or the first 100 feet of
unplatted street frontage with a depth not to
exceed 200 feet with a side yard adjoining a B-1,
B-2, ES, O or I zone may be utilized for the
following uses.
1) Two-family dwelling units.
2) Offices, including administrative,
architectural, engineering, accounting, law,
medical, dental, real estate and other typical
offices provided that there is no sale of
Chapter 17
Special Uses
17-10
goods or repair of goods or equipment on
the premises.
Such uses shall only be permitted provided
that:
i. The yard, area and height requirements
of the district are maintained
ii. Adequate parking and access drives are
provided.
iii. Landscaping and screening is provided
that will be sufficient to screen the
building and parking area from adjacent
property.
iv. The use is located in a building
converted from a residential use or
involves a new building designed with
the appearance of a residential building.
v. Signs are unlighted and erected subject
to the regulations applicable to signs in
the zoning district in which the property
is located.
vi. Access to the property is from an
arterial or collector street as classified
on the Major Street Plan.
o. Group Day Care Homes - In order to receive a
Special Use Permit for a group day care home
the use shall be in a bona fide residence and
shall meet the following conditions:
1) The home is located not closer than 1,500
feet to any of the following facilities, as
measured along a street, road, or other
public throughfare, excluding an alley:
i. Another licensed group day care home.
ii. An adult foster care small group home
or large group licensed by the State of
Michigan.
iii. A facility offering substance abuse
treatment and rehabilitation service to
seven (7) or more people, licensed by
the State of Michigan.
iv. A community correction center,
residence home, half-way house, or
other similar facility which houses an
inmate population under the jurisdiction
of the Michigan Department of
Corrections.
2) All outdoor play areas shall be enclosed by a
fence that is nonclimbable in design and at
least 54 inches in height.
3) Maintains the property consistent with the
visible characteristics of the neighborhood.
The use shall not require the modification of
the exterior of the dwelling or the location of
any equipment in the front yard.
4) Based upon the established capacity of the
facility, there shall be provided and
maintained, on the premises, a minimum of
150 square feet of outdoor play area per
child with not less than 5,000 square feet per
facility.
5) In addition to the on-site parking required
for the residence itself, the facility shall
provide on-site parking for all employees, in
a paved driveway or similar facility common
to the particular neighborhood.
6) Operating hours shall be limited from 6:00
a.m. to 10:00 p.m. daily.
7) The facility shall be inspected for compliance
with the aforementioned standards prior to
occupancy and at least once a year
thereafter within ten (10) days of the
anniversary of the Certificate of Occupancy.
(New Section added by Ordinance #14 of 1989).
p. Automobile Service Stations and Mini-Food-
Mart Stations as defined in Chapter 3
1) Lot Area, Width and Depth
i. Minimum lot area for a station shall be
equal to the minimum lot size
requirements of the zoning district in
which it lies. In the case of a PUD the
minimum lot size shall be determined by
the previous or underlying zoning
district (e.g. the B-2, zoning district
requires a minimum lot size of 3 acres).
ii. Minimum lot width: A minimum lot
width of 200 feet shall be required along
an abutting street functionally classified
as an arterial or collector road as shown
in Appendix "A" of this Ordinance.
iii. Minimum Lot Depth: A minimum lot
depth of 150 feet shall be required for
all stations.
Chapter 17
Special Uses
17-11
2) Front Setback(s)
i. Minimum Front Yard Setback for the
Main Building: The minimum front
setback shall be 100 feet, as measured
from the property line or the road rightof-
way line.
3) Other Required Setbacks for the Main
Building:
i. Side- 25 feet from the property line.
Rear- 40 feet from the property line.
ii. Minimum Setbacks for Pump Islands:
Pump islands shall not be located closer
than 35 feet from any property line or
road right-of-way line.
iii. Minimum Setbacks for Canopies over
Pump Islands: The setbacks of roof
edges or eaves for canopies over pump
islands shall be no closer than 25 feet
from any property or road right-of-way
line.
iv. Car Washes and / or Mini-Food-Mart
Buildings: The setbacks for these
buildings of other similar ancillary
buildings shall be the same as those of
the main building. In no case shall these
buildings extend out in front of the main
building.
4) Bufferyard and Screening Requirements
i. All station facilities shall be required to
install a minimum 20 foot landscaped
bufferyard around the perimeter of the
gas station. This bufferyard shall be
located within the first 20 feet of the
property.
ii. The bufferyard shall be required to have
an undulating landscaped berm along
the perimeter of the site. The berm
need not be continuous in its length.
The berm shall not extend higher than
three (3) feet and must not have a slope
greater than a 1:3 ratio.
iii. The minimum required amount of
landscaping for a station shall be the
equivalent of a Bufferyard "C" as
described in Section 20.04 of the Zoning
Ordinance.
iv. All other landscaping requirements (e.g.
sizes, maintenance, un-credited plant
materials, etc.) set forth in Chapter 20 of
this Ordinance shall also be required for
station facilities.
5) Site Design Standards
i. All building facades shall be so designed
to blend in harmonious with the
surrounding neighborhood. The use of
horizontal siding, stone or brick veneer
is required.
ii. All buildings must be oriented on the
site so that service bay doors shall face
away from the principle road or any
residential use.
iii. Canopies shall be so designed to relate
to the facade design of the main
building. In no case shall the canopy
extend beyond a height of 14 feet.
6) Other Site Requirements
i. The outdoor display of merchandise is
prohibited.
ii. Vending machines shall not be allowed
to be located outside any building on
the site.
iii. All trash dumpsters or oil recycling
collection systems shall be located
behind the main building or between
the main building and interior side yard
behind the front facade. These facilities
shall be enclosed with a solid masonry
wall six (6) feet high with solid doors
having sufficient truck access for
dumpster service.
iv. Signs for gas station facilities located in
the B-1, Village Business zoning district
shall comply with the design guidelines
set forth in the Cascade Village Design
Plan.
7) Parking Requirements
i. All automobile service station facilities
shall provide at least five (5) parking
spaces, plus one parking space for air -
water service and one parking space for
outdoor self-servicing vacuuming
machines, if available.
ii. Service spaces are those spaces set
aside for temporary parking of those
vehicles receiving maintenance service.
Chapter 17
Special Uses
17-12
If automotive service is proposed at a
station there shall be a minimum of two
(2) parking spaces for each gas pump,
plus one for each service bay.
iii. All parking spaces shall be marked and
delineated in accordance with Section
19.13 of this Ordinance. (This subsection
added by Ordinance #6 of 1993)
q. Recreational Lighting. (This subsection added by
Ordinance #7 of 2005; 9/28/05)
Protecting the general public health, safety, and
welfare of the community shall be the top
priority in all outdoor lighting.
Outdoor lighting shall:
1) Protect motorists and pedestrians from the
glare of nonvehicular light sources.
2) Protect neighbors from nuisance glare and
light trespass from improperly selected or
poorly placed, aimed, applied, maintained,
or shielded lighting sources.
3) Protect and retain the intended visual
character of the community.
Outdoor lighting shall not:
1) Be used to draw undue and excessive
attention to buildings, properties, or
appurtenances for purposes other than
protecting the general public health, safety,
and welfare of the community.
2) Be used to compete for the attention of, or
cause distraction and physical discomfort to,
motorists and pedestrians by means of
excessively illuminated surfaces and
unshielded, noncutoff type lighting sources
with a direct glare component.
Recreational Lighting:
Lighting for outdoor recreational facilities (public
or private), such as, but not limited to, football
fields, soccer fields, baseball fields, softball fields,
tennis courts, or show areas, shall be allowed,
provided all of the following conditions are met:
1) All fixtures used for event lighting shall be
fully shielded or be designed or provided
with sharp cut-off capability, so as to
minimize up-light, spill-light, and glare.
2) All events shall be scheduled so as to
complete all activity before or as near to
10:00 p.m. as practical, but under no
circumstances shall any illumination of the
playing field, court, or track be permitted
after 11:00 p.m. except to conclude a
scheduled event that was in progress before
11:00 p.m. and circumstances prevented
concluding before 11:00 p.m.
r. Private Streets. (Ord No 3 of 2010; 3/10/10)
1) The applicant shall demonstrate that use of a
private street would result in the
preservation of a farm or farmland that
would otherwise be significantly disturbed
by constructing a public street.
2) The applicant shall demonstrate that use of a
private street would result in the
preservation of natural features that would
otherwise be destroyed by constructing a
public street.
3) The applicant shall demonstrate that the
proposed location of the private street has
drainage constraints, necessitating the use
of the private street for narrower drive lanes
as compared to a public street, thus reducing
the amount of runoff.
4) The proposed private street shall not be
permitted if it does not include amenities or
features that, by design or agreement, are
intended for use by the general public.
5) The private street shall be designed and built
according to the standards for private
streets set forth by Cascade Township and
the Kent County Road Commission.
s. Buildings in excess of maximum height
standards in the ES zoning District. (section added
by Ord No 7 of 2011; 6/22/11)
1) Only those in the ES zoning district with
frontage on I-96 right-of-way, not including
exist ramps, shall be eligible for a Special
Land Use for increased building height. See
Figure 17-1.
2) Due to the lower topography for some of the
properties along I-96, a taller building may
be allowed by the Township but in no case
shall the height of the building exceed 72
feet or be more than 48 feet above the
height of I-96 whichever is less. For
purposed of determining the elevation of the
highway, the highest point of the highway
that is adjacent to the eligible property, will
Chapter 17
Special Uses
17-13
Figure 17-1
I-96 FRONTAGE LOTS IN ES DISTRICT
be used. For the eligible property the predevelopment
elevation will be used. Both
elevations will be determined based on the
Cascade Township REGIS system.
3) The application for special land use approval
shall include a visual impact analysis,
prepared by the applicant, which includes
graphic depiction of the anticipated visual
appearance of the building from important
vantage points in the surrounding area.
Methods used in preparing the analysis shall
be reviewed and approved by the Planning
Director.
4) In order to increase the height of the
building beyond 48 feet, an elevated setback
will be required. Elevated setbacks create a
stepped facade, helping maintain light and
air space and reduce the impact of building
height on pedestrian and vehicular
environments. The increased setback shall
be an additional ten (10) feet in the front,
side, and rear yards for each ten (10) feet of
additional height or for each story, which
ever is less. See Figure 17-2.
5) Increased height shall not be in conflict with
any Federal Aviation Administration
regulations.
6) The Planning Commission may require
modifications to exterior building materials
and architectural features to result in
greater building articulation.
7) The Planning Commission shall determine
the appropriate height allowance based on
one or more of the following incentives
provided:
i. Civic Space Incentive: Civic space may be
in the form of plazas, squares, greens or
parks that provide space for community
gathering. Civic spaces may provide
landscaping, seating, lighting, public art
or a water feature, and be oriented to
the public realm.
ii. Energy Efficient Design: The project may
be constructed utilizing a nationally
recognized green building rating system.
Owners or developers applying for the
special land use shall identify the system
chosen at the time of application and
shall provide quarterly updates that
identify progress.
iii. Roof Top Uses Incentive: The applicant
may provide access and use by utility
providers, including the Township for
communications antennae.
iv. Low Impact Development Incentive: The
applicant may provide best
management practices for drainage,
such as green roofs, pervious pavement,
bioswales, or others, to minimize
discharge or result in zero discharge
from the site.
v. Streetscape Incentive: The project may
incorporate entry features in the form
of decorative street lighting and
landscaping to match those along 28th
Street within the Cascade Township
Downtown Development Authority.
300’
100’
25’
Figure 17-2
INCREASED BUILDING HEIGHT IN ES DISTRICT
©birchlerarroyo
Chapter 17
Special Uses
17-14
vi. Other Incentives: The applicant may
present to the Township other
incentives which help mitigate any real
or perceived impact of additional
building height.
CHAPTER 18
Zoning District Height, Area and Placement Standards
18-1
Section 18.01 Title:
Height, Bulk, Area and Placement Standards Relating to All
Zoning Districts:
Section 18.02 Applicability:
Within the ARC, R-1, R-2 and FP districts, except as
otherwise provided in this Ordinance, no building or
structure shall be erected or placed and no parcel of land
created or used unless in accordance with the following
provisions. (Ord No 3 of 2010; 3/10/10)
Section 18.03 Maximum Building Height: (Ord No
3 of 2010; 3/10/10)
Except as provided in Section 4.10(3), the maximum
height of any building or structure erected in the ARC, R-1,
R-2 and FP districts shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet or
two and one-half (2-1/2) stories, whichever is lessor. (See
also Section 4.14).
Section 18.04 Bulk and Area Standards,
Residential Dwellings and Lots – Table 18-A:
The following Table 18-A sets forth the minimum
standards regarding the floor area of residential dwelling
units and the dimensional standards of platted and
unplatted parcels and areas of property intended for
residential use.
Notes to Table 18-A
The following additional provisions shall supplement
Section 18.04, Table 18-A
1. Ground Floor Area: In determining the minimum
ground floor areas for dwelling units, the calculation
may include the floor areas contained on more than
one level provided that these levels are separated by
no more than three (3) feet of elevation difference.
2. Minimum Dwelling Unit Width and Floor to Ceiling
Height: Section 4.19.
3. Minimum Lot Widths: Minimum lot widths shall be
required at the nearest point of building setback and
in any event, within 150 feet of the public right-ofway
or private street easement on which the lot has
frontage.
Table 18-A: Bulk and Area Standards, Residential Dwelling and Lots (Ord. No. 15 of 2003; 10/22/03) (Ord No 3 of
2010; 3/10/10)
FP ARC R-1 R-2 NOTES
Min Floor Area
1 Story Dwelling
2 Story Dwelling
1100 sf
1400 sf
1100 sf
1400 sf
1300 sf
1600 sf
1300 sf
1600 sf
1
Min. on Ground Floor 800 sf 800 sf 800 sf 800 sf
Min. Dwelling Width 20ft 20 ft 20 ft 20 ft 2
Min. Floor to Ceiling Height 7.5 ft 7.5 ft 7.5 ft 7.5 ft 2
Min Lot Widths
Platted Lots
Unplatted Lots
SO SO SO SO
3
200 ft 200 ft 110 ft 110 ft
Min Average Lot Size in Plat SO SO SO SO
Min Lot Area (sf)
Platted Lots
Unplatted Lots
SO SO SO SO
100,000 100,000 40,000 18,000
Max. Density SO SO SO SO
Max Lot Coverage* N/A N/A 25% 25%
sf = square feet N/A = Not applicable SO = Subdivision Ordinance, Article 3
*Section added by Ordinance #14 of 1989
CHAPTER 18
Zoning District Height, Area and Placement Standards
18-2
Section 18.05 Placement and Yard Area
Standards, Residential Dwellings – Table 18-B
The following Table 18-B sets forth the minimum building
setback and yard area standards applicable to residential
dwellings.
Section 18.06 Bulk Area and Placement
Standards, Principal Non-Residential Buildings
and Uses: (Ord No 3 of 2010; 3/10/10)
The following provisions shall apply to non-residential
principal buildings and uses which may be permitted by
right or special use in the ARC, FP, R-1 and R-2 districts.
1. Agricultural Uses and Buildings: Agricultural
buildings as permitted in the ARC and FP District shall
be located on a parcel of land which constitutes an
integral part of a farming operation as defined in
Chapter 3. The minimum front yard building setbacks
or agricultural buildings and structures as defined in
Chapter 3, shall be 100 feet. The minimum side and
rear yard setbacks for such buildings or structures
shall be 50 feet.
2. For non-residential uses in the residential zones (R-
1, R-2 FP and ARC) a Type A bufferyard shall only be
required when any approved parking lot is located
closer to a residentially used lot than the permitted
building setback line. (Ord. #10 of 2001)
3. Principal Uses Allowed by Special Use Permits: The
dimensional standards applicable to principal uses
which may be permitted by special use, as
enumerated in Chapters 6, 7 and 7a shall be
determined in accordance with the provisions
contained in Chapter 17, "Special Uses".
Section 18.07 Bulk, Area and Placement
Standards, Accessory Buildings, Structures and
Uses - Cross References: (Ord No 3 of 2010;3/10/10)
The following subsections enumerate by reference the
various provisions contained elsewhere within this
Ordinance which shall regulate accessory buildings,
structures and uses permitted in the ARC,FP, R-1 and R-2
districts, as well as those additional provisions of the
Ordinance which may be imposed in specific situations.
1. Accessory Buildings and Structures: As required in
Sections 4.08 and 4.09.
2. Animals and Fowl, Domesticated: As required in
Section 4.11.
3. Corner Lots: As required in Section 4.21.
4. Off-Street Parking: As required in Section 19.21.
5. Sign: As provided in the Cascade Township Sign
Ordinance.
6. Greenbelts: As required in Chapter 20.
7. Driveways: As required in Chapter 19.
8. Satellite Dish antennas: As required in Section
4.10(1).
Sections 18.08 through 18.11 have been intentionally left
blank
Table 18-B: Placement and Yard Area Standards,
Residential Dwellings
Distance in Feet
Front Yard Setback
Platted local & Pavement Streets
Collector Streets
Arterial Streets
35 [68]
43 [88]
50 [110]
Side Yard Setback
Minimum on One (1) Side
Total on Both Sides
10
25
Rear Yard Setback 25
Editors Note: See Section 4.15 to determine the applicable
line from which front yard building setbacks shall be
measured.
Note: Numbers in brackets [ ] refer to distances measured
from the nominal centerline of the street right-of-way.
CHAPTER 18
Zoning District Height, Area and Placement Standards
18-3
Section 18.12 Applicability:
Within the B-1, B-2, ES, VO, O, AC and I districts, except as
otherwise provided in this Ordinance, no building or
structure shall be erected or placed and no parcel of land
created or used unless in accordance with the provisions
of this Chapter.
The provisions contained in this Chapter are not intended
to overly limit or restrict development but are intended to
regulate short-range development in a manner that will
assure the orderly long-range development of the area.
While the majority of the land in these districts can be
developed in accordance with these requirements, it is
recognized that strict enforcement might preclude the use
of a few smaller parcels of land. In these instances, it is
envisioned that land will be developed by complying with
the Planned Unit Development provisions of this
Ordinance or where appropriate by the granting of
necessary variances and Special Use Permits so that the
intent of districts requirements can be satisfied without
unduly restricting reasonable development.
Section 18.13 Height Lot Area and Building
Placement Standards – Table 18-C: (Amended by Ord
No 5 of 2010; 3/10/10) (Amended by Ord No 7 and 8 of 2011; 6/22/11)
Notes to Table 18-C
1. Maximum Building Height: See Section 4.14
2. Minimum Lot Widths: Minimum lot widths shall be
provided at the front right-of-way line or in the case
of cul-de-sac or curved streets at the nearest point of
building setback, and in any event within 150 feet of
the public street right-of-way or private street
easement on which the lot has frontage.
3. Minimum Front Yard Building Setback: See Section
4.15.
4. Minimum Rear Yard Building Setbacks: Where the
rear lot line of any non-residential use lot in a B-1, B-
2, ES, O, AC, TI or I District abuts upon a side or rear
yard of a lot in any residential district there shall be
rear yard setback requirements as follows:
a. B-1, B-2, ES, VO, O and AC Districts: 60 feet.1
b. I District1:
1) "A" Groupings: 400 feet.
2) "B" Groupings: 200 feet.
c. TI District: 200 feet
1Table Notes Amended by Ordinance #4 of 1993
5. The following apply to the AC zone:
a. Maximum Stories/Height: The maximum height
in the Subzone 1 shall be limited to the maximum
height permitted by the FAA. The maximum
height in Subzone 2 shall be 45 feet.
b. Minimum Lot Width: There shall be no
minimum lot width in the subzone 1. The
Subzone 2 area shall have a minimum lot width
of 200 feet.
c. Setbacks: There shall be no minimum setback
requirement in Subzone 1. The table on the
following page setbacks shall apply to Subzone 2:
Table 18-C: Height Lot Area and Building Placement Standards
B-1 & VO+ B-2 ES** O AC## I TI
Maximum Stories 2 3 4 2 2 2
Maximum Structure Height
(feet)
25 for non-residential
uses
30 feet for residential
uses
35 ft 48 ft 35 ft
45 ft*** 45 ft
Min. Lot Area
AC= Acres
SF=square feet
None, with approved
site plan, otherwise
20,000 SF
3 AC 1 AC 50,000
SF
2 AC 1 AC
Min. Lot Widths 100 ft, unless waived per
Section 8.06
300 ft 300 ft 200 ft 200ft 100 ft
Min. Bldg. Front Yard Setback See Table 8-A 100 ft 100 ft 30 ft 100 ft 50 ft
Min. Bldg. Side Yard Setback See Table 8-A 25 ft 25 ft 25 ft 25 ft 25 ft 25 ft
Min. Bldg. Rear Yard Setback 30 ft 50 ft 50 ft 50 ft 50 ft 50 ft 25 ft
**Section Amended by Ordinance 7 of 2011; Special Use permit allows for additional height. Increased setbacks are required for
additional height. See Section 17.07.s
***Section Amended by Ordinance 12 of 1997
+Section Amended by Ordinance 8 of 2011
##Section Amended by Ord. 10 of 2002
CHAPTER 18
Zoning District Height, Area and Placement Standards
18-4
Section 18.14 Lot Area and Placement
Standards - Special Uses:
In addition to, or in place of the standards outlined in the
above Sections 17.04 and 17.05, certain permitted Special
uses shall be required to conform to the provisions
contained in Chapter 17.
Section 18.15 Bufferyards: (Amended by Ord No 5 of
2010; 3/10/10)
Unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance or stipulated
herein, each use permitted on a lot or parcel located in a
B-1, B-2, ES, VO, O, AC, TI or I District shall provide a
bufferyard within each front, side and rear yard. Such
bufferyard shall begin at the right-of-way line in the case
of front yards and the side and rear property line in the
case of side and rear yards. Bufferyards shall be
landscaped and maintained in accordance with the
standards and guidelines contained in Chapter 20.
Bufferyards shall be required to run the entire length of
the property line or street frontage except that portion of
a bufferyard shall not be required in areas providing
necessary ingress and egress or if a parking lot adjoins an
adjacent parking lot at the same grade and no restrictions
are placed on the movement of traffic from one parking
lot to another. (Section added by Ordinance #14 of 1989).
Section 18.16 Off-Street Parking Areas:
Off-street parking areas shall be provided in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 19, and further provided
that not more than sixty (60) percent of the required offstreet
parking for uses permitted in the B-2 and ES
Districts shall be located in the front yard.
Section 18.17 Ingress and Egress, Landscaping,
Etc. - Cross References:
The following subsections enumerate by reference
various provisions of this Ordinance which also may have
to be complied with under specific situations.
1. Ingress and Egress: As required in Chapter 19.
2. Landscaping: As required in Chapter 20.
3. Signs: As required by the Cascade Charter Township
Sign Ordinance.
4. Accessory Buildings and Structures: As required in
Section 4.08.
5. Corner Lots: As required in Section 4.21.
6. Non-Conforming Uses: As regulated in Chapter 22.
7. Temporary Buildings and Structures: As provided in
Section 4.18.
Setback Requirements for AZ Zone: Subzone 2
Front Road
Oostema Blvd or any other public or private
street
35’
60th 43’
Patterson and Thornapple River Drive 50’
Side Yard 25’
Rear Yard 50’
CHAPTER 19
Access, Parking, and Loading
Section 19.01 Title:
Ingress / Egress Provisions and Off-Street Parking &
Loading Requirements
Section 19.02 Intent:
It is the purpose of this Section to establish guidelines for
location and design of driveways that can be used for new
construction in undeveloped areas and for redevelopment
of existing developed areas. The objectives of these
requirements are to reduce the frequency of conflicts
between vehicular movements and to increase the
spacing between conflict points, thereby providing
motorists with increased decision process time which will
increase safety and assure smoother traffic flow.
Section 19.03 General Provisions:
1. Lanes Per Driveway: The number of driveway lanes
shall be based on analysis of expected trip generation
and peak turning volumes. If expected egress left
turns exceed 100 per hour, two egress lanes shall be
provided.
2. Turn Prohibitions: Left turns may be prohibited at
the discretion of the approving Township Official or
Body to and/or from driveways under the following
conditions:
a. Inadequate corner clearance.
b. Inadequate sight distance.
c. Inadequate driveway spacing.
3. Relationship to Opposing Driveways: To the extent
desirable and reasonably possible, driveways shall be
aligned with driveways on the opposite side of the
street.
4. Sight Distance: Adequate sight distance shall be
ensured for all vehicles exiting from a proposed
development. If certain movements cannot be made
safely, then they shall be prohibited or joint access
with adjoining property shall be encouraged.
5. Driveway Permits: Prior to the granting of a building
permit for any construction involving a new or
expanded driveway opening to a public street, a
permit for such driveway from the State and/or
County Agency having jurisdiction over the public
street shall be submitted to the building inspector.
Section 19.04 Non-Residential Ingress and
Egress Provisions: (Revised Section: See Ordinance #1 of 1993)
1. Driveway Spacing: The minimum spacing allowed
between a proposed driveway and all other
driveways (located on the same side of the public
street which the proposed driveway abuts or adjoins)
or public or private streets (where the street
intersects the public street which the proposed
driveway abuts or adjoins) shall be in accordance with
the Table 19-A, as provided below.
(Note: This amendment became effective February 9, 1993.)
2. In the event that a particular parcel or parcels lack
sufficient road frontage to maintain adequate
spacing, the landowner(s) have one of two options:
a. They can seek a variance from the Zoning Board
of Appeals for minimum spacing, but in no case
can the variance be greater than the next lowest
classification in Table 19-A, above. For example,
on a 40 MPH road requiring 210-foot spacing, the
distance may be reduced to no less than 160
Table 19-A: Minimum Driveway Spacing
Legal Driving Speed Limit
Spacing on the Public Road
Which Adjoins or Abuts the
Proposed Driveway (MPH)++
Minimum Feet*
30 or Less 100
35 160
40 210
45 or Over 300
++These traffic speeds are based upon the limits posted in
Cascade Charter Township on the effective date of this
zoning ordinance amendment (see Appendix - "B"). Should
the posted speed limit change on a public road in the
Township, it is intended that the minimum spacing
requirement effective on the adoption date of this
amendment would remain in force, unless amended at a
later date by the Township Board.
* These spacings are based on average vehicle acceleration
and deceleration rates and are considered necessary to
maintain safe traffic operation. The spacing is measured
from centerline of the proposed driveway to the centerline
of the nearest existing driveways or the edge of the rightof-
way or easement of the nearest intersecting private or
public street in either direction. See Figure 19-1.
19-1
CHAPTER 19
Access, Parking, and Loading
feet, which is the standard for a 35 MPH road
facility.
b. The adjacent landowners may agree to establish
a common driveway.
3. Number of Driveways Per Parcel:
a. A maximum of one (1) driveway opening shall be
permitted to a particular site from each of any
one or two abutting streets.
b. The Township Planning Commission may permit
one (1) additional driveway entrance along a
continuous site with frontage in excess of 300
feet or two (2) additional driveway entrances
along a continuous site with frontage in excess of
600 feet.
c. Where a dual-service driveway is used, it will be
considered, for the purposes of this Section, to
be only one (1) direct-access driveway.
d. In the case of dual one-way driveways, one pair
may be used per 250 feet of frontage. Only one
pair of one way drives may be used per street
frontage.
4. Property Clearance: The minimum distance between
the property line and the nearest edge of the
driveway shall be 25 feet, except where the driveway
provides access to more than one lot or parcel.
5. Corner Clearance: The minimum corner clearance
distance between the centerline of a proposed
driveway and the edge of the right-of-way or
easement of a public or private street (which street
intersects or adjoins the public street which the
proposed driveway will abut or adjoin) shall be 150
feet. Traffic movements into and from (i.e. into and
out of) a driveway with a centerline located less than
250 feet from the edge of the right-of-way or
easement of a signalized intersection of a public or
private street (which street intersects or adjoins a
public street which the proposed driveway will abut
adjoin) shall be limited solely to right turns into the
driveway and right turns out of the driveway. Corner
clearance distance for the purposes of this
Section of the Zoning Ordinance shall mean the
distance from the centerline of the proposed
driveway to the edge of the right-of-way or easement
of the nearest signalized public or private street
intersection. (See Figure 19-1).
Section 19.05 Ingress and Egress Provisions:
Residential Districts: (Re-numbered Section: See Ordinance
#1 of 1993)
1. Residential: All residential driveway openings onto a
public street shall be constructed to Kent County
Road Commission Standards
2. Non-residential: All driveway openings for nonresidential
uses permitted in the residential zoning
districts shall be reviewed and approved by the
Township as part of site plan approval or the
provision contained in Chapter 17, Special Use.
Sections 19.06 through 19.10 intentionally left out for
future use
Section 19.11: Off-Street Parking and Loading
Provisions:
Section 19.12 Intent: (Amended by Ord. No. 15 of 2000)
This Section is intended to ensure that the parking and
circulation aspects of all developments are well designed
with regard to safety, efficiency and convenience for
vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians and transit, both within the
development and to and from surrounding areas.
Sidewalk or bikeway extensions off-site may be required
based on needs created by the proposed development.
This Section sets forth minimum parking requirements in
terms of numbers and dimensions of parking stalls,
landscaping and shared parking. It also addresses the
placement of drive-in facilities and loading zones.
The parking and circulation system within each
development shall accommodate the movement of
vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians and transit, throughout the
proposed development and to and from surrounding
Public or
Private
Road
Edge of
Pavement Min. Corner Clearance
= 150 ft
Proposed
Driveway
Figure 19-1
CORNER CLEARANCE
©birchlerarroy
Property Line
19-2
CHAPTER 19
Access, Parking, and Loading
areas, safely and conveniently, and shall contribute to the
attractiveness of the development. The on-site pedestrian
system must provide adequate directness, continuity,
street crossings, visible interest and security as defined by
the standards in this Section. The on-site
bicycle/pedestrian system must connect to the
bikeway/pedestrian network.
Section 19.13 Development Standards (Amended by
Ord. No. 15 of 2000)
All developments which require site plan review under
the terms of this ordinance shall meet the following
standards:
1. Safety Considerations. To the maximum extent
feasible, pedestrians shall be separated from vehicles
and bicycles. Where complete separation of
pedestrians, vehicles and bicycles is not possible,
potential hazards shall be minimized by the use of
techniques such as special paving, grade separations,
pavement marking, signs or striping, bollards, median
refuge areas, traffic calming features, landscaping,
lighting or other means to clearly delineate
pedestrian areas, for both day and night use.
2. Curbcuts and Ramps. Curbcuts and ramps shall be
located at convenient, safe locations for the
physically disabled, bicyclists and people pushing
strollers or carts and shall avoid crossing or funneling
traffic through loading areas, drive-in lanes and
outdoor trash storage/collection areas.
3. Site Amenities. Development plans shall include site
amenities that enhance safety and convenience and
promote walking or bicycling as an alternative means
of transportation. Site amenities may include bike
racks, drinking fountains, canopies, benches, etc.
4. Bicycle Facilities. Commercial, civic, employment and
multi-family residential uses should provide bicycle
facilities to meet the following standards:
a. Bicycle Parking. A minimum number of bicycle
parking spaces equal in number to five (5)
percent of the total number of automobile
parking spaces provided by the development, but
not less than one (1).
b. Location. For convenience and security, bicycle
parking facilities shall be located near building
entrances, shall be visible from the land uses
they serve, and shall not be in remote
automobile parking areas. Such facilities shall
not, however, be located so as to impede
pedestrian or automobile traffic flow nor so as to
cause damage to plant material from bicycle
traffic.
c. Design. Bicycle racks must be designed so that
they:
1) Do not bend wheels or damage other bicycle
parts;
2) Accommodate the high security U-shaped
bike locks;
3) Accommodate locks securing the frame and
both wheels;
4) Do not trip pedestrians;
5) Are easily accessed from the street and
protected from motor vehicles. See Figure
19-2.
5. Walkways
a. Directness and continuity. Walkways within the
site shall be located and aligned to directly and
continuously connect areas or points of
pedestrian origin and destination. Walkways
shall not be located and aligned solely based on
the outline of a parking lot configuration that
does not provide such direct pedestrian access.
Walkways shall link street sidewalks with building
entries through parking lots.
b. Street Crossings. Where it is necessary for the
primary pedestrian access to cross drive aisles or
internal roadways, the pedestrian crossing shall
emphasize and place priority on pedestrian
access and safety. The material and layout of the
pedestrian access shall be continuous as it
crosses the driveway, with a break in continuity
Figure 19-2
BICYCLE RACKS
ACCEPTABLE UNACCEPTABLE
©birchlerarroy
19-3
CHAPTER 19
Access, Parking, and Loading
of the driveway paving and not in the pedestrian
access way. The pedestrian crossings must be
well-marked using pavement treatments, signs,
striping, signals, lighting, traffic calming
techniques, median refuge areas and
landscaping. (See Figure 19-3)
6. Direct On-site Access to Pedestrian and Bicycle
Destinations. The on-site pedestrian and bicycle
circulation system must be designed to provide, or
allow for, direct connections to major pedestrian and
bicycle destinations. The on-site pedestrian and
bicycle circulation system must also provide for onsite
connections to existing or planned off-site
pedestrian and bicycle facilities at points necessary to
provide direct pedestrian and bicycle travel from the
development to major pedestrian destinations. In
order to provide direct pedestrian connections to
these destinations, the Township may require
additional sidewalks or walkways not associated with
a street.
7. Lot Size/Scale. Large surface parking lots shall be
visually and functionally segmented into several
smaller lots according to the following standards:
a. Large parking lots shall be divided into smaller
sections by landscape areas. Each section shall
contain a maximum of two hundred (200)
parking spaces.
b. Parking bays shall extend no more than fifteen
(15) parking spaces without an intervening tree,
landscape island or landscape peninsula.
8. User Needs. Layout and design shall anticipate the
needs of users and provide continuity between
vehicular circulation, parking, pedestrian and bicycle
circulation. Pedestrian drop-off areas shall be
provided where needed (especially for land uses that
serve children or the elderly).
9. Shared Parking. Where a mix of uses on different
pieces of property creates staggered peak periods of
parking demand, shared parking calculations shall be
made to reduce the total amount of required parking.
Retail, office, institutional and entertainment uses
may share parking areas. In no case shall shared
parking include the parking required for residential
uses. Evidence of a signed agreement between the
property owners of both properties agreeing to the
shared parking shall be provided to the Planning
Commission.
10. Drive-in Facilities. Any drive-in facilities, if permitted
by the zone district regulations, shall be secondary in
emphasis and priority to any other access and
circulation functions. Such facilities shall be located in
side or rear locations that do not interrupt direct
pedestrian access along connecting pedestrian
frontage. The design and layout of drive-in facilities
for restaurants, banks, or other uses shall:
a. Avoid potential pedestrian/vehicle conflicts;
b. Provide adequate stacking spaces for
automobiles before and after use of the facility;
11. Parking Lots
a. Minimum Required Spaces - The amount of
required off-street parking area and space by
type of use shall be determined and provided in
accordance with the following Table 19-B. The
number of parking spaces required for land or
buildings used for two or more purposes shall be
the sum of the requirements for the various uses,
computed separately.
b. Additional Parking Spaces - Applicants who wish
to install additional parking spaces over and
above the minimum required spaces shall be
required to increase their Internal Landscaping
for Parking Lots (Table 20-D) by one square foot
for every one square foot of additional parking
space.
c. Minimum Size and Units of Measurement - All
off-street parking facilities required by this
Chapter shall be of adequate size and design to
provide safe ingress and egress to all parking
spaces. The minimum standards for parking
spaces and aisles are as indicated in Table 19-C
and constructed as shown in Figure 19-4.
Figure 19-3
WALKWAY CONNECTIONS
©birchlerarroyo
19-4
CHAPTER 19
Access, Parking, and Loading
Table 19-B: Minimum Required Parking Per Use
Number of Dwelling
Unit(s) / Use
Minimum # of Parking Spaces
per Unit of Measure
Residential
One 1.5 per Dwelling Unit
Two 1.75 per Dwelling Unit
Three 2.0 per Dwelling Unit
Four and above 2.5 per Dwelling Unit
Mobile Homes 2 per dwelling unit
Institutional
Group Homes (2) parking spaces for every (3)
employees, and in addition, (1)
parking space for each (4) adult
residents, unless
residents are prohibited from
owning or operating personal
automobiles.
Recreational Uses (1) parking space per (4)
persons maximum rated
capacity.
Schools, Places of
Worship or Assembly
and Child Care
Centers
(1) parking space per (4) seats
in the auditorium or place of
worship or assembly, or (2)
parking spaces per (3)
employees, or (1) parking
space per (1,000) square feet
of floor area, whichever
requires the greatest number
of parking spaces
Business \ Commercial
Restaurants
a. Fast Food
b. Standard
15/1000 square feet
10/1000
Bars, Taverns, and
Nightclubs
10/1000 square feet
Theaters 1/3 seats
Microbrew 1/3 seats
Brew Pub 1/3 seats
General Retail 4/1000 square feet
Personal Business and
Service Shop
4/1000 square feet
Shopping Center 5/1000 square feet
Grocery Store,
Supermarket
6/1000 square feet
Lodging
Establishments
1/unit plus specified
requirements for other related
facilities.
Automobile Repair
Shop and Service
3/1000 square feet
Station
Number of Dwelling
Unit(s) / Use
Minimum # of Parking Spaces
per Unit of Measure
Low Intensity Retail,
Repair Service,
Workshop and
Custom Small
Industry
2/1000 square feet
Health Facilities
a. Hospitals
b. Long-Term Care
Facilities
1/bed
.33/bed
plus 1/two
employees
on major shift
Office
Medical, Dental,
Veterinary offices
4/1000 square feet
Banks, Business and
General Office
3/1000 square feet
Industrial
Manufacturing, light
industrial, and
research
1.5/1000 square feet
Wholesale,
warehouses,
distribution facility
.67/1000 square feet
Other industrial uses 1/employee
For uses that are not specifically listed in subsections 19.13.11,
the number of parking spaces permitted shall be the number
permitted for the most similar use listed.
19-5
CHAPTER 19
Access, Parking, and Loading
Table 19-C: Minimum Standard for Parking Spaces and
Aisles
Parking
Pattern
Parallel Up to 53° 54-74° 75-90°
Maneuvering
Lane Width
1-Way
2-Way
12 ft
22 ft
13 ft
22 ft
16 ft
22 ft
12 ft
24 ft
Parking
Space Width+
8.5 ft
9 ft
9 ft
9 ft
Parking
Space
Length++
22 ft
18 ft
18 ft
18 ft
Total Width
of 2 tiers of
Parking, plus
lane
1-Way
2-Way
29 ft
39 ft
49 ft
58 ft
52 ft
58 ft
48 ft
60 ft
+Measured perpendicular to the space centerline
++Measured along the space centerline
Section 19.14 Access Drives:
Each lane of driveway providing access to parking areas
shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width. Where a
turning radius is necessary, it shall be of an arc that allows
unobstructed vehicle flow.
Section 19.15 Required Construction:
All parking and loading facilities and access drives for uses
other than single family residential and agricultural shall
be provided with a pavement surface consisting of
bituminous concrete or asphalt. Driveways shall be
constructed with materials equal to or better than the
standards set forth by the Kent County Road Commission
for commercial driveways. Parking lots and driveways
shall be completely constructed prior to the issuance of
an occupancy permit, weather permitting. All parking
surface shall be maintained in good condition, free from
dust, trash and debris.
9’
24’
24’
Figure 19-D
MIN. PARKING SPACE & AISLE
REQUIREMENTS
45 DEGREES
60 DEGREES
90 DEGREES
18’
13’ One-Way
22’ Two-Way
18’ 9’
16’ One-Way
22’ Two-Way
18’ 9’
©birchlerarroyo
19-6
CHAPTER 19
Access, Parking, and Loading
Section 19.16 Entrances and Exits:
All non-residential parking and loading facilities shall have
entrances and exits within the zoning district in which the
principal use is permitted.
Section 19.17 Drainage:
All off-street parking and loading areas shall be graded
and drained to dispose of surface water. No surface
water shall be permitted to drain onto adjoining property
unless there is a common engineered drainage system
shared with the adjoining property or an appropriate
watershed easement has been obtained.
Section 19.18 Location:
Unless otherwise regulated under the provisions of
Chapter 17, the location of all non-residential parking
facilities shall be as specified in the regulations of each
zoning district, and as follows (See Chapters 17 and 18):
1. When a required non-residential parking facility is
situated on a parcel adjoining a residential district or
use, the parking facility shall be setback a minimum
of thirty (30) feet from the adjoining residential
property. Within this setback and nearest the
respective property line, a greenbelt shall be required
in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 20.
2. For all residential buildings and for all non- residential
uses of buildings located in residential districts,
required parking shall be provided on the same parcel
as the building or use.
Section 19.19 Required Lighting:
Protecting the general public health, safety, and welfare
of the community shall be the top priority in all outdoor
lighting.
Outdoor lighting shall:
1. Protect motorists and pedestrians from the glare of
nonvehicular light sources.
2. Protect neighbors from nuisance glare and light
trespass from improperly selected or poorly placed,
aimed, applied, maintained, or shielded lighting
sources.
3. Protect and retain the intended visual character of
the community.
Outdoor lighting shall not:
1. Be used to draw undue and excessive attention to
buildings, properties, or appurtenances for purposes
other than protecting the general public health,
safety, and welfare of the community.
2. Be used to compete for the attention of, or cause
distraction and physical discomfort to, motorists and
pedestrians by means of excessively illuminated
surfaces and unshielded, noncutoff type lighting
sources with a direct glare component.
All parking and loading facilities utilized during nighttime
hours shall be artificially illuminated to a
minimum level of 0.5 foot candles and a maximum
level of five (5) foot candles, with one (1) foot candle
being the desired level of average illumination.
Lighting fixtures providing illumination for or within
parking facilities shall be designed and arranged to:
3. Deflect light away from adjacent properties, streets,
and highways. The source of illumination in any
parking facility located within 200 feet of a residential
use or district, shall not be more than 20 feet above
the parking surface and shall be shrouded to prevent
glare.
4. Allow a reduction of the amount of artificial light
during other than normal parking hours. (Amended by
Ordinance #6 of 1996)
Downcast Lighting:
For parking lots, cutoff- type luminaries shall be used and
shall be equipped with devices, such as shields, visors,
hoods, for redirecting light. All outdoor lighting on
private, residential, commercial, industrial, municipal,
recreational, and intuitional property shall be so
equipped, aimed, located, designed, fitted, and
maintained. Directional luminaries such as spot lights,
and sign lights shall be so installed and aimed that they
illuminate only the task and do not shine directly onto
neighboring properties, roadways, and distribute
excessive light skyward.
Nonhorizontal Surface Lighting:
For the lighting of predominantly nonhorizontal surfaces,
such as, but not limited to, facades, landscaping, signs,,
fountains, displays, and statuary, lighting fixtures shall be
19-7
CHAPTER 19
Access, Parking, and Loading
fully shielded and shall be installed and aimed downcast
so as to not project their output into the windows of
neighboring residences, adjacent uses, past the object
being illuminated, or onto a public roadway. Ground
mounted lighting may be uplit for structures not taller
than five feet. Lighting fixtures with an aggregate rated
lamp lumen output per fixture that does not exceed 1,000
lumens are exempt from the requirements of this
paragraph.
Flag Lighting
The lighting of flags is allowed and cutoff fixtures are not
required so long as shielded and directional fixtures are
used. Fixtures must be installed and aimed so as to
minimize glare, sky glow, and light trespass. (Amended by
Ordinance #7 of 2005)
Section 19.20 Landscaping:
Landscape features within front yard parking areas shall
be installed in accordance with the minimum standards
outlined in Chapter 20. They shall be protected by a
raised concrete curb or anchored timbers around their
borders to prevent motor vehicle infringement upon the
landscape area.
Section 19.22 Loading Spaces:
A building or addition to an existing building exceeding
ten thousand (10,000) square feet requiring the receipt or
distribution of materials or merchandise in vehicles, there
shall be provided off-street loading spaces in relation to
floor area according to the following schedule:
1. Up to twenty thousand (20,000) square feet - one (1)
space.
2. Twenty thousand (20,000) to fifty thousand (50,000)
square feet - two (2) spaces.
3. Fifty thousand (50,000) to one hundred thousand
(100,000) square feet - three (3) spaces.
4. One (1) additional space for each additional one
hundred thousand (100,000) square feet or fraction
thereof.
Each loading space shall be at least ten (10) feet in width
and twenty-five (25) feet in length and fourteen (14) feet
in height. No such space shall be located closer than fifty
(50) feet to any lot in any residence district unless it is
wholly within a completely enclosed building or enclosed
on all sides by a wall or a uniformly painted solid board or
masonry fence not less than six (6) feet in height. No such
space shall extend into the front, side or rear yard setback
areas. Refuse disposal service areas shall be screened
from public view with a suitable fence or plant material.
Section 19.23 Deferred Parking (Non-
Residential Uses):
As a means of avoiding greater amounts of parking spaces
and impermeable surface than are reasonably needed to
serve a particular use while still ensuring site adequacy for
a broad range of potential changes in the use of a
particular building or premises, the Planning Commission
may defer construction of the required number of spaces
for any industrial, commercial, office or other nonresidential
use if the following conditions are satisfied.
1. An application is filed with the Planning Commission.
Which shall be accompanied by a development plan
of the entire project showing the design and layout of
all required parking areas including areas proposed
for deferred parking. An application for deferred
parking plan approval shall be accompanied by a fee
as established by the Township Board.. The design of
the parking area, as indicated on the development
plan shall include sufficient space to provide for the
total parking area as required by Section 19.21, Table
19-B.
2. The area designated for deferred parking shall not
include areas required for setbacks, side or rear
yards, landscaping or greenbelts or land otherwise
unsuitable for parking due to environmental or
physical conditions.
The Planning Commission, may modify the requirements
of Table 19-B. The Planning Commission may also impose
reasonably necessary conditions to protect the public
interest and may require the security to assure
completion of any related improvements required as a
condition of Deferred Parking Plan Approval. At any time
subsequent to the approval and construction of a
deferred parking plan, the Planning Commission may,
based on review of parking needs by the Planning
Department, require the construction of additional
parking spaces as required in Table 19-B.
19-8
CHAPTER 19
Access, Parking, and Loading
Section 19.24 Miscellaneous Off-Street Parking
Provisions:
1. Existing Off-Street Parking At the Effective Date of
this Ordinance: Off-Street parking existing at the
effective date of this Ordinance which serves an
existing building or use, shall not be
reduced/expanded in size to less/more than that
required under the terms of this Ordinance.
2. Fractional Requirements: When units of
measurement determining the number of required
parking spaces result in the requirement of a
fractional space, the fraction shall be considered one
full required space.
3. For the purposes of determining off-street parking
and loading requirements, the following provision
shall apply:
a. Floor area shall mean net floor area of all floors
of a building as defined in Chapter 3.
4. It shall be unlawful to use any off-street parking or
loading area established to meet the requirements of
this Ordinance for any purpose other than parking of
licensed vehicles or the loading or unloading of
necessary service trucks, unless otherwise provided.
19-9
Intentionally left blank
CHAPTER 20
Landscape and Greenbelt Provisions
20-1
Section 20.01 Title:
Landscape and Greenbelt Provisions
Section 20.02 Intent:
The intent of this Chapter is to assist development
proposals in meeting desired landscaping objectives and
to set forth minimum yet flexible standards for required
landscape areas.
The objectives and primary functions of landscaping are
both utilitarian and aesthetic. The utilitarian aspects and
effects of good landscaping design includes:
1. The screening of lighted areas and unattractive
features.
2. The prevention of glare from buildings, cars and other
sources.
3. The control of air pollution by the absorption of
noxious gases and the release of oxygen.
4. The reduction of noise and the stabilization of soils.
5. Decreased wind velocity and increased surface water
retention.
6. The definition of access and circulation.
The aesthetic functional aspects and effects of good
landscape design include:
1. The enhancement or the focusing of attention toward
a feature (building, main entrance, sign, etc.)
2. The provision of visual relief from monotonous
features such as building walls, large parking lots and
streets.
3. The adding of natural color and the attraction of
wildlife.
Section 20.03 Landscaping - General:
For all uses except single-family residential and
agricultural, every site upon which a building or structure
has been placed shall be landscaped in accordance with a
plan and specifications approved by the Planning
Commission. The entire site not devoted to floor area,
parking, access ways or pedestrian use shall be
appropriately landscaped with grass, canopy and
coniferous trees, shrubs and ground cover. Expansion
areas shall be placed in grass and kept weed free. Any
areas which become disturbed for any reason shall be
restored in accordance with the original landscape plan
unless approved otherwise in writing by the Planning
Director.
1. Landscaping shall be installed within ninety (90) days
of completion of the building or structure, or unless
permitted in writing by the Planning Director at a
later date.
2. All landscaping shall be hardy plant materials and
maintained thereafter in a neat and orderly manner.
Withered and/or dead plant materials shall be
replaced within a reasonable period of time but no
longer than one growing season.
3. Underground sprinkling systems shall be installed on
private property where necessary to service
landscaped areas and such areas shall be neatly
maintained, including mowing, fertilizing and pruning.
4. Parking and loading areas shall be landscaped and/or
fenced in such a manner as to interrupt or screen the
areas from view.
5. For the purpose of this Chapter a corner lot is
considered as having two front yards and the
appropriate landscaping shall be provided for both.
6. The extensive use of cobble stones, crushed stones or
other non-living material as a ground cover is
discouraged.
7. Where appropriate, plantings should be grouped or
clustered to provide the maximum visual effect.
8. The Planning Commission may require a readily
available water supply with at least one outlet
located within 150 feet of all plant material to be
maintained. (New Section added by Ordinance #14 of 1989).
Section 20.04 Bufferyard Requirements:
1. When Bufferyard Requirements Apply - Bufferyard
requirements shall apply to all new development
within Cascade Township. The bufferyard
requirements shall also apply to all expansions,
renovations, or alterations which increase the size of
an existing structure or building cumulatively by at
least 20 percent of its gross floor area as of January 1,
1990.
2. The following table (Table 20-A) indicates the
minimum bufferyard required between
developments based upon zoning or road
classification. In reading the table the following shall
apply:
a. The left-hand column identifies the type of
proposed development. If the proposed
CHAPTER 20
Landscape and Greenbelt Provisions
20-2
development is (or is proposed to be) a PUD the
Planning Commission shall determine which
bufferyard is required along abutting property
b. The top column identifies the zoning district or
road classification of the adjacent land use.
c. The letter designations contained in Table 20-A
refer to the requirements and standards
contained in Section 20.04(3).
3. Bufferyard requirements are stated in terms of width
of the bufferyard and the number of plant units
required per one hundred (100) linear feet of
bufferyard. The type and quantity of plant materials
required by each bufferyard, and each bufferyard
option are specified in this Section. (Section 20.04
substantially revised by Ordinance #14 of 1989)
Table 20-A: Adjacent Land Use: Bufferyard Requirements (Amended by Ord No 5 of 2010; 3/10/10)
Proposed
Land Use
ARC FP R1 R2 B1 B2 O ES AC I TI Arterial/
Collector
Highway
ARC N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
FP N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
R1 N/A N/A N/A N/A A B A B B B B A B
R2 N/A N/A N/A N/A A B A B B B B A B
B1 E N/A F F C C D C D C C C B
B2 F N/A G G C D D D D D D C C
O E N/A F F D D D D C C C C D
ES E N/A G G C D D D C D D C C
AC E N/A F F D D D D C B B C C
I F N/A G G E D E D D C C C C
TI F N/A G G E D D D D C C C C
N/A = Not Applicable
Table 20-B: Quantity of Plant Materials in Bufferyards Per 100 Linear Feet
Bufferyard Plant
Type
A B C D E F G
Minimum Width of
Bufferyard (ft)
10 10 20 25 30 35 40
Canopy Tree 1 2 2 3 4 5 6
Understory Tree 2 4 4 6 6 4 4
Shrubs N/A N/A 6 9 12 18 24
Evergreen/Conifer N/A 2 N/A N/A 2 7 10
N/A = Not Applicable
CHAPTER 20
Landscape and Greenbelt Provisions
20-3
Section 20.05 Bufferyard Design Requirements:
1. Minimum Plant Size: New plant materials shall meet
the minimum plant size requirements contained in
Table 20-C.
Table 20-C: Minimum Plant Size
Plant
Material
Type
Planting in Bufferyard
abutting Vacant Lands
All other
Plantings
Canopy Tree
Single Stem
1 ½” Caliper 2 ½”
Caliper
Canopy Tree
Multi-Stem
clump
6 feet (height) 10 feet
(height)
Understory
Tree
4 feet (height) 1 ½”
Caliper
Evergreen
Tree
4 feet (height) 5 feet
(height)
Shrub
Deciduous
15 inches (height) 24 inches
(height)
Shrub
Evergreen
12 inches (height) 18 inches
(height)
2. Berms- Undulating earthen berms not exceeding six
(6) feet in height, as measured from average grade,
and 3:1 slope may be permitted within a required
bufferyard. Credit of up to 25 percent may be
received against the required plantings through the
use of berms three (3) feet in height or greater.
3. Use- A bufferyard may be used for passive recreation;
it may contain pedestrian or bicycle pathways,
provided that:
a. No plant material is eliminated;
b. The total bufferyard (width and length) is
maintained; and
c. All other requirements of this Ordinance are met.
4. Stormwater Retention/Detention Facilities in
Bufferyards - The Planning Director shall be authorized
to allow stormwater retention/detention facilities to
encroach into bufferyards a maximum of 30 percent of
the bufferyard width, where it can be demonstrated
that all planting requirements are met and the visual
screen provided by the bufferyard will be fully
achieved.
5. Location - All plantings for a bufferyard shall be
planted within the required bufferyard.
6. Existing Plant Materials - Existing plant materials which
satisfy the minimum size requirements set forth in
Section 20.05(A) above and all other requirements or
specifications of this Chapter shall be credited toward
satisfying the bufferyard requirements of the
proposed use.
7. Maintenance of Plant Materials- All plant materials in
bufferyards shall be maintained in a good condition so
as to present a healthy, near and orderly appearance.
The owner, tenant of their agent shall insure that:
a. All plant growth in landscaped areas be controlled
by pruning, trimming, or other suitable methods
so that plant materials do not interfere with public
utilities, restrict pedestrian or vehicular access, or
other wise constitute a traffic hazard;
b. All planted areas be maintained in a relatively
weed-free condition and clear of undergrowth;
and
c. All plantings be fertilized and irrigated at such
intervals as are necessary to promote optimum
growth. (Section 20.05 substantially changed by Ordinance
#14 of 1989).
Section 20.06 Required Bufferyards - Additional
Planting Requirements:
For reasons of conflicting uses, unfavorable topography or
other unique or extenuating physical circumstances the
Planning Commission may increase required landscape
plantings in any required greenstrip or greenbelt, if in its
discretion any increase is found to be necessary to
reasonably achieve stated utilitarian and aesthetic
objectives.
Section 20.07 Required Bufferyards - Reductions
and Substitutions of Plantings:
If a physical hardship exists or existing topography and
vegetation are determined by the Planning Commission to
provide equal or better landscape and buffering effect, the
Planning Commission may approve modifications only to
the planting requirements of Sections 20.04 and 20.05.
The Planning Commission may require such alternate
plantings and visual screens as hedges, fences, walls,
and/or combination thereof which it deems necessary to
ensure compliance with stated utilitarian and aesthetic
objectives.
CHAPTER 20
Landscape and Greenbelt Provisions
20-4
Section 20.08 Greenspace within the Public
Right-of-Way and Private Easements:
For the land area lying between the required greenstrip in
the front yard of properties and the edge of pavement of
a public or private street the following standards shall
apply.
1. As a minimum grass or other living ground cover shall
be neatly maintained and kept weed free by the
owners of property abutting the public right-of-way
or private easement.
2. Trees within a public right-of-way shall not be planted
without the written consent of the Kent County Road
Commission or the Michigan Department of
Transportation.
Section 20.09 Parking Areas, Front Yard -
Required Landscaping:
Landscaping shall be provided for in all internal areas of
parking lots so as to provide visual and climatic relief from
broad expanses of pavement. Landscape features
installed in fulfillment of this requirement should be
designed and situated to protect lighting fixtures and fire
hydrants and to define access and circulation ways.
1. When Internal Landscaping Requirements Apply- The
internal landscaping requirements contained herein
apply to all new development within Cascade
Township. New industrial development is exempt
from the requirements contained in this Section.
These requirements shall also apply to expansions
which would require the development to increase its
parking area by at least 20 percent of the total offstreet
parking requirements as required in Section
19.11.
2. Internal Landscaping Area Requirements - In order to
reduce the visual impacts of parking lots and to
enhance their appearance to surrounding land uses,
the Township requires parking lots to be internally
landscaped. Based upon the number of parking spaces
within a parking lot a particular land use would have to
set aside some of the land area within the parking lot
for landscaping. The following table shows the
amount of land area which must be set aside for
landscaping.
3. Minimum Size - The minimum size of any internal
landscaped area shall be 180 square feet, with a
minimum width not less than 20 feet.
4. Protection of Landscaping- Internal landscape areas
shall be protected by the installation of a raised
concrete curb or anchored landscape timbers around
their border. The curb is intended to prevent motor
vehicle infringement upon landscaped areas and to
insure that the landscaping materials remain within a
defined area.
5. Required Plantings- For each 180 square feet of
required landscaped area one (1) canopy tree or two
(2) evergreen/conifer trees.
6. Minimum Plant Size- All new plants required for
internal landscaped areas shall meet the minimum size
requirements set forth in Section 20.05(1) above.
(Section 24.07 was substantially revised by Ordinance #14 of 1989).
Section 20.10 Credited Species:
The Planning Director shall hold on file a suggested
planting list to accommodate various site situations.
Section 20.11 Uncredited Species:
The following Table 20-E enumerates species that are
permitted but which will not be credited in required
landscape areas due to their brittleness, susceptibility to
disease and insects, excessive root structure, excessive
litter, susceptibility to road salt damage and/or other
undesirable characteristics.
Table 20-D: Internal Landscaping Area Requirements
for Parking Lots
Number of parking spaces in lot Square feet (sf)
of land area per
parking space
For parking lots containing less
than 50 parking spaces
15 sf
For parking lots containing
between 51 and 99 parking
spaces
25 sf
For parking lots containing over
100 parking spaces
30 sf
CHAPTER 20
Landscape and Greenbelt Provisions
20-5
Table 20-E: Undesirable (Uncredited) Species
Botanical Name Common Name
Trees:
Acer Negundo Box Elder
Ailantus Altissima Tree of Heaven
Betula Spp. Birch
Catalpa Speciosa Catalpa
Eleagnus Augustifolia Russian Olive
Ginkgo Biloba (Female) Female Gingko
Maclura Pomifera Osage Orange
Morus Spp. Mulberry
Populus Spp. Cottonwood, Poplar, Aspen
Prunus Spp. Cherry, Plum
Salix Spp. Willow
Ulmus Spp. Elm
Pinus Strobus White Pine
Morus Spp. Mulberry
Juglans Nigra Black Walnut
Robina Spp. Black Locus
Crateaegus Spp. Hawthorn
Aesculus Hippocastanum Horsechestnut
Carya Spp. Hickory
Acer Saccharinum Silver Maple
A. Rubram Red Maple
Gleditsia Triancanthos
(with thorns)
Honey Locust
Ulmust Americana American Elm
Ulmus Pumila Siberian Elm
Ulmus Rubra Slippery Elm; Red Elm
Rhododendron Rhododendron
Yucca Yucca
Ilex Holly
Mahonia Grape Holly
Azalea Azalea
Arborvitae Globe Arborvitae
Rhododendron Rhododendron
Yucca Yucca
Section 20.12 Residential Landscape
Requirements:
For all residential uses where a lot or parcel of land has
been disturbed or cleared for development, the disturbed
area shall be finish graded and landscaped within the time
specified below, except for driveways, walks, and required
parking areas. Seeding or sodding shall be the minimum
acceptable landscaping of any said lots or parcels of land.
This minimum landscaping shall be installed not later than
(1) one year after a Building Permit has been issued by the
Building Inspector, and shall be reasonably maintained
thereafter. After the period of one (1) year of occupancy,
the Building Inspector may require the posting of a
financial guarantee in an amount up to One Thousand
Dollars ($1,000.00) to assure installation of the landscaping
and may extend the one year time limit if conditions
warrant. (Section amended by Ordinance #1 of 1992)
Section 20.13 Outdoor Storage: (Added by Ord No 5 of
2010; 3/10/10)
1. In the TI district, all outdoor storage areas located less
than one hundred (100) feet from any other district,
shall be enclosed by a solid fence or wall, not less than
eight (8) feet in height.
2. In the I district, all outdoor storage facilities for fuel,
raw materials, ad products for every use, as
enumerated ad limited herein, located less than one
hundred (100) feet from any other district, shall be
enclosed by a solid fence or wall, not less than eight
(8) feet in height.
Intentionally left blank
CHAPTER 21
Site Plan Review
21-1
Section 21.01 Title:
Site Plan Review
Section 21.02 Purpose:
It is the purpose of this Chapter to require site plan review
approval for certain buildings, structures and uses that
can be expected to have a significant impact on natural
resources, traffic patterns, adjacent parcels and the
character of future development. The regulations
contained in this Chapter are intended to promote:
1. Safe and convenient traffic movement, both within a
site and in relation to access streets;
2. Harmonious relationships of buildings, structures and
uses, both within a site and with adjacent sites;
3. Conservation of natural amenities and resources; and
4. Compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and
all other applicable Township, state and federal laws.
All land uses shall be subject to site plan approval, except
a detached single-family dwelling on a lot or parcel not
having any other dwelling existing or to be located
thereon, and non-residential uses requiring less than five
(5) parking spaces.
Section 21.03 Site Plan Procedure:
1. Following the filing of a proposed site plan, the
Planning Department shall review the plan with other
appropriate Township departments and/or Kent
County governmental agencies for design sufficiency.
Within fifteen (15) days after submittal of the site
plan the Planning Department shall submit a report
to the developer informing him of any site plan
deficiencies (if any) which shall be corrected prior to
review by the Planning Commission. Upon receipt of
a revised site plan, the Planning Department shall
submit the site plan with a report and its
recommendation for review by the Planning
Commission within twenty (20) days. The Planning
Commission shall approve or reject the site plan
within thirty (30) days of the recommendation by the
Planning Department. If approval is conditioned with
changes, the applicant shall agree in writing to the
changes prior to the issuance of any building permits.
2. When an applicant receives site plan approval, he
must develop the site exactly as approved by the
Planning Commission or Planning Director.
3. If rezoning of the land is required to allow the
proposed development or use of the property as
provided for in the site plan, a concept approval of
the site plan by the Township Planning Commission
shall be considered contingent upon rezoning of the
subject property by the Township Board; such
concept site approval shall not be construed as any
assurance of such rezoning nor shall it be binding on
the applicant if the rezoning is approved.
4. An approved site plan shall be effective for a period
of one (1) year, or the life of a building permit
obtained pursuant to the approved site plan,
whichever is longer. If construction is not
commenced within the period that the site plan is
effective, no construction shall take place unless
there has been an extension approved by the
Township Board and before the extension is granted
there is compliance with all applicable site plan
requirements that are in effect at the time of the
extension.
5. Before a site plan is marked "approved", it shall be
revised to reflect any conditions attached to the
approval, or changes or corrections required to
obtain approval.
6. All requirements of this Ordinance, and any other
applicable Township ordinance, standard,
specification or regulation shall be complied with
even if not specifically included in an approved site
plan.
7. Three (3) complete sets of "as-built" drawings
certified by the project engineer or architect must be
submitted by the proprietor at the time of application
for an occupancy permit.
Section 21.04 Administrative Plan Review:
Minor changes to a site plan or new site plan may be
approved administratively by the Planning Director
provided the plan complies with all applicable
requirements of this Ordinance and all other Township
regulations or state law. The Planning Director may
approve a site plan for the following:
1. Change of location or type of landscape materials.
2. Minor changes to an approved site plan which involve
the addition or relocation of any of the following
items:
CHAPTER 21
Site Plan Review
21-2
a. Sidewalks
b. Refuse containers
c. Lighting
d. Driveways and entrances
e. Signs
f. Retention/detention ponds
3. Decrease in building size from an approved site
4. Moving a proposed building on an approved site plan
no more than ten (10) feet or five (5) percent of the
distance to the closest property line, whichever is
smaller.
5. An increase in a building size that does not exceed
5,000 square feet or five (5) percent of the gross floor
area, whichever is smaller.
6. A building or structure which does not exceed 5,000
square feet of gross floor area and for any use which
does not require a special use permit, as provided by
Chapter 15 of this Ordinance.
7. New parking lots.
Section 21.05 Required Site Plan Information:
1. Graphic Materials Required For Plans - Every
application for site plan approval shall contain plans
that locate the development site and graphically
demonstrate existing and proposed natural, manmade
and legal features on and near the site in
question. Development site plans shall show on the
first page the following information:
a. Name of applicant.
b. Name of development (if any).
c. North arrow.
d. Legend.
e. Location. A location map that shows the location
of the project in the broad context of the
Township.
f. Scale. Development site plans shall be drawn to
scale, using such a scale that all features required
to be shown on the plans are readily discernible.
The Planning Department shall make the final
determination whether the plans submitted are
drawn to the appropriate scale.
g. All of the features required to be shown on plans
by Section 21.05(2) and Section 21.05(3), may be
included on one set of plans, so long as the
features are distinctly discernible.
2. Existing Natural, Man-Made, and Legal Features
Development site plans shall show all existing natural,
man-made and legal features on the lot where the
development is to take place, including but not
limited to those listed below. In addition, the plans
shall also show those features, indicated in the
following by an asterisk, that are located within 50
feet in any direction of the lot where the
development is to take place, and shall specify the
use made of adjoining properties.
a. Existing natural features:
1) Tree line of wooded areas.
2) Individual trees 18 inches in diameter or
more, identified by common or scientific
name.
3) Orchards or other agricultural groves by
common or scientific name.
4) Streams, ponds, drainage ditches, swamps,
boundaries of floodways and floodplains.
5) If more than five acres of land are to be
developed base flood elevation data.
6) Contour lines (shown as dotted lines) with
no larger than two-foot contour intervals.
(As indicated in Section 21.05.(3)(o)
proposed contour lines shall be shown as.
b. Existing man-made features:
1) Vehicle accommodation areas (including
parking areas, loading areas and circulation
areas, all designated by surface material and
showing the layout of existing parking spaces
and direction of travel lanes, aisles, or
driveways.
2) Streets, private roads, sidewalks, and other
walkways, all designated by surface material.
3) Curbs and gutters, curb inlets and curb cuts,
and drainage grates.
4) Other storm water or drainage facilities,
including manholes, pipes, and drainage
ditches, including sizes and materials.
5) Underground utility lines (sizes and
materials), including water, sewer, electric
power, telephone, gas, cable television.
6) Above ground utility lines and other utility
facilities.
7) Fire hydrants.
CHAPTER 21
Site Plan Review
21-3
8) Buildings, structures and signs (including
dimensions of each).
9) Location of exterior light fixtures.
10) Location of dumpsters.
c. Existing legal features:
1) The zoning of the property, including zoning
district lines where applicable.
2) Property lines (with dimensions identified).
3) Street right-of-way lines.
4) Utility or other easement lines.
3. Proposed Changes in Existing Features or New
Features - Development site plans shall also show
proposed new legal features (especially new property
lines, street right-of-way lines, and utility and other
easements), as well as proposed man-made features,
including, but not limited to, the following:
a. Lot dimensions, including lot widths.
b. The location and dimensions of all buildings and
freestanding signs on the lot, as well as the
distances all buildings and freestanding signs are
set back from property lines, streets or street
right-of-way lines.
c. Principal side(s) building elevations for typical
units of new buildings or exterior remodeling of
existing buildings, showing exterior building
materials, building heights and proposed wall
sign or window sign area.
d. Areas intended to remain as usable open space.
The plans shall clearly indicate whether such
open space areas are intended to be offered for
dedication to public use or to remain privately
owned.
e. Streets, labeled by classification (see Appendix
A) and street name showing whether curb and
gutter or shoulders and swales are to be
provided and indicating street paving widths.
Private roads in subdivisions shall also be shown
and clearly labeled as such.
f. Curbs and gutters, curb inlets and curb cuts,
drainage grates.
g. Other storm water or drainage facilities,
(proposed sizes and materials) including
manholes, pipes, drainage ditches, retention
ponds, etc.
h. Sidewalks and walkways, showing widths and
surface material.
i. Bridges.
j. Outdoor illumination with lighting fixtures
sufficiently identified to demonstrate compliance
with Section 19.09.
k. Underground utility lines, (proposed sizes and
materials) including water, sewer, electric power,
telephone, gas, cable television. Water and
sewer pipe line signs shall be labeled.
l. Above ground utility lines and other facilities.
m. Fire hydrants.
n. Dumpsters.
o. New contour lines resulting from earth
movement (shown as solid lines) with no larger
than two-foot contour intervals (existing lines
should be shown as dotted lines).
p. Scale drawings of all signs requiring permits
pursuant to the Cascade Township Sign
Ordinance, together with an indication of the
location and dimensions of all such signs.
q. Vehicle accommodation areas (including parking
areas, handicapped parking areas, loading areas,
and circulation areas), all designated by surface
material and showing the dimensions and layout
of proposed parking spaces and the dimensions
and direction of travel of lanes, aisles, and
driveways.
r. Proposed plantings or construction of other
devices to comply with the screening
requirements of Chapter 20. Plans shall label
shrubbery by common or scientific name, show
the distance between plants and indicate the
height at the time of planting and expected
mature height and width. Plans shall label trees
by common or scientific name, show the circles
of the mature crowns.
4. Documents and Written Information in Addition to
Plans- In addition to the written application and the
plans, whenever the nature of the proposed
development makes information or documents such
as the following relevant, such documents or
information shall be provided. The following is a
representative list of the types of information or
documents that may be requested:
a. Documentation confirming that the applicant has
a legally sufficient interest in the property
proposed for development to use it in the
manner requested, or is the duly appointed
agent of such a person.
CHAPTER 21
Site Plan Review
21-4
b. Certifications from the appropriate agencies that
proposed utility systems are or will be adequate
to handle the proposed development, and that
all necessary easements have been provided.
c. Legal documentation establishing property
owner associations or other legal entities
responsible for control over required common
areas and facilities.
d. Bonds, letters of credit, or other surety devices.
e. Time schedules for the completion of phases in
staged development.
f. The environmental impact of a development,
including its effect on historically significant or
ecologically fragile or important areas and its
impact on pedestrian or traffic safety or
congestion.
g. A fiscal impact analysis of a development onto
the Township and other governmental units (e.g.
schools, public safety, roads, etc.).
h. A traffic impact analysis of a proposed
development onto the Township and other
governmental units.
i. Calculations for drainage and stormwater design
detention/retention.
5. Number of Copies of Plans and Documents - With
respect to all plans and other documents required by
this Chapter the developer shall submit the number
of copies that the Planning Department deems
necessary to expedite the review process and to
provide necessary permanent records.
Section 21.05.6 Site Plan Review and Standards
for Mobile Home Park: (This section amended by Ordinance
#3 of 2000)
No Mobile Home Park use shall be commenced in any
district where such use is a permitted use until and unless
the Planning Commission approves a site plan hereunder,
and all standards contained in this section 25.05.6 are
met. Pursuant to Section 11 of PA No. 96 of 1987, as
amended, a preliminary plan shall be submitted to the
Township for review by the Planning Commission. The
preliminary plan shall include the location, layout, general
design, and general description of the project. The
preliminary plan need not include detailed construction
plans.
In preparing a preliminary plan and when reviewing such
plan, the following standard procedures and requirements
shall herein apply.
1. Application: Any person(s) requesting action or
review under the provisions of this Ordinance shall
file an application on the forms provided by the
Township. The information required shall be typed or
legibly written on the application form and separate
sheets of paper thereto attached.
2. Pre-application Conference: An applicant shall meet
with Township staff, including any consultants
designated by the Township Board, to review an
application prior to filing. This pre-application
conference is intended to assist the applicant and
facilitate the future review and approval of the
application. However, no suggestions,
recommendations, or other comments made by
Township officials, staff or consultants at such
conference shall constitute approval of an application
or bind the Township.
3. Process and Review: Completed site plan
applications accepted by the Township shall be
submitted to the appropriate Township staff and
consultants for their written review and
recommendation. The application, along with all
recommendations, shall then be submitted to the
Planning Commission. Official receipt of the
application shall be the time in which the completed
plan arrives or is delivered to the appropriate
Township staff. The staff and consultants may advise
and assist the applicant in meeting ordinance
requirements, but shall have no power to approve or
deny any application, or in any way restrict an
applicant’s right to seek formal approval thereof.
4. Planning Commission Action: The Planning
Commission shall review all site plan applications at a
public meeting. The Planning Commission may
consider all recommendations of the staff and
consultants. Pursuant to Section 11 of PA 96 of 1987,
as amended, the Planning Commission shall take
action on the preliminary plan within sixty (60) days
after the Township officially receives a completed
application with a complete plan, unless the applicant
agrees to a time extension. All applications, for which
the Planning Commission is charged with authority to
approve under the provisions of this Ordinance, shall
be approved, denied, or approved subject to
conditions. The Township Planning Commission may
CHAPTER 21
Site Plan Review
21-5
require one or more of the following as part of the
submission:
a. Evidence of market need for the use and
economic feasibility of the project.
b. A community impact statement.
c. A traffic impact statement.
d. An environmental impact statement.
e. A fiscal impact assessment.
The Planning Commission may table an application
for further study or to obtain additional information,
provided that final action on such application is taken
within the sixty (60) day review period.
5. Fees and Deposits: All applications submitted to the
Township for review and approval shall be
accompanied by a filing fee to cover the cost of
processing and reviewing the application. The fee
shall be established by resolution of the Township
Board, in accordance with Section 24 of PA 184 of
1943, as amended. The filing fee and any escrow fees
shall be paid before the site plan approval process
begins. Upon notification of deficient payment of
fees, administrative officials in charge with
enforcement of the Ordinance shall suspend further
review of the application and shall deny any new
permits. Any deposit toward the cost of review shall
be credited against the expense to the Township, and
any portion of the deposit not needed to pay such
expense shall be refunded without interest to the
applicant within thirty (30) days of final action on the
application. A schedule of the current filing fees and
escrow requirements is available in the office of the
Township Clerk and the Planning Department.
6. Disclosure of Interest: The full name, address,
telephone number, and signature of the applicant
shall be provided on the application. If the
application involves real property in the Township,
then the applicant must be the fee owner, or have
identified legal interest in the property, or be an
authorized agent of the fee owner. A change in
ownership after the application is filed shall be
disclosed prior to any public hearing or the final
decision on the application. One of the following
applicable disclosures shall be required:
a. When Applicant is not Fee Owner: If the
applicant is not the fee owner, the application
must indicate the applicant’s interest in the
property, and the name, address, and telephone
number of the fee owner(s). An affidavit of the
fee owner(s) shall be filed with the application
stating that the applicant has authority from the
owner to make the application.
b. When Applicant is a Corporation or Partnership:
If the applicant or fee owner is a corporation, the
name, address, and telephone number of the
corporation officers and registered agent shall be
provided, and if a partnership, the name,
address, and telephone number of the partners
shall be provided.
c. When Applicant or Owner is a Land Trust: If the
applicant or fee owner is a trust or trustee
thereof, the name, address, telephone number,
and extent of interest of each beneficiary must
be provided.
7. Records: The Township shall keep accurate records
of all decisions on all applications submitted pursuant
to this Ordinance.
8. Standard Operation Requirements:
a. State Permit: It shall be unlawful for any
person(s) to operate a manufactured housing
community unless that individual obtains a
license for such operation in compliance with the
requirements of Michigan Public Act No. 96 of
1987, as amended. The Planning Department
shall communicate their recommendations
regarding the issuance of such licenses to the
Director of the Manufactured Housing Division,
Corporation and Securities Bureau, Michigan
Department of Commerce.
b. Violations: If and when, upon inspection of any
manufactured housing community, the Planning
Department finds that there are existing
conditions or practices which violate provisions
of this Ordinance or other regulations referenced
herein, they shall give notice in writing by
certified mail to the Director of the Michigan
Manufactured Housing Commission, including
the specific nature of the alleged violations and a
description of possible remedial action necessary
to effect compliance with the ordinance or other
regulations. The notification shall include such
other information as is appropriate in order to
fully describe the violations and potential
hazards to the public health, safety and welfare
resulting from the violation. A copy of such
notification shall be sent by certified mail to the
last known address of the community owner or
CHAPTER 21
Site Plan Review
21-6
agent. All other Township penalties are still
applicable.
c. Inspections: The Building Inspector or other
authorized Township agent is granted the
authority, as specified is PA No. 96 of 1987, as
amended, to enter upon the premises of any
manufactured housing community for the
purpose of determining compliance with the
provisions of this Ordinance or other regulations
referenced herein.
d. Operation: A manufactured housing community
shall not be operated until a license has been
issued by the Michigan Department of
Commerce. Buildings that require a Township
permit which are constructed on-site shall
require a Township Building Permit prior to
construction and a Certificate of Occupancy prior
to use.
1) Development Standards: Manufactured
housing communities shall be subject to all
the rules and requirements as established
and regulated by Michigan law, PA 96 of
1987, as amended, and the Manufactured
Housing Commission, and shall also satisfy
the following minimum requirements:
PARCELS AND HOMESITES
1. Maximum Density and Minimum Parcel Area: Each
mobile home park shall be owned and operated as
one (1) entity or on a condominium basis. A mobile
home park shall contain a minimum of forty (40)
acres.
2. Minimum Homesite Area: The mobile home park
shall be developed with homesites consisting of at
least seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square
feet per each mobile home being served.
3. Home Placement: It is the intent of this ordinance to
require parallel placement of homes adjacent to the
perimeter of the community, and to encourage
parallel placement whenever possible, so as to
maintain consistency of standards and aesthetic
quality with other residential districts and adjacent
land uses in the township.
a. All homes within the community which are
adjacent to the perimeter of the community shall
be sited parallel to an internal road.
b. A home sited parallel to an internal road shall be
placed at least twenty (20) feet from any part of
an attached structure of an adjacent home that is
used for living purposes if the adjacent home is
sited next to the home on the same internal road
or an intersection internal road.
c. A home not sited parallel to an internal road shall
be placed at least twenty (20) feet from any part
of an attached structure of an adjacent home
that is used for living purposes.
d. It shall be unlawful to permanently or
temporarily locate or park a mobile home so that
any part of such home will obstruct any roadway
or walkway within a mobile home park.
e. It shall be unlawful to locate any mobile home to
be occupied in a mobile home park unless the
home is situated on a homesite.
f. A building permit shall be issued by the Township
Building Inspector before a manufactured home
may be placed on a homesite in a mobile home
park.
4. Minimum Living Area: No one story mobile home in
any mobile home park shall contain less than one
thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet of living
area, excluding hitch and eaves.
No two story mobile home in any mobile home park
shall contain less than one thousand four hundred
(1,400) square feet of living area, excluding hitch and
eaves.
5. Setback Requirements: A mobile home shall comply
with the following minimum distances:
a. Twenty (20) feet from any part of an attached or
detached structure of an adjacent mobile home
which is used for living purposes.
b. Ten (10) feet from an on-site parking space of an
adjacent homesite.
c. Ten (10) feet from an attached or detached
structure or accessory of an adjacent mobile
home which is not used for living purposes.
d. One hundred (100) feet from any baseball,
softball or similar recreation field.
e. Fifty (50) feet from any permanent building.
f. Twenty (20) feet from the edge of an internal
road.
g. Twenty (20) feet from the right-of-way line of a
dedicated public road within the mobile home
park.
h. Seven (7) feet from any parking space.
CHAPTER 21
Site Plan Review
21-7
i. Seven (7) feet from a common pedestrian
walkway.
j. All mobile homes, accessory buildings, and
parking areas shall be set back not less than
twenty (20) feet from any mobile home park
boundary line, except that a minimum setback of
fifty (50) feet shall be provided from existing and
future right-of-way lines of abutting roads and
highways.
k. Fifty (50) feet from the edge of any railroad rightof-
way.
STRUCTURES AND AREAS
6. Maximum Building Height: The maximum height of a
building shall not exceed two (2) stories or twentyfive
feet. Storage sheds shall not exceed a height of
fourteen (14) feet and the height of the
manufactured home they are intended to serve.
7. Accessory and Site-built Structures: Accessory and
site-built structures constructed for use as
management offices, public works facilities, storage
buildings laundry facilities, recreation or community
centers, and other similar facilities shall be designed
and operated for use by residents of the mobile
home park only. Site-built structures within a
community shall be constructed in compliance with
the Township building codes and shall require all
applicable permits.
8. Canopies and Awnings: Canopies and awnings may
be attached to any mobile home provided they meet
the current building code standards. Canopies and
awnings shall comply with the setback and distance
requirements set forth in this Chapter and shall
require a building permit.
9. Storage:
a. Sheds: One (1) storage shed may be permitted
for each homesite. Each storage shed shall
comply with all Township regulations and
requirements and shall require all applicable
permits. Storage sheds need not be supplied by
the owner of the mobile home park.
b. Recreation Vehicle: Common areas for the
storage of boats, motorcycles, recreation
vehicles, and similar equipment may be provided
by the community owner, but shall be limited to
use only by residents of the manufactured
housing community. If proposed, the location of
such storage areas shall be shown on the
preliminary site plan. No part of any such
storage area shall be located in any required yard
or on the perimeter of the mobile home park.
The placement of the storage area shall be
located internally in the park to help screen it
from adjacent land uses. Such storage area shall
be screened from view from adjacent residential
properties with an opaque wooden fence or a
masonry wall measuring six (6) feet in height
above average grade, or a landscaped greenbelt.
The landscaped greenbelt, if used, shall consist of
closely—spaced evergreen plantings, no less than
fifteen (15) feet apart, and shall provide a
complete visual barrier at least six (6) feet in
height above grade within two (2) years of
planting.
10. Landscaping:
a. Perimeter: Perimeter screening from any
adjacent residential land use shall consist of a
masonry wall or densely planted landscaped
area. If provided, the masonry wall shall
measure six (6) feet in height from the average
grade and shall be placed inside and adjacent to
the lot line. The wall may be setback from the
property line a sufficient distance in the event
that underground utilities would interfere with
the placement of the wall or where the wall
would unreasonably obstruct the use of adjacent
property. The landscaped greenbelt, if used, shall
consist of closely—spaced evergreen plantings,
no less than fifteen (15) feet apart, and shall
provide a complete visual barrier at least six (6)
feet in height above grade within two (2) years of
planting.
b. Road Frontage: A landscaped berm measuring 2
½ to 3 feet in height from the average grade shall
be provided for every lineal foot adjacent to a
right-of-way. The berm shall be constructed with
slopes no steeper than one (1) foot vertical for
each three (3) feet horizontal. Landscaping of
the berm shall include one (1) deciduous tree for
every forty (40) lineal feet of road frontage and
one (1) deciduous or evergreen shrub for every
three (3) lineal feet of road frontage.
c. Homesite: Landscaping shall consist of one (1)
deciduous or evergreen tree for every one (1)
homesite.
d. Parking Area: An interior landscaped area of 10
square feet per parking space shall be provided
CHAPTER 21
Site Plan Review
21-8
for any parking lot, bay, or area within the
community consisting of more than 15 parking
spaces. Landscaped areas shall measure at least
150 square feet and shall include plantings of
grass, ground cover, shrubs or other live plant
material. At least one (1) deciduous tree shall be
planted for each parking landscaped area.
11. Open Space: Each mobile home park in excess of fifty
(50) acres shall include an open space area equal in
size to two percent (2%) of the site. All open space
areas shall be centrally located, well drained, and
accessible to all residents of the community. Up to
twenty-five percent (25%) of the required open space
may consist of wetlands, swamps and similar use
areas.
MOTORIZED/NONMOTORIZED FACILITIES
12. Access: Each community shall have a minimum of
two (2) access roads provided there are more than
twenty (20) homesites. If two (2) access roads are
required, they must meet the spacing requirements
of Chapter 19. The main entrance to the community
shall have access to a public thoroughfare or a
recorded easement meeting the private road
standards with access to a public thoroughfare. The
public thoroughfare shall be connected to a public
collector or arterial road.
13. Internal Roads: All internal roads shall be hardsurfaced
and may be constructed with curbs and
gutters. Internal roads shall be constructed of
materials suitable for subgrades and hard surface in
compliance with the standards of the American
Association of the State Highway and Transportation
Officials (AASTO). All internal roads, walkways,
driveways, and permanent foundations shall be
maintained in such a manner that they are of a sound
and reasonably smooth surface for either walking or
driving. Surfaces shall be maintained reasonably free
of cracks, holes, upheavals, buckling, depressions,
rutting, or channeling of the wearing surface, or
shifting of the pavement base and sub-base, or both.
An adequate clear vision zone shall be provided at
intersections (see Section 4.29 Traffic visibility across
Corners). An offset at an intersection or an
intersection of more than two (2) internal roads is
prohibited. The minimum width of internal roads
shall be no less than twenty-three (23) feet. One-way
traffic shall not be permitted. All entrances to the
community shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet in
width.
14. Parking: All homesites shall be provided with two (2)
parking spaces in accordance with the Manufactured
Housing Commission Rules. One (1) additional
parking space for every three (3) homesites shall be
provided for visitor parking and located convenient to
the area served. Visitor parking shall be counted
separately from those parking spaces required for
employees or community facilities. No unlicensed or
inoperable vehicle of any type shall be parked in this
district at any time except within a covered building.
Parking shall not be permitted in any required
landscaped area.
15. Sidewalks: A three (3) foot wide concrete sidewalk
may be required to be constructed on at least one
side of all internal roads within the manufactured
housing community.
OTHER
16. Lighting: Sufficient lighting shall be provided within a
community in order to promote safe and convenient
movement from all homesites to principal
destinations within the community and connections
to public thoroughfares and walkways. Such lighting
shall meet the standards of Section 19.19.
17. Mailbox Clusters: The United States Postal Service
may require that mobile home parks be served by
clusters of mailboxes serving several homesites
rather than individual mailboxes. If mailbox clusters
are required, they shall be located at least two
hundred (200) feet from any intersection of a mobile
home park internal road and a public road.
18. Sale of Mobile homes: The business of selling new or
used mobile homes as a commercial operation shall
be prohibited after 75% complete occupancy of a
new or expanded mobile home park has been
achieved. Thereafter, new or used mobile homes
located on homesites within the community to be
used and occupied on that site may be sold by a
licensed dealer or broker. This section shall not
prohibit the sale of a used mobile homes by a
resident of the community provided the community
regulations permit such activity.
19. School Bus Stops: School bus stops shall be located
in an area that is acceptable to the school district and
the manufactured housing community developer or
owner.
CHAPTER 21
Site Plan Review
21-9
20. Signs: Any and all such signs provided within the
community shall not exceed a height of five (5) feet
measured from the average grade, and shall be set
back (10) feet from any property line or road right-ofway.
a. Primary entrance: One (1) sign not to exceed an
area of thirty-two (32) square feet, shall be
permitted at the primary access of the
manufactured housing community.
b. Identification: One (1) identification sign not to
exceed an area six (6) square feet shall be
permitted for management offices and
community buildings.
21. Trash Dumpsters: Trash dumpsters, if provided, shall
be located in a location that is clearly accessible to
the servicing vehicle. Each dumpster shall be set back
a minimum of fifty (50) feet from the perimeter of
the mobile home park, and shall be placed at least
fifteen (15) feet from any building within the
community. Dumpsters shall be screened on three
(3) sides with a decorative masonry wall or wood
fencing not less than six (6) feet in height. The fourth
side of the dumpster screen shall be equipped with
an opaque lockable gate not less than six (6) feet in
height. Dumpsters shall be placed on a concrete pad
which shall extend six (6) feet in front of the
dumpster enclosure. Bollards (concrete filled metal
posts) shall be installed at the opening of the
dumpster enclosure to prevent damage to the
screening wall or fence.
22. Utilities:
a. Fuel Oil and Gas: Any fuel oil and gas storage
shall be placed in underground tanks and located
a safe distance from all homesites. All fuel lines
servicing homesites shall be placed underground
and designed in conformance with the
Manufactured Housing Commission Rules and
other applicable local county and state
regulations.
b. Telephone and Electric Service: All telephone,
electric, cable TV, and other lines within the
community shall be placed underground.
23. Water and Sewer Service: All mobile home parks
shall be served by an approved water and sewage
systems which shall meet the requirements of the
County Health Division and the Michigan Department
of Health. The plumbing connections to each
homesite shall be constructed so that all lines are
protected from freezing, accidental bumping, or from
creating any nuisance or health hazard.
24. Storm Drainage: All developed portions of the
mobile home park shall be served by adequate storm
drainage facilities which are designed and
constructed in accordance with applicable local,
county, and state regulations.
25. Skirting and Anchoring: The siding of the home shall
be required to extend to grade. Anchoring of the
mobile home shall comply with sections R125.1604
Rule 604 and R 125.1605 Rule 605 of PA 419 of 1976,
as amended.
26. Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants shall be included in the
site plan of any proposed community whenever
hookups are available (see R 125.1702a Rule 702a(b).
If fire hydrants are available within the community,
then vehicular parking on internal roads is prohibited
within ten (10) feet of a hydrant.
27. Additional Standards: The Planning Commission shall
have the right to impose additional reasonable
conditions to a site plan approval in order to meet
the intent of this ordinance.
Section 21.05.7 Adult Oriented Businesses/
Massage Establishments: (This section amended by Ord. #
5 of 2001)
No Adult Oriented Business/Massage Establishment use
shall be commenced in any district where such use is a
permitted use until and unless the Planning Commission
approves a site plan hereunder, and all standards
contained in this section 21.05.7 are met.
1. An Adult Oriented Business/Massage Establishment
shall only be located on those properties which are
situated west of the I-96 Highway interchange.
2. An Adult Oriented Business/Massage Establishment
shall not be located within a 1000-foot radius of any lot
zoned or occupied for residential purposes, or upon
which is located a school, public park, library, municipal
building, child care facility, or church or place of
worship.
3. An Adult Oriented Business/Massage Establishment
shall not be located within a 1000-foot radius of any
other Adult Oriented Business/Massage Establishment.
4. For the purpose of this Section, the measurement of a
radius shall be measured in a straight line from the
property line of the Adult Oriented Business/Massage
Establishment to the nearest property line of the
CHAPTER 21
Site Plan Review
21-10
residential property, public park, school, municipal
building, child care facility, church or place of worship,
or other Adult Oriented Use/Massage Establishment.
5. An Adult Oriented Business/Massage Establishment
shall not be located in the same structure or on the
same parcel as another Adult Oriented Use/Massage
Establishment.
6. All on-site parking areas shall comply with the
requirements of this Ordinance and additionally shall
be illuminated in compliance with this Ordinance on
any days the business is open from sunset until
closing.
Section 21.06: Review By Planning Commission:
The Township Planning Commission shall review the site
plan to determine compliance with permitted land use,
density of development, general circulation, and other
provisions of this Ordinance. The Planning Commission
shall respond to the site plan within thirty (30) days of
receiving a recommendation by the Planning Department,
and if denied, shall cite reasons for denial. If approved, a
Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be issued to the
applicant by the Planning Department.
Section 21.07: Criteria For Site Plan Approval:
The Planning Commission shall use the following criteria
in evaluating a site plan submittal:
1. Whether the required information has been
furnished in sufficiently complete and
understandable form to allow an accurate description
of the proposed use(s) and structure(s) in terms of
density, location, area, height, bulk, placement,
setbacks, performance characteristics, parking, and
traffic circulation.
2. Whether there are ways in which the configuration of
uses and structures can be changed which would
improve the impact of the development on adjoining
and nearby properties, persons, and activities, and on
the community, while allowing reasonable use of the
property within the scope of district regulations and
other regulations of this Ordinance that are
applicable to the property and proposed use and
structures.
3. The extent to which natural features and
characteristics of the large trees, natural groves,
watercourses, and similar will be preserved; the
regard given to existing natural features that would
add attractiveness to the property and environs if
they were preserved; the preservation of natural
drainage systems the dedication and/or provision,
where appropriate, of scenic easements, natural
buffering, and other techniques for preservation and
enhancement of the physical environment.
Section 21.08: Modification of Approved Site
Plan:
Once site plan approval has been granted by the Planning
Commission, changes to the approved site plan shall
require a resubmission and payment of fee.
Section 21.09: Posting of Financial Guarantee:
The Planning Commission may require a performance
bond letter of credit or certified check in an amount equal
to the estimated cost of road, lighting, utility, sidewalk,
landscaping and drainage improvements associated with
the project. Such performance guarantee shall be
deposited with the Clerk of the Township at the time of
the issuance of the permit authorizing the activity or
project to insure faithful completion of the improvements
indicated with the approved site plan; if not, the
performance guarantee shall be forfeited. The Township
shall rebate a proportional share of cash deposits only
when requested by the depositor, based on the percent of
improvements completed, as attested to by the depositor
and verified by the Planning Director. In cases where the
provisions of this Chapter have not been met, the amount
of the aforementioned performance guarantee shall be
used by the Township to complete the required
improvements; and the balance, if any, shall be returned
to the applicant.
Link to Procedures Manual with
Forms, Applications, and Flowcharts
CHAPTER 22
Nonconforming Uses and Structures
22-1
Section 22.01: Title:
Nonconforming Uses and Situations
Section 22.02: Intent:
Within the zoning districts and special use provisions
established by this Ordinance, there exist lots, structures,
and uses of land and structures which were lawful, either
as conforming or nonconforming uses before this
Ordinance was effective, but which would now be
prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this
Ordinance. It is the intent of this Chapter to permit these
nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but
not to encourage their continuance. The purpose of this
Chapter is that nonconformities shall not be enlarged,
expanded or extended, or be used as grounds for adding
other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same
zoning district, except by approval from the Zoning Board
of Appeals. It is further intended that such uses are
declared to be incompatible with the permitted uses in
the zoning district involved.
Section 22.03: Extension or Enlargement of
Nonconforming Situations:
1. Except as specifically provided in this Chapter, no
person may engage in any activity that causes an
increase in the extent of nonconformity of a
nonconforming situation. In particular, physical
alteration of structures or the placement of new
structures on open land is unlawful if such activity
results in:
a. An increase in the total amount of space devoted
to a nonconforming use, or
b. Greater nonconformity with respect to
dimensional restrictions such as setback
requirements, height limitations or density
requirements or other requirements such as
parking.
2. A nonconforming use may be extended throughout
any portion of a completed building that was
manifestly designed or arranged to accommodate
such use when the use was made nonconforming by
this Ordinance. However, subject to Section 22.07
(Authorizing the Completion of Nonconforming
Projects in Certain Circumstances), a nonconforming
use may not be extended to additional buildings or to
land outside the original building.
3. Subject to Section 22.07 (Authorizing the Completion
of Nonconforming Projects in Certain Circumstances),
a nonconforming use of open land may not be
extended to cover more land than was occupied by
that use when it became nonconforming.
Section 22.04: Repair and Maintenance of
Nonconforming Property: (Ord No 8of 2011; 6/23/11)
1. On any building or structure devoted in whole or in
part to any nonconforming use, repair and
maintenance work may be made provided that the
cubic content of the building or structure as it existed
at the time of adoption of this Ordinance is not
increased.
2. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to prevent
the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of
any building or structure or part thereof declared to
be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the
public safety, upon order of such official.
3. Nonconforming uses or structures shall not be
reestablished in their nonconforming condition in any
zoning district after damage or destruction of the
nonconforming use or structure if the estimated
expense of reconstruction exceeds sixty (60%)
percent of the appraised replacement cost of the use
or entire building or structure, with an exception for
existing Automobile Service Stations and Mini-Food-
Mart Stations with related automotive parts repair
shops, garages and vehicle wash facilities in the B-1
district.
4. The estimated expense of reconstruction shall be
determined by the Township Building Inspector, upon
advice from the Township Assessor. Persons
aggrieved by the determination of estimated
replacement cost by the Building Inspector may
appeal such determination to the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
CHAPTER 22
Nonconforming Uses and Structures
22-2
Section 22.05: Change in Use of Property
Where a Nonconforming Situation Exists:
1. A change in use of property (where a nonconforming
situation exists) that is sufficiently substantial to
require a new zoning or special use permit may not
be made except in accordance with Subsections
22.05(2) through 22.05(4) below.
2. If the intended change in use is to a principal use that
is permissible in the district where the property is
located, and all of the other requirements of this
Ordinance applicable to that use can be complied
with, permission to make the change must be
obtained in the same manner as permission to make
the initial use of a vacant lot. Once conformity with
this Ordinance is achieved, the property may not
revert to its nonconforming status.
3. If the intended change in use is to a principal use that
is permissible in the zoning district where the
property is located, but all of the requirements of this
Ordinance applicable to that use cannot be
reasonably complied with, then the change is
permissible if the Zoning Board of Appeals issues a
variance authorizing the change. This variance may
be issued if the Zoning Board of Appeals finds that:
a. The intended change will not result in a violation
of Section 22.03, above, and
b. All of the applicable requirements of this
Ordinance that can reasonably be complied with
will be complied with. Financial hardship caused
by the cost of meeting such requirements does
not constitute grounds for finding that
compliance is not reasonably possible. In no case
shall an applicant be given permission pursuant
to this Subsection to construct a building or add
to an existing building if additional
nonconformities would thereby be created.
4. If the intended change in use is to another principal
use that is also nonconforming, then the change is
permissible if the Zoning Board of Appeals issues a
variance authorizing the change. The Zoning Board of
Appeals may issue the variance if it finds that:
a. All of the conditions applicable to the permit
authorized in Subsection 22.05(3.B), above, are
satisfied, and
b. The proposed development will have less of an
adverse impact on those most affected by it and
will be more compatible with the surrounding
neighborhood than the use in operation at the
time the permit is applied for.
Section 22.06: Abandonment and
Discontinuance of a Nonconforming Use or
Nonconforming Situation:
1. When a nonconforming use is discontinued for a
consecutive period of 180 days or discontinued for
any period of time without the intention to reinstate
the nonconforming use, the property involved may
thereafter be used only for conforming purposes.
2. If the principal activity on property where a
nonconforming situation (e.g. dimensional
nonconformity) exists is discontinued for a
consecutive period of 180 days or discontinued for
any period of time without the intention of resuming
that activity, then the subject property may
thereafter be used only in conformity with the zoning
regulations applicable to the zoning district in which
the subject property is located. The Zoning Board of
Appeals may grant a variance to the subject property
to be used without correcting the nonconforming
situation if the Zoning Board of Appeals finds that
eliminating a particular nonconformity is not
reasonably possible. The variance shall specify which
nonconformities need not be corrected.
3. When a structure or operation made nonconforming
by this Ordinance is vacant or discontinued at the
effective date of this Ordinance, the 180 day period
for purposes of this Chapter begins to run on the
effective date of this Ordinance.
Section 22.07: Completion of Nonconforming
Projects:
1. All nonconforming projects on which construction
was begun at least 180 days before the effective date
of this Ordinance as well as all nonconforming
projects that are at least twenty (20%) percent
completed in terms of the total expected cost of the
poject on the effective date of this Ordinance may be
completed in accordance with the terms of their
permits, so long as these permits were validly issued
and remain unrevoked and unexpired. If a
development is designed to be completed in stages,
this Subsection shall apply only to the particular
phase under construction.
CHAPTER 22
Nonconforming Uses and Structures
22-3
2. All work on any nonconforming project that is less
than twenty (20%) percent completed in terms of the
total expected cost of the project on the effective
date of this Ordinance shall cease. Work on the
nonconforming project may begin or may be
continued only pursuant to a vested rights
determination issued in accordance with this Section
by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall issue such a
determination only if it finds that the applicant has in
good faith made substantial expenditures or incurred
substantial binding obligations upon reliance on the
land use law (e.g. zoning and planning) as it existed
before the effective date of this Ordinance and would
be unreasonably burdened if not allowed to complete
the project as proposed.
Section 22.08: Nonconforming Lots of Record:
In any zoning district in which single-family dwellings are
permitted, notwithstanding other limitations imposed by
other provisions of this Chapter, a single-family dwelling
and customary accessory building may be erected on any
single lot of record after the effective date of this
Ordinance, subject to the following conditions:
1. Lot coverage by said dwelling and accessory building
shall not exceed twenty-five (25%) percent;
2. Height of the structure shall not exceed thirty-five
(35) feet. The height will be measured as provided in
Section 4.14 of this Ordinance;
3. Side yards may be reduced by the same percentage
that the area of such lots bears to its own district
requirements, provided each side yard in no instance
shall be less than five (5) feet; and
4. If two (2) or more lots or combination of lots and
portions of lots with continuous frontage in single
ownership are of record at the time of passage of this
Ordinance or at anytime thereafter, such lots and
parts of lots shall be used so as to meet the
requirements for lot width and area, unless a
variance is granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Section 22.09: Elimination of Nonconforming
Uses, Structures or Situations:
In accordance with Section 208 of the Michigan Zoning
Enabling Act (MCLA 125.3208 et. seq.), as amended, the
Township may acquire private property by purchase,
condemnation or otherwise for removal of
nonconforming uses, structures or situations, provided
the elimination of such nonconformity is declared to be
for a public purpose and for a public use.
Intentionally left blank
CHAPTER 23
Administrative Procedures
(Amended by Ord No 7 of 2006; 9/13/06)
1 23-1
Section 23.01 Title:
Administrative Procedures of the Planning Commission
and Zoning Board of Appeals
Section 23.02 Establishment of the Planning
Commission and the Zoning Board of Appeals:
1. Planning Commission - Pursuant to Section 301
(MCLA 125.3301 et. seq.) of the Michigan Zoning
Enabling Act, as amended, Cascade Charter Township
has transferred all zoning powers and duties provided
in the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (PA 110 of 2006),
as amended, to the Cascade Charter Township
Planning Commission. The Planning Commission is
hereby established in accordance with the Michigan
Zoning Enabling Act (PA 110 of 2006), and the
Michigan Planning Enabling Act (Public Act 33 of
2008) to undertake all planning and zoning activities
within Cascade Charter Township.
2. Zoning Board of Appeals - The Zoning Board of
Appeals is hereby established in accordance with the
Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (PA 110 of 2006), as
amended, to act upon all questions as they may arise
in the administration of this Zoning Ordinance,
including the interpretation of the Cascade Charter
Township Zoning Map.
Section 23.03 Membership and Terms of
Office:
1. Membership:
a. Planning Commission – The Planning
Commission shall consist of nine (9) members
who shall be representative of Township
population and of the major interests present in
the Township. All members shall be residents
and qualified voters within Cascade Charter
Township. One (1) member of the Township
Board shall be a member of the Planning
Commission. The Township Board member’s
term of service shall be concurrent with his/her
service on the Township Board.
b. Zoning Board of Appeals – The Zoning Board of
Appeals shall consist of five (5) members and two
(2) alternate members who shall be
representative of the Township population and
the major interests present in the Township. All
members shall be residents and qualified voters
within Cascade Charter Township. One (1)
member of the Township Board may be a
member of the Zoning Board of Appeals and one
(1) member of the Planning Commission shall be
a member of the Zoning Board of Appeals, with
their term of service running concurrent with
his/her service on their respective board (i.e.,
other than the Zoning Board of Appeals). The
Township Supervisor may appoint up to two (2)
alternate members for the same term as regular
members to the Zoning Board of Appeals, upon
approval by the Township Board. An alternate
member may be called as specified to serve as a
member of the Zoning Board of Appeals in the
absence of a regular member if the regular
member will be unable to attend one (1) or more
meetings. An alternate member may also be
called to serve as a member for the purpose of
reaching a decision in which the member has
abstained for reasons of conflict of interest. The
alternate member appointed shall serve in the
case until a final decision is made. The alternate
member has the same voting rights as a regular
member of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
2. Terms: (Amended by Ord. No 4 of 2011; 5/11/2011)
a. Members of the Planning Commission or Zoning
Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the
Township Supervisor with approval by the
Township Board.
b. The term of each member shall be for three (3)
years.
c. Planning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals
members shall be appointed with staggered
terms, but members may continue to serve until
their successors have been appointed.
3. Vacancies: In the event that a member of the
Planning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals can
no longer serve because of health or any other
reason, the Township Supervisor may appoint, upon
Township Board approval, another person to the
Planning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals for
that unexpired term. Should the unexpired term be
two (2) years or longer, it shall be considered as a full
term.
If a Planning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals
member moves outside of the jurisdictional
boundaries of the Township, that shall constitute an
automatic resignation from the Planning Commission
or Zoning Board of Appeals and shall be effective
CHAPTER 23
Administrative Procedures
(Amended by Ord No 7 of 2006; 9/13/06)
2 23-2
upon the date a replacement is appointed by the
Township Supervisor and approved by the Township
Board.
4. Member Absence: In the event that a member
cannot attend a meeting, they shall call and inform
the Recording Secretary before 5:00 p.m. the day of
the meeting, so that they can be excused from the
meeting.
Should a member have three (3) or more consecutive
unexcused absences from regularly scheduled
meetings or miss at least fifty (50) percent or more of
all meetings within any twelve (12) month period, it
shall constitute a reasonable ground for removal. To
initiate this action, the chairman shall prepare a
memorandum requesting that member to resign.
The memorandum of attendance or a letter of
resignation shall be forwarded to the Township
Supervisor, with a request that an appointment be
made to fill any vacancy.
5. Removal:
a. Reason for Removal - Members of the Planning
Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals may be
removed by the Township Board for misfeasance,
malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon
written charges and after a public hearing. A
member shall disqualify himself or herself from a
vote in which the member has a conflict of
interest. Failure of a member to disqualify
himself or herself from a vote in which the
member has a conflict of interest constitutes
malfeasance in office.
b. Conflict of Interest - A member may be excused
from voting on a particular issue by majority vote
of the remaining members present for reasons of
a conflict of interest if:
1) The member has a direct financial interest in
the outcome of the matter at issue;
2) The matter at issue involves the member's
business or place of employment;
3) Participation in the matter might violate the
letter or spirit of a member's code of
professional responsibility;
4) The member has such close personal ties to
the applicant that the member cannot
reasonably be expected to exercise sound
judgment in the public interest; or
5) Participation would violate a rule or
regulation adopted by the body involved.
Section 23.04 Officers, Procedural Matters,
Meetings, Quorum, Voting and Records:
1. Officers and Duties: The Planning Commission and
Zoning Board of Appeals shall elect a chairman, vicechairman,
and a secretary from its members. No
member of the Township Board shall be an officer of
the Planning Commission or the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
The term of each officer shall be one (1) year or until
their successor(s) are selected and assume office.
The term of each officer shall not extend for more
than two (2) consecutive one-year terms. The
election of officers shall take place at the first
meeting in January. The Planning Commission shall
elect its officers by a majority vote of the members
present at the time of election at a meeting where a
quorum is present. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall
elect officers by a majority vote of the permanent
membership. Alternate Zoning Board of Appeals
members may not participate in nominations or the
electing of officers. (Section 23.04 amended by Ordinance #2
of 2000)
The chairman shall preside at all meetings, appoint
committees subject to Planning Commission or
Zoning Board of Appeals approval, retain voting and
discussion privileges, and perform such other duties
as may be ordered by the Planning Commission or
Zoning Board of Appeals.
The vice-chairman shall act in the capacity of the
chairman in his/her absence. In the event the office
of the chairman becomes vacant, the vice-chairman
shall succeed to this office for the unexpired term and
the Planning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals
shall select a successor to the office of vice-chairman
for the unexpired term. The vice-chairman may also
serve as the secretary.
The secretary shall execute documents in the name of
the Planning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals
and perform such other duties as the Planning
Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals may
determine. The Planning Director shall serve as the
recording secretary, shall be responsible for the
minutes of each meeting, and shall have them
recorded in suitable volumes available at the Cascade
Charter Township Hall.
CHAPTER 23
Administrative Procedures
(Amended by Ord No 7 of 2006; 9/13/06)
3 23-3
2. Procedural Matters:
a. The Recording Secretary shall prepare an agenda
for each meeting and whenever feasible, the
agenda for each meeting shall be made available
to the public in advance of the meeting.
b. Parliamentary procedure at Planning Commission
or Zoning Board of Appeals meetings shall be
governed by Robert's Rules of Order.
3. Meetings:
a. Planning Commission - Meetings of the Planning
Commission shall be held on the first and third
Mondays of each month at a time and place to
be determined by the Recording Secretary,
unless canceled or rescheduled by the Planning
Commission. When the regular meeting day falls
on a legal holiday, the Planning Commission may
select a suitable alternate day in accordance with
the Michigan Open Meetings Act. At the
Planning Commission's first meeting in
December, the Recording Secretary shall submit
to the Planning Commission a proposed meeting
schedule for the upcoming year. At this meeting,
the schedule shall be approved as submitted or
amended to reflect the changes directed by the
Planning Commission.
Special meetings may be called at the request of
any member of the Planning Commission or upon
request by the Recording Secretary.
All meetings, subcommittee meetings, hearings,
records and accounts shall be open to the public
in accordance with the Michigan Freedom of
Information Act and the Michigan Open
Meetings Act.
b. Zoning Board of Appeals - Meetings of the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held on the
second Tuesday of each month at a time and
place to be determined by the Recording
Secretary, unless canceled or rescheduled by the
Zoning Board of Appeals. When the regular
meeting day falls on a legal holiday, the Zoning
Board of Appeals may select a suitable alternate
day in accordance with the Michigan Open
Meetings Act. At the Zoning Board of Appeals
meeting in December, the Recording Secretary
shall submit to the Zoning Board of Appeals a
proposed meeting schedule for the upcoming
year. At this meeting, the schedule shall be
approved as submitted or amended to reflect the
changes directed by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Special meetings may be called at the request of
any member or upon request by the Recording
Secretary.
All meetings, subcommittee meetings, hearings,
records and accounts shall be open to the public
in accordance with the Michigan Freedom of
Information Act and the Michigan Open
Meetings Act.
4. Quorum:
a. Planning Commission - A quorum shall consist of
a majority of the Planning Commission
membership excluding vacant seats.
Official action of all matters before the Planning
Commission shall be taken by a concurring vote
of a majority of the quorum. Whenever a
quorum is not present at a meeting, those
present may adjourn the meeting to another
meeting date or hold the meeting for the
purpose of hearing citizen comments or
testimony regarding scheduled agenda items. In
no case shall an official action be taken without a
quorum.
b. Zoning Board of Appeals - A quorum shall consist
of at least three (3) members. Official action of
all matters before the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall be taken by a concurring vote of three (3) or
more members of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
5. Voting:
a. Planning Commission -
1) The majority vote of the quorum present
shall be required to render a decision of
approval on any matter of this Ordinance
which requires action by the Planning
Commission.
2) In the event that a decision of approval is
not obtained or in the event that the vote
results in a tie, then the matter being
considered shall be deemed to have been
denied.
b. Zoning Board of Appeals - The concurring vote of
at least three (3) members of the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall be required to reverse any
requirement, decision or determination made by
the Planning Director, or grant a variance from
the requirements of this Ordinance.
CHAPTER 23
Administrative Procedures
(Amended by Ord No 7 of 2006; 9/13/06)
4 23-4
c. Voting Procedures -
1) Motions before the Planning Commission or
Zoning Board of Appeals may be restated by
the chairman before a vote is taken. The
name of the person making the motion and
its supporter shall be recorded.
2) Voting shall be by voice vote. All motions or
resolutions resulting in Township
expenditures shall be by a roll call vote. All
members present are required to vote
unless excused for reasons of a conflict of
interest, as noted in Section 23.03(5)(b).
3) Action by the Planning Commission or
Zoning Board of Appeals on any matter for
which a public hearing is required shall not
be taken until the public has had the
reasonable opportunity to address the
Planning Commission or Zoning Board of
Appeals.
4) A member may be allowed to withdraw from
the entire remainder of a meeting by
majority vote of the remaining members
present for any good and sufficient reason
other than the member's desire to avoid
voting on matters to be considered at the
meeting. A motion to allow a member to be
excused from voting or excused from the
remainder of the meeting is in order only if
made by or at the initiative of the member
directly affected.
Section 23.05 Functions, Considerations -
Decisions, and Authority of the Planning
Commission:
The Planning Commission serves a dual role as the
planning advisory board and the zoning advisory board of
the Township.
1. Functions:
a. Planning Duties - The Planning Commission shall
have the following prescribed local planning
activities and responsibilities:
1) The conduct of the Township's
comprehensive planning program;
2) Preparation of the comprehensive plan.
3) Monitor and oversee the effectiveness and
status of the comprehensive plan and
recommend to the Township Board such
changes in the Comprehensive Plan as may
from time to time be required;
4) Review proposed land development
regulations, or amendments thereto, and
make recommendations to the Township
Board as to consistency of the proposal with
the adopted comprehensive plan; and
5) Perform any other functions, duties and
responsibilities which may be assigned to it
by the Township Board or general or special
ordinance or statute.
b. Zoning and Development Review Duties - The
Planning Commission shall have the following
prescribed duties and responsibilities:
1) Initiate studies and prepare
recommendations for changes or
amendments relating to the boundaries of
the various zoning districts or to the
regulations applicable thereto, to the
Township Board.
2) Make recommendations on the following to
the Township Board regarding:
i. Applications for rezonings, including
Planned Unit Developments.
ii. Applications for Special Use Permits that
meet the requirements of Chapter 15 of
this Ordinance.
3) Make recommendations to the Township
Board regarding the following types of
development:
i. Regarding applications for subdivision
plats pursuant to the Cascade Charter
Township Subdivision Ordinance.
ii. Regarding applications for lot splits of
subdivision lots pursuant to the Cascade
Charter Township Subdivision
Ordinance.
iii. Regarding all other development
reviews which the Township Board or
ordinance assigns to the Planning
Commission.
2. Considerations - Decisions: In addition to the
applicable standards contained in this Ordinance, the
Planning Commission shall consider the following
whenever making recommendations:
a. Whether there exists an error or ambiguity which
must be corrected;
CHAPTER 23
Administrative Procedures
(Amended by Ord No 7 of 2006; 9/13/06)
5 23-5
b. Whether there exists changed or changing
conditions or circumstances which make
approval of a proposed Zoning Ordinance
amendment or rezoning appropriate;
c. The impact of a proposed change on the intent of
this Zoning Ordinance;
d. The testimony of any applicant;
e. The recommendation of Township Staff;
f. The testimony of the public;
g. Whether a proposed land use change is
consistent with the goals, objectives, policies,
and intent of the Cascade Township General
Development Plan;
h. Whether a proposed land use change meets or
exceeds all performance and locational standards
set forth for the proposed use;
i. Whether a proposed land use change is
consistent with the densities, intensities, and
general uses set forth in the Cascade Township
General Development Plan;
j. Whether a proposed land use change will
protect, conserve or preserve environmentally
critical areas and natural resources;
k. Whether a proposed land use change will be
compatible with existing or planned uses and not
cause damage, hazard, nuisance, or other
detriment to persons or property;
l. Whether the location of a proposed land use
change places an undue burden upon existing
transportation or other services and facilities and
will be served by streets with the capacity to
carry traffic generated by the development;
m. Whether a requested use will be in compliance
with all applicable General Provisions and Special
Use Regulations pertaining to the use, as set
forth elsewhere in this Ordinance; and
n. Whether a change is proposed in order to rectify
errors on the Official Zoning Map.
Section 23.06 Public Hearing Notice
Requirements for the Planning Commission:
1. Rezoning, Special Use Permit and Planned Unit
Development Requests – Public Hearing Notice to
Surrounding Properties:
In accordance with the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act
(PA 110 of 2006), as amended, the Planning
Department shall send by mail or personal delivery a
public hearing notice of a rezoning, special use or
planned unit development request as specified in
Section 23.09 hereof.
2. Publication of Public Hearing Notices:
Publication of public hearing notices for rezonings,
special uses, and planned unit developments shall
follow the requirements of Section 23.09 hereof.
Section 23.07 Functions, Considerations -
Decisions and Authority of the Zoning Board of
Appeals:
1. Appeals From Administrative Action:
a. Function - The Zoning Board of Appeals shall
hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that
there is an error in any requirement, decision,
interpretation, determination or action of any
administrative official charged with the
administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this Ordinance, provided that:
1) No appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall lie from any act by such administrative
official pursuant to:
i. A resolution or directive of the
Township Board directing him/her to
perform such act; or
ii. Any procedure or other requirement of
this Ordinance.
2) The appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall be in writing on forms provided by the
Township, and shall be duly filed with the
Planning Department within thirty (30)
calendar days (but not thereafter) of such
act or decision by the administrative official.
The appeal shall specify the grounds for the
appeal.
CHAPTER 23
Administrative Procedures
(Amended by Ord No 7 of 2006; 9/13/06)
6 23-6
3) No appeal shall be considered by the Zoning
Board of Appeals where it appears to be a
circumvention of an established or required
procedure.
b. Considerations
1) In reaching its decision and in addition to
any standards specified in this Ordinance,
the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider
the following criteria as well as any other
issues which are pertinent and reasonable:
i. Whether or not the appeal is of a nature
properly brought to them for decision,
or whether or not there is an
established procedure for handling the
request other than through the appeal
process (i.e., a variance or Special Use,
etc.).
ii. The intent of the Ordinance.
iii. The effect the ruling will have when
applied generally to this Ordinance.
2) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider
Staff recommendations, the testimony of the
applicant and testimony of the general
public.
c. Decision and Authority - The Zoning Board of
Appeals may reverse, affirm, or modify any
decision or action of any administrative official
charged with the administration or enforcement
of this Ordinance. In order to reverse any
decision or action of such administrative official,
the concurring vote of at least three (3) members
of the Board shall be necessary.
2. Variances:
a. Function - The Zoning Board of Appeals shall
hear and decide all requests for variances (except
use variances) from the terms of the regulations
or restrictions of this Ordinance.
b. Nonconforming use of neighboring lands,
structures, or buildings in the same zoning
district, or permitted use of lands, structures, or
buildings in other zoning districts shall not be
considered grounds for granting a variance.
c. Findings - Before granting any variance, the
Zoning Board of Appeals must find that all of the
following standards are met:
1) That there are exceptional or extraordinary
conditions or circumstances that are
inherent to the property in question and
that do not apply generally to the other
nearby properties in the same zoning
district;
2) That the exceptional or extraordinary
conditions or circumstances are not the
result of actions of the applicant (or the
applicant’s predecessors) taken subsequent
to the adoption of this Ordinance;
3) That such variance is the minimum variance
that will make possible the reasonable use of
the land, building, or structure;
4) That the granting of the variance will not be
injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise
detrimental to the public welfare;
5) That the condition or situation of the specific
piece of property for which the variance is
sought is not of so general or recurrent
nature as to make it more reasonable and
practical to amend the Ordinance; and
6) That complying with the Ordinance presents
practical difficulty.
d. Decisions and Authority
1) The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant or
deny, wholly or partly, any request for a
variance from the regulations or restrictions
of this Ordinance; provided, however, that
no use variance shall be applied for, heard,
or granted.
2) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the
authority to attach such conditions and
requirements to the granting of a variance as
are reasonably necessary for the protection
of the health, safety, comfort, convenience,
and welfare of the general public. Such
conditions or requirements shall be
reasonably related to the variance granted.
3) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and
decide only those matters which it is
specifically authorized to hear by statute and
this Ordinance and decide as provided
herein.
4) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not alter
or change the zoning district classification of
any property, or make any change in the
definitions or terms of this Ordinance, and
shall not take any action which results, in
effect, in making such legislative changes.
CHAPTER 23
Administrative Procedures
(Amended by Ord No 7 of 2006; 9/13/06)
7 23-7
e. Voiding of a Reapplication for a Variance
1) Each variance granted under the provisions
of this Ordinance shall become null and
voice unless the construction, occupancy or
other actions authorized by such variance
have substantially commenced within one
(1) year of granting such variances, and is
pursued diligently to completion. For the
purpose of this Section, the commencement
of construction for a building shall be the
time at which a building foundation is
installed.
2) No application for a variance which has been
denied wholly or in part by the Zoning Board
of Appeals shall be resubmitted, except on
grounds of new evidence of proof of
changed conditions found.
3. Appeal of Variances:
A decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
final. However, an aggrieved party may appeal to the
circuit court.
4. Temporary Uses:
Pursuance to Section 4.18(4) of this Ordinance, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the authority to
review and approve requests for temporary uses.
Section 23.08: Public Hearing Notice
Requirements for the Zoning Board of Appeals
1. Mailed or Delivered Notices – The Planning
Department shall send by mail or personal delivery a
notice of public hearing for a variance or zoning
ordinance interpretation request as specified in
Section 23.09 hereof.
2. Publication of Public Hearing Notes: The publication
of a notice for a public hearing for a variance or
zoning ordinance interpretation as specified in
Section 23.09 hereof.
Section 23.09 Public Notices – Publication,
Mailing, and Delivery
Except where expressly stated otherwise in this
Ordinance, whenever a public hearing on a zoning
application or matter is required by this Ordinance or by
the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, as amended, notice of
the public hearing shall be published and delivered in
accordance with the requirements of this Section.
1. The notice shall be published once, at least 15 days
prior to the date of the public hearing, in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Township.
2. For applications involving the rezoning of ten (10) or
fewer adjacent properties; for applications to the
Zoning Board of Appeals involving a specific parcel;
and for all planned unit development and special use
applications, a notice of public hearing shall be
mailed by way of U.S. first class mail or be personally
delivered to the following persons, at least 15 days
prior to the date of the public hearing:
a. The applicant;
b. All persons to whom real property is assessed for
property tax purposes within 300 feet of the
property that is the subject to the application; and
c. The occupants of all structures within 300 feet of
the property that is the subject of the application.
If the above-described 300-foot radius extends
outside of the Township’s boundaries, then notice
must be provided outside of the Township
boundaries, within the 300-foot radius, to all
persons in the above-stated categories.
3. The notice of the public hearing shall include the
following information:
a. A description of the nature of the application or
request.
b. An identification of the property that is the
subject of the application or request. The notice
shall also include a listing of all existing street
addresses within the property; provided,
however, that street addresses do not need to be
created and listed if no such addresses currently
exist within the property; and provided further
that street addresses do not need to be listed if
eleven (11) or more adjacent properties are
being proposed for rezoning.
c. A statement of where and when the application
or request will be considered.
d. Indicate where and when written comments will
be received concerning the application or
request.
Intentionally left blank
CHAPTER 24
Zoning Ordinance Enforcement
24-1
Section 24.01 Title:
Zoning Ordinance Enforcement (Amended by Ordinance 20 of
1995)
Section 24.02 Enforcement Procedures:
1. Enforcement - The Planning Director shall administer
and enforce the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
The Planning Director is authorized to employ
assistants and agents to aid him or her in the
enforcement and administration of this Zoning
Ordinance.
2. Violations -Any person who violates any provision of
this Zoning Ordinance is responsible for a municipal
civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of
not less than $50.00 or more than $500.00, plus costs
and other sanctions, for each infraction. Every day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
a. Repeat Offenses. Repeat offenses under this
Ordinance shall be subject to increased fines as
provided below. As used herein, "repeat
offense" means a second (or any subsequent)
municipal civil infraction violation of any
provision of this Zoning Ordinance committed by
a person within any one (1) year period and for
which the person admits responsibility or is
determined to be responsible. The increased
fine for repeat offenses shall be as follows:
1) The fine for any offense which is a first
repeat offense shall be not less than
$500.00, plus costs.
2) The fine for any offense which is a second
repeat offense or any subsequent repeat
offense shall be not less than $750.00, plus
costs.
b. Persons Chargeable With a Violation. Persons
chargeable with a violation of the Zoning
Ordinance and subject to being responsible for a
municipal civil infraction may include the
following:
1) The owner, agent, lessee, tenant, contractor
or any other person using or having control
of the land, building or premises where such
violation has been committed or shall exist;
2) Any person who knowingly commits, aids
and abets, takes part or assists in any such
violation; or
3) Any person who owns or maintains any land,
building, or premise on which such violation
shall exist.
3. Civil Remedies - In addition to the municipal civil
infraction remedies provided above, the violation of
any provision of this Zoning Ordinance may be legally
enjoined and otherwise abated in any manner
provided by law.
4. Administrative Remedies
a. Cease and Desist Orders - The Planning Director
shall have the authority to issue a cease and
desist order in the form of a written notice for
the violation of any provision of this Zoning
Ordinance. A cease and desist order may be
issued to any person referred to in Section 2 (b)
hereof. Such cease and desist order shall
become effective once it has been posted on the
property where the violation has occurs and a
copy of the notice has been sent to the person
involved by first class mail at the person's last
known address. Once a cease and desist order is
effective, any use or work done in violation of
the Zoning Ordinance shall stop immediately and
shall not be recommenced until the Planning
Director issues a written notice dissolving the
cease and desist order. Any person who violates
a cease and desist order shall be responsible for
a municipal civil infraction as authorized above.
Any decision of the Planning Director regarding a
cease and desist order may be appealed to the
Zoning Board of Appeals. A cease and desist
order shall be in addition to the other violation
penalties and remedies provided in this Chapter.
b. Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy
1) Development requiring site plan review or
any other type of zoning review approval
under the authority of this Ordinance shall
not receive a building permit until it has
received the necessary Township approvals
and a Certificate of Zoning Compliance from
the Planning Department.
2) Issuance - No building permit or Certificate
of Occupancy shall be issued by the Building
Inspector unless there is compliance with
this Ordinance and other applicable
ordinances and laws, decisions of the
Planning Commission, Zoning Board of
Appeals, Township Board or court decisions.
CHAPTER 24
Zoning Ordinance Enforcement
24-2
3) Revocation - The Building Inspector may
revoke a Building Permit or Certificate of
Occupancy in those cases where an
administrative determination has been
duly made that false statements or
misrepresentations existed as to
material fact(s) in the application or
plans upon which the permit of approval
was based.
4) Suspension - The Building Inspector may
suspend a Building Permit or Certificate
of Occupancy where an administrative
determination has been duly made that
an error or omission on either the part
of the permit applicant or government
agency existed in the issuance of the
permit or certificate. A new permit or
certificate shall be issued in place of the
incorrect permit or certificate after
correction of the error or omission.
5) Notice and Appeal - All Building
Inspector decisions concerning the
issuance, revocation, or suspension of
Building Permits and Certificates of
Occupancy pursuant to this Ordinance
shall be stated in a written notice to the
permit applicant. Any decision of the
Building Inspector with regards to this
Ordinance may be appealed to the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
CHAPTER 25
Amendments
25-1
Section 25.01 Title:
Amendments
Section 25.02 Initiating Amendments:
The Township Board may amend, modify, supplement, or
revise the provisions of this Ordinance upon its own
initiative, or by formal request from the Planning
Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals or by one or more
property owners of Cascade Charter Township. A
proposed amendment shall be referred to the Planning
Commission for public hearing and recommendation
before action may be taken by the Township Board.
Section 25.03 Amendment Fees:
The Township Board shall establish an amendment fee.
The fee shall be of a reasonable amount that will cover
advertising and administrative costs necessary to process
the application. The fee shall be paid in full at the time of
application and no part of the fee shall be returnable to
the petitioner. Fee requirements may be waived at the
discretion of the Township Board.
Section 25.04 Amendment Procedures:
1. The procedure for amending this Ordinance is
governed by the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (MCLA
125.3401 et. seq.), as amended.
2. A signed and complete application form, together with
the application fee for the amendment shall be filed
with the Planning Department. The Department shall
review the application as to proper form and content,
and transmit it to the Planning Commission for review.
3. The Planning Commission shall direct the Planning
Department to establish a date for public hearing(s) on
the application and to give proper legal notice as
required by Section 23.06 of this Ordinance.
4. The Planning Department shall send written notice of
proposed amendment to any adjacent municipality
and to any school district affected by a proposed
amendment.
Section 25.05 Conformance to Court Decree:
An amendment for the purpose of conforming to a
provision of a decree of a court of competent jurisdiction
shall be adopted by the Township Board and the
amendment published without referring it to any other
board or agency.
Intentionally left blank
CHAPTER 26
Severability Conflict
26-1
Section 26.01 Title:
Severability Conflict with Other Ordinances and
Codification
Section 26.02 Severability:
The provisions of this Ordinance are severable and it is
the intention of the Cascade Charter Township Board to
confer the whole or any part of the powers herein
provided. If any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall
be held unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, the decision of such court shall not affect or
impair any remaining provisions of this Ordinance. It is
hereby declared to be the legislative intent of the
Township Board that this Ordinance would have been
adopted had such unconstitutional provisions not be
included therein.
Section 26.03 Conflict with Other Ordinances:
To the extent that any other Ordinance regulates the
subject matter regulated by this Ordinance, the
Ordinances shall be construed together, if possible, and
the remedies of the Ordinance shall be cumulative.
Where the provisions of any other Ordinance conflict
with the provisions of this Ordinance, this Ordinance
shall prevail and its terms shall control. If any part of this
Ordinance conflicts with any other part, it shall be
administratively appealed to the Township Board for a
final determination of intent. The remainder of the
Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.
Section 26.04 Codification:
It is the intention of the Township Board that the
provisions of this Ordinance shall become and be made a
part of a Cascade Charter Township Development Code;
and that sections of this Ordinance may be renumbered
or relettered and the word "ordinance" may be changed
to "section," "article," or such other appropriate word or
phrase in order to accomplish such intentions; and
regardless of whether such inclusion in the Code is
accomplished, sections of this Ordinance may be
renumbered or relettered, and typographical errors
which do not affect the intent, may be corrected by the
Township Board without need of Public Hearing, by filing
a corrected or recodified copy of same with the
Township Clerk and publishing such changes in a
newspaper of general distribution within the Township
within fifteen (15) days of such authorization.
Intentionally left blank
CHAPTER 27
Repeal of Prior Zoning Ordinance
27-1
Section 27.01 Title:
Repeal of Prior Zoning Ordinance
The Cascade Charter Township Board does hereby repeal
that certain Zoning Ordinance, effective January 3, 1989,
and all amendments thereto; provided, however, that any
and all PUD, Planned Unit Developments under the prior
ordinance are not repealed and shall remain in full force
and effect.
Intentionally left blank
CHAPTER 28
Effective Date
28-1
Section 28.01 Title:
Effective Date
This Ordinance shall become effective on January 29,
2013. This Ordinance was published in synopsis form
on January 22, 2013, in the Grand Rapids Press, a
newspaper of general circulation in Cascade Charter
Township.
The foregoing Ordinance was offered by Member
Lewis, supported by Member Koessel, the vote being
as follows:
YEAS: Koessel, Lewis, Peirce, Goodyke,
Goldberg, Janes, Beahan
NAYS: None
ABSENT: None
______________________________
Ron Goodyke
Cascade Charter Township Clerk
CERTIFICATION
I hereby certify the foregoing to be a true copy of an
Ordinance adopted at a Regular Meeting of the
Cascade Charter Township Board on the 9th day of
January, 2013.
______________________________
Ron Goodyke
Cascade Charter Township Clerk



