


Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapters:

1.01    Code Adoption

1.04    General Provisions

1.08    Ordinances

1.12    General Penalty

1.16    Service Areas

1.20    Right of Entry for Administrative Searches

1.24    Emergency Communications Services

1.25    Public Records

1.35    Records Management

NOTE:    S.C.C., as used herein, means the Sitka General Code. (Sitka City Code)

B.C.S., as used herein, means the Greater Sitka Borough General Code. (Borough Code, Sitka)

Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this title.


Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION1

Sections:

1.01.010    Adoption.

1.01.020    Title—Citation—Reference.

1.01.030    Codification authority.

1.01.040    Ordinances passed prior to adoption of code.

1.01.050    Reference applies to amendments.

1.01.060    Title, chapter and section headings.

1.01.070    Reference to specific ordinances.

1.01.080    Effect of code on past actions and obligations.

1.01.090    Effective date.

1.01.100    Constitutionality.


1.01.010 Adoption.

As authorized by AS 29.25.050, there is hereby adopted the “Sitka General Code.” (Ord. 15-15 § 4 (part), 2015: Ord. 74-120 § 2, 1974.)


1.01.020 Title—Citation—Reference.

This code shall be known as the “Sitka General Code” and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the “Sitka General Code” in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, correction or repeal of the “Sitka General Code.” Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the “Sitka General Code” and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. (Ord. 74-120 § 3, 1974.) 


1.01.030 Codification authority.

This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the city and borough of Sitka, Alaska, codified pursuant to the provisions of AS 29.25.050. (Ord. 15-15 § 4 (part), 2015: Ord. 74-120 § 4, 1974.)


1.01.040 Ordinances passed prior to adoption of code.

The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance No. 73-73. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance No. 73-73, but prior to adoption of this code, are adopted and made a part of this code: 73-92, 73-94, 73-95, 73-99, 73-111, 73-112, 74-114 and 74-118. (Ord. 74-120 § 5, 1974.)


1.01.050 Reference applies to amendments.

Whenever a reference is made to this code as the “Sitka General Code,” or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city and borough of Sitka, Alaska, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now, or hereafter made. (Ord. 74-120 § 6, 1974.)


1.01.060 Title, chapter and section headings.

Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (Ord. 74-120 § 7, 1974.)


1.01.070 Reference to specific ordinances.

The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 74-120 § 8, 1974.)


1.01.080 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.

Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendments hereby of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the city and borough of Sitka shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations or ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee, or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 74-120 § 9, 1974.)


1.01.090 Effective date.

This code shall become effective on April 10, 1974, the day after the date of the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 74-120 § 10, 1974.)


1.01.100 Constitutionality.

If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The assembly declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been or would be declared invalid or unconstitutional. If for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 74-120 § 11, 1974.)


Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

1.04.010    Definitions.

1.04.020    Grammatical interpretation.

1.04.030    Acts by agents.

1.04.040    Prohibited acts include causing, permitting, etc.

1.04.050    Other definitions.

1.04.060    Repeal shall not revive any ordinances.

1.04.080    Conflict of interest.

1.04.090    Use of city seal.

1.04.100    Forest policy.


1.04.010 Definitions.

The following words and phrases, whenever used in ordinances of the city and borough of Sitka, Alaska, or in any ordinance of any predecessor municipal government thereof, which ordinances have been or are adopted as ordinances of the city and borough of Sitka, Alaska, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended, or unless different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words and phrases:

A.    “Administrator” means the municipal administrator;

B.    “Assembly” means the assembly of the city and borough of Sitka;

C.    “Assembly clerk” means the municipal clerk;

D.    “Assessor” means the municipal assessor;

E.    “Attorney” means the municipal attorney;

F.    “Borough” means the city and borough of Sitka, or the area within the territorial limits of the city and borough, over which the city and borough has jurisdiction or control through any constitutional, Charter provisions, law, constitutional or statutory provision;

G.    “Building official” means the municipal building official;

H.    “Charter” means the Charter of the city and borough;

I.    “City” means the city and borough of Sitka (see definition of “Borough”);

J.    “City and borough” means the city and borough of Sitka;

K.    “Clerk” means the municipal clerk;

L.    “Clerk-treasurer,” whenever the reference is to duties involving money, means the municipal finance director;

M.    “Clerk-treasurer,” whenever the reference is to duties not involving money, means the municipal clerk;

N.    “Computation of time” means the time within which an act is to be done. It shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day; and if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded;

O.    “Council” means the assembly of the city and borough. “All councilmen” means all assemblymen;

P.    “Court” or “district court” means the municipal court for the city and borough;

Q.    “Day” means a calendar day composed of twenty-four hours, beginning at twelve a.m. and ending at 11:59 p.m. on the same day, unless otherwise specified;

R.    “Deputy presiding officer” means the deputy mayor;

S.    “Engineer” means the municipal engineer;

T.    “Finance director” means the municipal finance director;

U.    “Health officer” means the municipal health officer;

V.    “Include” or “including” shall be construed as though followed by the phrase “but not limited to”;

W.    “Judge” or “magistrate” means the judge of the municipal court;

X.    “Law” denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the state of Alaska, the Charter and ordinances of the city and borough, and when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder;

Y.    “May” is permissive;

Z.    “Mayor” means the municipal mayor;

AA.    “Month” means a calendar month;

BB.    “Municipality” means the city and borough of Sitka (see definition of “Borough”);

CC.    “Must” and “Shall.” Each is mandatory;

DD.    “Oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and “affirmed”;

EE.    “Occupant.” See “Tenant”;

FF.    “Or” may be read “and” and “and” may be read “or” if the sense requires it;

GG.    “Ordinance” means a law of the city and borough; provided, that a temporary or special law, administrative action, order or directive, may, as allowed by the Charter, be in the form of a resolution;

HH.    “Owner,” applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, or agent in charge for any of the foregoing, of the whole or a part of such building or land;

II.    “Peace officer” means any officer of the state police, members of the police force of any incorporated city or borough, United States Marshals and their deputies, and other officers whose duty it is to enforce and preserve the public peace;

JJ.    “Person” means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them;

KK.    “Personal property” includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt;

LL.    “Preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively;

MM.    “Presiding officer” means the mayor;

NN.    “Property” includes real and personal property;

OO.    “Real property” includes lands, tenements and hereditaments;

PP.    “Registered mail” includes certified mail. When the use of registered mail is authorized or required by the Sitka General Code, certified mail may be used unless expressly prohibited;

QQ.    “Sidewalk” means that portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians;

RR.    “Signature” or “subscription” includes mark when the person cannot write, with his name written near the mark by a witness who writes his own name near the person’s name, but a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two witnesses so sign their own names thereto;

SS.    “Sitka” means the city and borough of Sitka (see definition of “Borough”);

TT.    “State” means the state of Alaska;

UU.    “Street” includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, parking areas, or other public ways which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of the state of Alaska;

VV.    “Superior Court” means the Superior Court of the state of Alaska at Sitka;

WW.    “Tenant” and “occupant,” applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others;

XX.    “Title of Office.” Use of the title of any officer, employee, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city and borough;

YY.    “Written” includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed or multigraphed;

ZZ.    “Year” means a calendar year.

(Ord. 07-03 § 4, 2007: Ord. 06-07 § 4, 2006: Ord. 73-68 § 3, 1973; B.C.S. § 1.16.090.)


1.04.020 Grammatical interpretation.

The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the city and borough:

A.    Gender. Any gender includes the other genders;

B.    Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular;

C.    Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable;

D.    Use of Words and Phrases. Words and phrases not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language.

E.    All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. (Ord. 73-68 § 4, 1973.)


1.04.030 Acts by agents.

When an act is required by ordinance and the act may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed as to require and include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. (Ord. 73-68 § 5, 1973.)


1.04.040 Prohibited acts include causing, permitting, etc.

Whenever in the ordinances of the city and borough, any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or omission. (Ord. 73-68 § 6, 1973.)


1.04.050 Other definitions.

Additional, but nonconflicting herewith, definitions may be as set forth in other ordinances of the city and borough. (Ord. 73-68 § 7, 1973.)


1.04.060 Repeal shall not revive any ordinances.

The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of such ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. (Ord. 73-68 § 8, 1973.)


1.04.080 Conflict of interest.

A.    No member of the assembly, elected or appointed official, municipal employee or official may participate in official action in which the assembly person, elected official, employee or official has a substantial financial interest.

B.    If a member of the assembly or other municipal board or commission has a substantial interest in an official action, that member shall declare the substantial financial interest and ask to be excused from the vote on the matter.

C.    Upon a request made under subsection B of this section, the following procedure shall be followed:

1.    The presiding officer shall rule on the request by a member to be excused from the vote.

2.    The assembly, board or commission may override the decision of the presiding officer on the request to be excused by a majority vote.

D.    As used in this section, “substantial financial interest” means an expectation of receiving a non-trivial pecuniary or material benefit. A substantial financial interest of a person includes any substantial financial interest of that person’s immediate family. A person has a substantial financial interest in an organization in which that person has an ownership interest, or is a director, officer, or employee. A person has a substantial financial interest in a decision if a substantial financial interest of that person will vary with the outcome of the decision. A substantial financial interest does not include the following: a personal or financial interest which is not of the magnitude that would exert an influence on an average, reasonable person; a personal or financial interest of a type which is generally possessed by the public or a large class of persons to which that official or employee belongs; or an action or influence which would have an insignificant or conjectural effect on the matter in question.

E.    As used in this section, “immediate family” of a person means anyone related to that person by blood, marriage, or adoption or who lives in that person’s household.   

(Ord. 04-27 § 4, 2004: Ord. 86-684 § 4, 1986.)


1.04.090 Use of city seal.

A.    The official seal of the city and borough of Sitka is a symbol of authority and jurisdiction of the city. As a valuable asset of the city and its citizens, the assembly seeks to insure that it is used only for appropriate purposes. 

B.    The municipal clerk shall have charge of the seal of the city and borough of Sitka and shall affix the city seal to all certificates required by law, by this code, or by ordinance of the city. The municipal clerk may issue written permission for ceremonial or other permitted purposes as deemed appropriate by the clerk or assembly.

C.     Municipal officers, employees, members of the assembly, and members of municipal boards and commissions may use stationery and printed materials with the city seal, or facsimile thereof, while acting within the scope of their office or employment.

D.    Except as provided for in this section, no person, other than the city and borough of Sitka, shall reproduce, use, give away, sell, or distribute any seal or facsimile thereof purporting to be or represented to be the city seal.

E.    A person may not use or make a die or impression of the city seal for any advertising or commercial purpose.

F.    Violation of this section is a misdemeanor, and upon conviction is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both. 

(Ord. 14-32 § 4, 2014.)


1.04.100 Forest policy.

A.    The policy of the city and borough is, in general, to not oppose the use of timber harvest and silvicultural systems on all public lands identified as appropriate by the U.S. Forest Service and to encourage the U.S. Forest Service to provide a reliable, continuous supply of timber sales in the Sitka area that will support timber industry jobs in Sitka.

B.    It is further the policy of the city and borough to oppose all clearcut harvest which is not located so as to minimize negative impacts to critical fish and wildlife habitat, subsistence resources and scenic quality.

C.    The municipal administrator and assembly shall advocate the policy’s objective to all appropriate agencies and state and federal officials.

(Ord. 96-1398 § 3 (part), 1996.)


Chapter 1.08 ORDINANCES2

Sections:

1.08.010    Codes of technical regulations.

1.08.020    Ordinances included in code.

1.08.030    Revision.

1.08.050    Time ordinances take effect.

1.08.070    Retrospective ordinances.


1.08.010 Codes of technical regulations.

Upon introduction of an ordinance adopting any standard published code of technical regulations, the assembly promptly shall cause at least five copies to be made available for public inspection and shall cause to be published, by means indicated in Charter Section 3.02, and together with the notice of hearing, a notice setting out the purpose of the ordinance and the time and place at which it is available for public inspection. No other publication is necessary before adoption, unless after the hearing the ordinance is amended as to its substance. If it is so amended, and also in the event of any later amendment before adoption, the amended sections shall be made available for inspection and notice published as earlier provided, and the ordinance as amended shall be subjected to hearing and to all other procedures as though newly introduced. Neither the ordinance nor any of its amendments need be distributed to the public or read in full at the hearings thereon. Publication after adoption shall be by notice declaring such adoption as published. The adopted code shall be sold to the public in such form and at such reasonable price as the assembly may direct. (B.C.S. § 1.16.030 (part).)


1.08.020 Ordinances included in code.

The assembly, with the advice and assistance of a legal advisor, shall cause each ordinance and resolution having the force and effect of law to be printed as promptly as possible following its adoption in the following manner:

A.    Ordinances enacted by the assembly of the city and borough general and permanent in nature shall be inserted in the Sitka General Code when properly prepared and authenticated by the municipal clerk and shall, when so inserted, be prima facie law;

B.    Emergency, bond and appropriation ordinances and resolutions shall not be included in the Sitka General Code but shall be retained in the form enacted.

(B.C.S. § 1.16.040.)


1.08.030 Revision.

A.    The administrator, with the advice and assistance of a legal advisor, shall cause the Sitka General Code to be revised and published at least every five years.

B.    The assembly, with the advice and assistance of a legal advisor, shall cause to be edited the ordinances for consolidation in the Sitka General Code without changing the meaning of any ordinance in the following manner:

1.    Renumber sections, parts of sections, articles, chapters and titles;

2.    Change the wording of section or subsection titles or delete subsection titles and change or provide new titles for articles, chapters and titles;

3.    Change capitalization for the purpose of uniformity;

4.    Substitute the proper calendar date for “effective date of this ordinance,” “date of passage of this ordinance” and other phrases of similar import;

5.    Substitute the proper designation for the terms “the preceding section,” “this ordinance” and like terms;

6.    Strike out figures if they are merely a repetition of written words or vice versa, or substitute figures for written words or vice versa for the purpose of uniformity;

7.    Correct manifest errors which are clerical, typographical or errors in spelling or errors by way of additions or omissions;

8.    Correct manifest errors in references to ordinances;

9.    Rearrange sections, combine sections or parts of sections with other sections or parts of sections, divide long sections into two or more sections, and rearrange the order of sections to conform to a logical arrangement of subject matter as may most generally be followed in the Sitka General Code;

10.    Change all sections, when possible, to read in the present tense, indicative mood, active voice, third person, and singular number or any other necessary grammatical change in the manner generally followed in the Sitka General Code;

11.    Delete or change sections or parts of sections if a deletion or change is necessary because of other amendments to the Sitka General Code which did not specifically amend or repeal them;

12.    Omit all temporary, emergency and bond ordinances, all titles to ordinances, all enacting and repealing clauses, all declarations of emergency, and all purpose, validity and construction clauses unless from their nature it may be necessary to retain some of them to preserve the full meaning and intent of this ordinance.

(B.C.S. § 1.16.050.)


1.08.050 Time ordinances take effect.

A.    An ordinance which by its terms is to take effect on a specified day, unless otherwise provided in the ordinance, takes effect at twelve noon on the day specified.

B.    An ordinance which by its terms is to take effect from and after a specified day takes effect at midnight of the day specified.

(B.C.S. § 1.16.100.)


1.08.070 Retrospective ordinances.

No ordinance is retrospective unless expressly declared therein. (B.C.S. § 1.16.120.)


Chapter 1.12 GENERAL PENALTY3

Sections:

1.12.010    Violation—Penalty.

1.12.020    Failure to pay fine.


1.12.010 Violations—Penalty.

A.    Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of the ordinances of the city and borough is guilty of a violation.

B.    Unless another penalty is specifically provided in such ordinances for any such violation or failure to comply, the offense shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars.

C.    Each and every day during any portion of which a violation or failure to comply is committed, permitted, or continued shall be a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly if the offender is so charged.

(Ord. 98-1510 § 4, 1998; Ord. 83-573 § 3, 1983; Ord. 76-225 § 3, 1976: Ord. 73-62 § 3 (part), 1973.)


1.12.020 Failure to pay fine.

Contumacious failure or refusal to pay a fine is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars or by imprisonment for not more than thirty days, or by both (Ord. 73-62 § 3 (part), 1973.)


Chapter 1.16 SERVICE AREAS4

Sections:

1.16.010    Management.


1.16.010 Management.

Service area shall be operated and managed by the municipal administrator and the assembly in the same manner as other municipal functions. (Ord. 74-127 § 4(B), 1974: Ord. 73-70 § 6, 1973.)


Chapter 1.20 RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR ADMINISTRATIVE SEARCHES

Sections:

1.20.010    Written notice to owner required.


1.20.010 Written notice to owner required.

Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provisions of the Sitka General Code, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that there exists a violation of the Sitka General Code in any building or upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the city and borough, any authorized official of the municipality may, upon receiving permission from the property owner or occupant, and upon presentation of proper credentials, enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon him by the Sitka General Code; provided, that except in emergency situations he shall first give the owner and/or occupant, if they can be located after reasonable effort, seventy-two hours’ written notice of the authorized official’s intention to inspect. In the event the owner and/or occupant refuses entry, the official is empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. (B.C.S. § 1.24.010.)


Chapter 1.24 EMERGENCY COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES

Sections:

1.24.010    Enhanced 911 emergency reporting system.

1.24.020    Definitions.

1.24.030    Enhanced emergency reporting systems.

1.24.040    Enhanced 911 surcharge.


1.24.010 Enhanced 911 emergency reporting system.

Pursuant to AS 29.35.131 through 29.35.137, local exchange telephone companies providing service within the municipality and wireless telephone companies providing wireless telephone service within the municipality shall cooperate in the establishment of an enhanced 911 emergency reporting system. (Ord. 03-1723 § 4 (part), 2003: Ord. 99-1541 § 4 (part), 1999.)


1.24.020 Definitions.

A.    “911 service area” or “enhanced 911 service area” means the area within the municipality served by roads, wire-carried telephone service, or wireless telephone service.

B.    “Enhanced 911 equipment” means any equipment dedicated to the operation of, or use in, the establishment, operation or maintenance of an enhanced 911 system, including customer premises equipment, automatic number identification or automatic location identification controllers and display units, printers, cathode ray tubes, recorders, software and other essential communication equipment.

C.    “Enhanced 911 system” or “system” means a telephone system consisting of network, database and enhanced 911 equipment that uses the single three-digit number, 911, for reporting medical, fire, police or other emergency situations, and which enables users of a public telephone system to reach a public safety answering point with the capability of providing the receivers of such communications automatically the location and telephone number from which the call originates and includes the personnel required to acquire, install, operate and maintain the system.

D.    “Local exchange line” means a telephone line which connects a local exchange service customer to the local exchange telephone company switching office and has the capability of reaching local public safety agencies.

E.    “Local exchange service” means the transmission of two-way interactive switched-voice communications furnished by a local exchange telephone company within the city and borough of Sitka, including access to enhanced 911 systems.

F.    “Local exchange telephone company” means a telephone utility certified by the Regulatory Commission of Alaska to provide local exchange service in the city and borough of Sitka.

G.    “Municipality” means the city and borough of Sitka.

H.    “Public safety answering point” means a twenty-four-hour local communications facility that receives 911 service calls and directly dispatches emergency response services or that relays calls to the appropriate public or private safety agency.

I.    “Wireless telephone” means a telephone that is not a wireline telephone and includes cellular and mobile telephones; each wireless telephone number is considered to be a separate wireless telephone.

J.    “Wireless telephone company” means a telephone utility that provides telephone service for wireless telephone customers who receive monthly or periodic bills sent to an address within a designated enhanced 911 service area.

K.    “Wireline telephone” means a telephone that uses a local exchange access line.

(Amended during 3/15 supplement; Ord. 03-1723 § 4 (part), 2003: Ord. 99-1541 § 4 (part), 1999.)


1.24.030 Enhanced emergency reporting systems.

The municipality may purchase, lease or contract for any enhanced 911 equipment or services required to establish and maintain an enhanced 911 system at public safety answering points from a local exchange telephone company or other qualified vendor of an enhanced 911 system. (Ord. 03-1723 § 4 (part), 2003: Ord. 99-1541 § 4 (part), 1999.)


1.24.040 Enhanced 911 surcharge.

A.    A surcharge in the amount of one dollar and forty-eight cents per month is imposed on all local exchange access lines in the municipality to fund the enhanced 911 system. A surcharge in the amount of one dollar and forty-eight cents per month is imposed on each wireless telephone number that is billed to an address within the municipality. These surcharges shall be reviewed annually by the assembly to determine whether the level of surcharge is adequate, excessive or insufficient to fund the anticipated enhanced 911 system needs.

B.    A local exchange customer may not be subject to more than one 911 surcharge per local exchange access line. A wireless telephone customer may not be subject to more than one enhanced 911 surcharge for each wireless telephone number.

C.    The local exchange telephone company shall include the 911 surcharge, stated separately, and included in the total amount owed, in the bills delivered to its customers. A local exchange service customer is liable for payment of the 911 surcharge until the amounts have been paid to the telephone company. A wireless telephone company that provides telephone service to wireless telephone customers with billing addresses within the enhanced 911 service area shall impose an enhanced 911 surcharge each month and collect the surcharge from customers in the enhanced 911 service area.

D.    The local exchange telephone company or wireless telephone company shall remit the surcharge amounts collected to the municipality no later than sixty days after the end of the month in which the amount was collected. From each remittance made in a timely manner, under this subsection, the local exchange telephone company or wireless telephone company is entitled to deduct and retain the greater of one percent of the amount collected or one hundred fifty dollars as the cost of administration for collecting the 911 surcharge. In addition, a wireless telephone company is entitled to full recovery of the recurring and nonrecurring costs associated with implementation and operation of Phase I E911 service as allowed under Federal Communications Commission proceedings entitled “Revision of the Commission’s Rules to Ensure Compatibility with Enhanced 9-1-1 Emergency Calling Systems” (CC Docket No. 94-102; RM-8143).

E.    A local exchange telephone company or wireless telephone company is not obligated to take legal action to enforce collection of the 911 surcharge. However, if a telephone company is attempting to collect an unpaid debt from a customer, the telephone company shall also attempt to collect any unpaid 911 surcharge the customer owes. If a customer pays a portion of a bill which includes a 911 surcharge, the amount paid shall be prorated between the telephone company and the 911 surcharge. The company shall annually provide the municipality with a list of the amounts due for the nonpayment of 911 emergency surcharges, together with the names and addresses of those customers who carry a balance for the nonpayment of the 911 emergency surcharges. The telephone company is not liable for uncollected amounts.

F.    The municipality may, at its own expense, conduct an annual audit of a local exchange telephone company’s or wireless telephone company’s books and records concerning collection and remittance of the 911 surcharge.

G.    Amounts received by the municipality for the 911 surcharge shall be deposited into a separate fund which shall be used only for the enhanced 911 system.

(Ord. 06-03 § 4, 2006; Ord. 03-1723 § 4 (part), 2003: Ord. 99-1541 § 4 (part), 1999.)


Chapter 1.25 PUBLIC RECORDS

Sections:

1.25.010    Public records open to inspection and copying—Fees.

1.25.020    Disposition of tax information.

1.25.030    Electronic services and products.

1.25.040    Public records exceptions— Certified copies.

1.25.042    Personnel records confidential—Exceptions.

1.25.050    Copies of public records for veterans.

1.25.060    Litigation disclosure.

1.25.070    Supervision and regulation.

1.25.080    Appeals.

1.25.090    Enforcement—Injunctive relief.

1.25.100    Confidentiality of library records.

1.25.110    Definitions.


1.25.010 Public records open to inspection and copying—Fees.

A.    Unless specifically provided otherwise, the public records of the city and borough of Sitka are open to inspection by the public under reasonable rules during regular office hours. The employee having the custody of public records shall give, on request and payment of the fee established under this section or Section 1.25.030, a certified copy of the public record. The employee having custody of the public records shall give notice of response to the applicant within ten business days of the request.

B.    Except as otherwise provided in this section, the fee for copying public records may not exceed the standard unit cost of duplication established by the city and borough of Sitka.

C.    If the production of records for one requester in a calendar month exceeds five person-hours, the department shall require the requester to pay the personnel costs required during the month to complete the search and copying tasks. The personnel costs may not exceed the actual salary and benefit costs for the personnel time required to perform the search and copying tasks. The requester shall pay the fee before the records are disclosed, and the department may require payment in advance of the search.

D.    The municipality may reduce or waive a fee when the municipality determines that the reduction or waiver is in the public interest. Fee reductions and waivers shall be uniformly applied among persons who are similarly situated. The municipality may waive a fee of five dollars or less if the fee is less than the cost would be to the municipality to arrange for payment.

E.    Electronic information that is provided in printed form shall be made available without codes or symbols, unless accompanied by an explanation of the codes or symbols.

(Ord. 00-1561 § 4 (part), 2000.)


1.25.020 Disposition of tax information.

A.    Information in the possession of the finance department that discloses the particulars of the business or affairs of a taxpayer or other person is not a matter of public record, except as provided in AS 43.05.230(i) or for purposes of investigation and law enforcement. The information shall be kept confidential except when its production is required in an official investigation, administrative adjudication under Title 4, or court proceeding. These restrictions do not prohibit the publication of statistics presented in a manner that prevents the identification of particular reports and items, prohibit the publication of tax lists showing the names of taxpayers who are delinquent and relevant information that may assist in the collection of delinquent taxes, or prohibit the publication of records, proceedings, and decisions under Title 4.

B.    If a copy of a record of tax information is requested under subsection A of this section for the purposes of child support administration, the copy may be released only to the child support enforcement agency created in AS 25.27.010 or a child support enforcement agency of another state. The finance department shall provide the requesting agency with a copy of the record. The requesting agency receiving information under this subsection may use it only for child support purposes authorized under law.

(Ord. 00-1561 § 4 (part), 2000.) 


1.25.030 Electronic services and products.

A.    Notwithstanding Section 1.25.100(A) and (B) to the contrary, upon request and payment of a fee established under subsection B of this section, a department may provide electronic services and products involving public records to members of the public. A department is encouraged to make information available in usable electronic formats to the greatest extent feasible. The activities authorized under this section may not take priority over the primary responsibilities of a department.

B.    The fee for electronic services and products must be based on recovery of the actual incremental costs of providing the electronic services and products, and a reasonable portion of the costs associated with building and maintaining the information system of the public agency. The fee may be reduced or waived by the department if the electronic services and products are to be used for a public purpose, including department program support, nonprofit activities, journalism and academic research. Fee reductions and waivers shall be uniformly applied among persons who are similarly situated.

C.    Notwithstanding subsection B of this section, the fee for duplicating a public record in the electronic form kept by a department may not exceed the actual incremental costs of the department.

D.    Departments shall include in a contract for electronic services and products provisions that:

1.    Protect the security and integrity of the information system of the municipality and of information systems that are shared by departments; and

2.    Limit the liability of the municipality providing the services and products.

E.    The municipality shall notify the state library distribution and data access center established under AS 14.56.090 of the electronic services and products offered by the municipality to the public under this section. The notification must include a summary of the available format options and the fees charged.

F.    When offering on-line access to an electronic file or database, a department also shall provide without charge on-line access to the electronic file or database through one or more public terminals.

G.    The municipality shall establish the fees for the electronic services and products provided under this section.

H.    The municipality may not make electronic services and products available to one member of the public and withhold them from other members of the public.

(Amended during 3/15 supplement; Ord. 00-1561 § 4 (part), 2000.)


1.25.040 Public records exceptions—Certified copies.

A.    Every person has a right to inspect a public record except:

1.    Records pertaining to juveniles unless disclosure is authorized by law;

2.    Medical and related public health records;

3.    Records required to be kept confidential by a federal law or regulation or by state law;

4.    To the extent the records are required to be kept confidential under 20 USC 1232g and the regulations adopted under 20 USC 1232g in order to secure or retain federal assistance;

5.    Records or information compiled for law enforcement purposes, but only to the extent that the production of the law enforcement records or information:

a.    Could reasonably be expected to interfere with enforcement proceedings;

b.    Would deprive a person of a right to a fair trial or an impartial adjudication;

c.    Could reasonably be expected to constitute an unwarranted invasion of the personal privacy of a suspect, defendant, victim or witness;

d.    Could reasonably be expected to disclose the identity of a confidential source;

e.    Would disclose confidential techniques and procedures for law enforcement investigations or prosecutions;

f.    Would disclose guidelines for law enforcement investigations or prosecutions if the disclosure could reasonably be expected to risk circumvention of the law; or

g.    Could reasonably be expected to endanger the life or physical safety of an individual;

h.    Public records containing information that would disclose or might lead to the disclosure of a component in the process used to execute or adopt an electronic signature if the disclosure would or might cause the electronic signature to cease being under the sole control of the person using it;

6.    Material made confidential by Section 1.25.042.

B.    Every public officer having the custody of records not included in the exceptions shall permit the inspection, and give on demand and on payment of the fees under Sections 1.25.010 through 1.25.030 a certified copy of the record, and the copy shall in all cases be evidence of the original.

(Ord. 02-1671 § 4(A), 2002: Ord. 00-1561 § 4 (part), 2000.)


1.25.042 Personnel records confidential—Exceptions.

A.    Municipal personnel records, including employment applications and examination and other assessment materials, are confidential and are not open to public inspection except as provided in this section. This subsection does not apply to the records of the administrator or the attorney.

B.    The following information is available for public inspection, subject to reasonable regulations on the time and manner of inspection:

1.    The names and position titles of all municipal employees;

2.    The position held by a municipal employee;

3.    Prior positions held by a municipal employee;

4.    Whether a municipal employee is in a partially exempt or exempt service;

5.    The dates of appointment and separation of a municipal employee;

6.    The compensation authorized for or received by a municipal employee; and

7.    Time sheets submitted by a municipal employee.

C.    A municipal employee has the right to examine the employee’s own personnel files and may authorize others to examine those files.

D.    In addition to any access to municipal personnel records authorized under subsection B of this section, municipal personnel records shall promptly be made available to the child support enforcement agency created in AS 25.27.010 or the child support enforcement agency of another state. If the record is prepared or maintained in an electronic database, it may be supplied by providing the requesting agency with access to the database or a copy of the information in the database and a statement certifying its contents. The agency receiving information under this subsection may use the information only for child support purposes authorized under law.

E.    Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit disclosure pursuant to a valid court order.

(Ord. 02-1671 § 4 (B), 2002.)


1.25.050 Copies of public records for veterans.

When a copy of a public record is required by the Department of Military and Veterans Affairs, the Department of Commerce, Community and Economic Development, or by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs to be used in determining the eligibility of a person to participate in benefits, the official custodian of the public record shall, without charge, provide the applicant for the benefits, a person acting on behalf of the applicant, or an authorized representative of the department or the United States Department of Veterans Affairs with a certified copy of the record. (Ord. 00-1561 § 4 (part), 2000.)


1.25.060 Litigation disclosure.

A public record that is subject to disclosure and copying under Sections 1.25.010 through 1.25.040 remains a public record subject to disclosure and copying even if the record is used for, included in, or relevant to litigation, including law enforcement proceedings, involving the municipality, except that with respect to a person involved in litigation, the records sought shall be disclosed in accordance with the rules of procedure applicable in a court or an administrative adjudication. In this section, “involved in litigation” means a party to litigation or representing a party to litigation, including obtaining public records for the party. (Ord. 00-1561 § 4 (part), 2000.)


1.25.070 Supervision and regulation.

A.    The municipal finance department shall supervise and adopt regulations for the operation and implementation of Sections 1.25.010 through 1.25.040, subject to the approval of the municipal attorney.

B.    The regulations and procedures adopted under this section must include the establishment of procedures for making an administrative appeal of municipal actions taken under Sections 1.25.010 through 1.25.040 (Action includes the calculation of a fee, the denial of a fee reduction or waiver, and the denial of a request to inspect or copy a public record.

(Ord. 00-1561 § 4 (part), 2000.)


1.25.080 Appeals.

A.    A person may appeal the final administrative order made by a municipal department under Sections 1.25.010 through 1.25.100 to the Assembly.

B.    A person may appeal the final administrative order made by the assembly under Sections 1.25.010 through 1.25.100 to the Superior Court.

(Ord. 12-15 § 4, 2012; Ord. 00-1561 § 4 (part), 2000.)


1.25.090 Enforcement—Injunctive relief.

A person having custody or control of a public record who denies, obstructs, or attempts to obstruct, or a person not having custody or control who aids or abets another person in denying, obstructing, or attempting to obstruct, the inspection of a public record subject to inspection under Section 1.25.010 or 1.25.040 may be enjoined by the superior court from denying, obstructing, or attempting to obstruct, the inspection of public records subject to inspection under Section 1.25.010 or 1.25.040. A person may seek injunctive relief under this section without exhausting the person’s remedies under Sections 1.25.070 through 1.25.080. (Ord. 00-1561 § 4 (part), 2000.)


1.25.100 Confidentiality of library records.

A.    Except as provided in subsection B of this section, the names, addresses, or other personal identifying information of people who have used materials made available to the public by a library shall be kept confidential, except upon court order, and are not subject to inspection under Section 1.25.010 or 1.25.040. This section applies to libraries operated by the state, a municipality, or a public school, including the University of Alaska.

B.    Records of a public elementary or secondary school library identifying a minor child shall be made available on request to a parent or guardian of that child.

(Ord. 00-1561 § 4 (part), 2000.)


1.25.110 Definitions.

In Sections 1.25.010 through 1.25.110, unless the context otherwise requires: 

“Electronic services and products” means computer-related services and products provided by the municipality, including:

1.    Electronic manipulation of the data contained in public records in order to tailor the data to the person’s request or to develop a product that meets the person’s request;

2.    Duplicating public records in alternative formats not used by a public agency providing periodic updates of an electronic file or database from a geographic information system;

3.    Providing online access to an electronic file or database;

4.    Providing information that cannot be retrieved or generated by the existing computer programs of the public agency;

5.    Providing functional electronic access to the information system of the public agency; in this subparagraph, “functional access” includes the capability of alphanumeric query and printing, graphic query and plotting, nongraphic data input and analysis, and graphic data input and analysis;

6.    Providing software developed by a public agency or developed by a private contractor for a public agency;

7.    Generating maps or other standard or customized products from an electronic geographic information system;

“Public records” means books, papers, files, accounts, writings, including drafts and memorializations of conversations, and other items, regardless of format or physical characteristics, that are developed or received by the municipality or by a private contractor for a municipality, and that are preserved for their informational value or as evidence of the organization or operation of the municipality; “public records” do not include proprietary software programs.

(Ord. 00-1561 § 4 (part), 2000.)


Chapter 1.35 RECORDS MANAGEMENT

Sections:

1.35.010    Records management program.

1.35.015    Records manager.

1.35.020    Records archivist.

1.35.025    Records coordinators.

1.35.030    Records review committee.

1.35.035    Records retention schedule.

1.35.040    Records management system rules and procedures.


1.35.010 Records management program. 

Records management program standards will be established for the maintenance and security of city and borough of Sitka records. The records management program shall provide for the orderly and efficient management, retention, preservation and disposal of records. This program will establish standards for the preparation of the records retention schedule which provides for the retention of municipal records of permanent value and for the prompt and orderly disposition of municipal records no longer possessing administrative, legal or historic value to warrant their retention.

An integral part of records management shall be the designation of prompt storage and archival of various records, including the research and recommendation of electronic document storage. The records manager and records archivist will work in conjunction with the information systems department which is in charge of the city and borough of Sitka’s computer systems.

The municipal clerk will develop the rules and procedures for the municipal records management program.

The records management program will annually review the fee schedule for duplicating public records and for providing electronic services, products, and employee labor when the request requires more than one hour. (Ord. 07-20 § 4 (part), 2007: Ord. 02-1660 § 4 (part), 2002.)


1.35.015 Records manager. 

The municipal clerk is the records manager and is custodian of the official records relating to the assembly and administration of the city and borough of Sitka. (Ord. 07-20 § 4 (part), 2007: Ord. 02-1660 § 4 (part), 2002. Formerly 1.35.020.)


1.35.020 Records archivist.

The records archivist works directly under the direction of the municipal clerk to ensure that the records management program is being implemented according to AS 40.21 and this chapter. (Ord. 07-20 § 4 (part), 2007.)


1.35.025 Records coordinators. 

The head of each department shall designate one person to be its records manager, who will be the custodian of that department’s records. The head of each department will notify the records manager of that appointment. (Ord. 07-20 § 4 (part), 2007: Ord. 02-1660 § 4 (part), 2002.)


1.35.030 Records review committee. 

There shall be a records review committee to work with the municipal clerk and records archivist on the records management program. Members of that committee will be the finance director, information services director, and municipal clerk; outcomes and decisions will be approved by the municipal attorney. (Ord. 07-20 § 4 (part), 2007: Ord. 02-1660 § 4 (part), 2002.)


1.35.035 Records retention schedule. 

The city and borough of Sitka adopts the attached records retention schedule specific to the city and borough of Sitka’s records, noting that this is considered a “living” document. As new record series are added or no longer in circulation, the schedule will be revised noting the latest date of revision. (Ord. 07-20 § 4 (part), 2007: Ord. 02-1660 § 4 (part), 2002.)


1.35.040 Records management system rules and procedures.

A.    General.

1.    Each department will designate one person to the records manager to act as a records coordinator. He or she will be custodian of that department’s records, and will offer input as to the management of its department’s records.

2.    Each department will have written standards for orderly, efficient records maintenance and security. This shall include the use of space, equipment and supplies.

3.    Each department shall complete the necessary records management forms to assist in determining records that will be kept in the department or transferred to the records center for permanent storage or destruction.

4.    The Sitka police department will follow the city’s record retention schedule in the absence of a state schedule. The records coordinator for the police department is responsible to follow and implement the policies and procedures as described in the records information handbook.

B.    Records Retention Schedule.

1.    The city and borough of Sitka adopts the attached records retention schedule specific to the city and borough of Sitka’s records; noting that this is considered a “living” document and as new records are added or no longer in circulation, the schedule will be revised noting the latest date of revision. (July 2007)

2.    The municipal clerk, as records manager, and records archivist, shall work with the records review committee and departmental records coordinators to address records not contained in the adopted retention schedule.

3.    The municipal clerk will establish new rules for records retention in consultation with department personnel.

4.    The municipal clerk will provide each department with a copy of the city and borough of Sitka’s retention schedule (available online) each time it is revised, at least quarterly.

5.    The retention schedule states the duration for which the departments will retain each record type typically held by them. Should the schedule fail to address certain records, the department coordinator shall advise the municipal clerk who will meet with the records review committee to determine those records’ retention periods. These records will be incorporated as needed. Prior to destruction of any records a “certificate of records destruction” form must be completed and executed.

C.    Access and Requests for Records.

1.    The locations of city and borough of Sitka records storage will be designated by the records review committee in collaboration with department personnel to ensure coordination between departments and the records center.

2.    The public records of the city and borough of Sitka are open to inspection by the public under reasonable rules during regular office hours. Disclosing public records and making copies of them upon payment of the required fees, if any, is a public agency obligation.

3.    For other than routine copying, each department shall maintain a copy of each public request for records form and route the original to the records center. The public records request form shall contain the date of request, name of requestor and, if longer than one working day is required to fill the request, the date requestor is provided the material. A log of all requests will be maintained at the records center by the records archivist. The log of public requests becomes disposable in three years.

4.    As soon as practical, but not later than the tenth working day after the date the municipal entity receives a request for public records, the requested entity shall furnish all disclosable records or advise the requestor the reason records are not disclosable, citing the specific legal authority and facts. Under extenuating circumstances, with adequate notice provided the requestor, the ten-day time period may be extended. Reasons for extensions: need to search and collect records from multiple offices; voluminous amount of records requested needs to be copied.

5.    If a record contains both disclosable and nondisclosable material, the latter will be withheld. The nondisclosable portions will be redacted and the disclosable remainder copied for the requestor.

6.    Municipal employees are not to manipulate data to create new records in response to a request for public records. However, if you can electronically sort an existing database for the requested subset of data and print just that, do so.

7.    Municipal employees are not to compile or summarize public records in response to a request for public records.

8.    Access to confidential information is protected as provided by law.

9.    If a department is unable to locate a requested record, the search will continue until the record is located or until it appears that the record does not exist or is not in the municipality’s possession. The requestor shall be notified of the search result(s).

D.    Exemptions for Particular Records.

1.    This section shall not be construed to require disclosure of the following records or information:

a.    Personnel, payroll or medical files which reveal the financial or medical status of any specific individual, the release of which would constitute an unwarranted invasion of privacy;

b.    Records of vital statistics and adoption proceedings;

c.    Records pertaining to juveniles;

d.    Medical and related public health records;

e.    Records required to be kept confidential by federal or state law;

f.    Trade secrets;

g.    Patented and/or copyrighted material;

h.    Organized, coordinated, collated, modified, created, interpreted or compiled information. Nothing in this chapter requires an agency or department to organize, coordinate, collate, modify, create, interpret or compile records requested. Only a literal or verbatim record need be provided;

i.    Police investigation compiled by any agency as a part of an investigation of criminal activity, except that such records may be released to other governmental agencies if necessary for the proper administration of justice. Police information practices in regard to criminal justice information shall be governed by the provisions of AS 12.62.180 et seq.;

j.    Records of engineering, marketing, accounting or other technical financial data, which, if released, would provide a competitive advantage to other persons or businesses engaged in similar or related activities;

k.    Proprietary information which a manufacturer, consultant or provider reasonably expects to be kept privileged or confidential to protect the property interests of persons providing the information or data;

l.    City personnel records, including employment application and examination materials;

m.    Communications between any agency and the municipal attorney or the city’s outside legal counsel, which contain legal questions concerning potential, pending or actual litigation. This subsection does not protect from disclosure documents which were public records prior to the commencement of the litigation, and public records which are otherwise subject to disclosure may not be protected from disclosure by mere submission to the municipal attorney or the city’s outside legal counsel. Any documents marked “Confidential” which are submitted to the municipality from the municipal attorney’s or the city’s outside legal counsel’s office shall only be produced if the municipal attorney so authorizes.

E.    Appeal of Denial of Request. In the event an individual requests information and is refused, the individual shall be notified in writing within five working days of his or her right to appeal that decision to the municipal administrator. If not satisfied with the ruling of the municipal administrator, the individual shall be notified within five working days of that decision of his/her right to appeal to the assembly at its next regularly scheduled meeting. An individual not satisfied with the action taken by the assembly shall have the right to appeal to supreme court as long as that appeal is filed no later than thirty days after the action of the assembly.

F.    Fee Schedule.

1.    Municipal employees shall duplicate and provide copies of a public record upon request and upon payment of applicable fees.

2.    There shall be no fee for materials of current routine public distribution (including current assembly minutes or agenda, pamphlets, copies of speeches, press releases, applications, etc.).

3.    The municipal clerk shall give, on request and payment of costs, a certified copy of any public record required to be disclosed under this code. A fee is charged for certified copies in accordance with the following schedule.

4.    There shall be one fee schedule established for all municipal departments. The fees do not exceed actual costs for machine usage, materials, and employee salary for a person completing the request. The basic city and borough fee schedule is outlined as follows:

Materials

$0.25 per page

$10.00 per copied audio cassette tape

$25.00 per copied video cassette tape

$10.00 per copied CD

$25.00 per copied DVD

$5.00 copies of plats

$20.00 mylar copies of plats

$1.25 (1st page), $0.25 (ea. additional page) certified copies

Labor

The associated salary of employee(s) filling a request, when retrieval and duplication of the documents requested generates labor in excess of one hour.

Reduction/Waiver

The municipal clerk may reduce or waive a fee when it determines that the reduction or waiver is in the public interest. Fee reductions and waivers shall be uniformly applied among persons who are similarly situated. Any city and borough employee may waive a fee of five dollars or less.

(Ord. 07-20 § 4 (part), 2007: Ord. 02-1660 § 4 (part), 2002.)


TITLE 1 FOOTNOTES

1    For statutory provisions requiring cities to codify all ordinances and resolutions, see A.S. 29.25.050. For the Charter provisions requiring Sitka to codify their ordinances within two years of the effective date of the Charter, see § 3.06(b).

2    For the Charter provisions concerning legislation, see Art. III.

3    For the Charter provisions authorizing Sitka to provide for fine or other penalty for violation of city ordinances or Charter provisions, see § 3.01(2), 18.16.

4    For Charter provisions regarding service areas, see §§ 14.01–14.04; for the Charter provisions establishing area of the city and borough of Sitka as a service area and providing that service areas in existence at the time of enactment of the Charter shall continue, see § 18.13.


Title 2 ADMINISTRATION 

Chapters:

2.04    City and Borough Assembly

2.08    City and Borough Departments

2.10    Defense and Indemnification of Officers and Employees

2.12    City and Borough of Sitka Hospital Board

2.13    Health Needs and Human Services Commission

2.14    Historic Trust Board

2.16    Library Commission

2.18    Planning Commission 

2.19    Police and Fire Commission

2.20    Fire Department

2.25    Sitka Police Department

2.36    Public Notice of Meetings

2.38    Gary Paxton Industrial Park

2.40    Elections

2.44    Municipal Court

2.46    Municipal Correctional Officers

2.47    Steps for Disaster Preparedness

2.54    Sitka Tree and Landscape Committee

2.56    Parks and Recreation Committee

2.58    Sitka Historic Preservation Commission

2.60    Municipal Boards, Commissions and Committees

2.62    Sitka Investment Committee

2.64    Seafood Processing Economic Development Committee

NOTE:    Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this title.


Chapter 2.04 CITY AND BOROUGH ASSEMBLY1

Sections:

2.04.010    Agenda.

2.04.020    Meetings.

2.04.035    Introduction of ordinances and resolutions.

2.04.040    Committees.

2.04.050    Debate.

2.04.060    Rules of public participation.

2.04.070    Motions, seconds.

2.04.080    Objections to consideration.

2.04.090    Clerical errors.

2.04.100    Vote required.

2.04.105    Order of roll call vote.

2.04.110    Parliamentarian.

2.04.120    Sessions.

2.04.130    Public participation.

2.04.140    Reconsideration.

2.04.150    Appointments to boards, commissions, and committees.

2.04.160    Adoption of Robert’s Rules of Order.

2.04.170    Regular meetings.

2.04.180    Special meetings.

2.04.185    Teleconference participation.

2.04.190    Salaries and compensation.

2.04.195    Salaries for assembly members and mayor.

2.04.200    Vacancies.

2.04.210    Interim succession to offices of mayor and deputy mayor. 


2.04.010 Agenda

A.    At all regular meetings, the order of business shall be:

1.    Call to order;

2.    Flag salute;

3.    Roll call;

4.    Correspondence and changes to agenda;

5.    Ceremonial matters: proclamations, presentations, awards;

6.    Special reports: government-to-government, municipal boards/commissions, committees, municipal departments, school district, students and guests;

7.    Public participation on any item off the agenda. Public testimony is not to exceed three minutes per individual, unless the mayor imposes other time constraints at the beginning of the agenda item;

8.    Municipal reports from mayor, administrator, attorney, liaisons, clerk and other, not to exceed three minutes per report;

9.    Consent agenda, to include vote on approval of minutes of previous meeting(s), ordinances for introduction, and routine items adopted by one motion;

10.    Board, commission, and committee appointments;

11.    Unfinished business, with public hearing/participation after motion on agenda item, but before deliberation of the assembly;

12.    New business, with public hearing/participation after motion on agenda item, but before assembly deliberation;

13.    Public participation on any item on or off the agenda. Not to exceed three minutes per individual;

14.    Executive session, if motion for executive session is made and adopted;

15.    Adjournment. 

B.    The agenda shall be prepared by the administrator with concurrence of the mayor. In order for matters to appear on the agenda at a regular meeting, they must be submitted to the clerk’s office on or prior to noon on the Wednesday immediately preceding the meeting. In order for items to appear on the agenda at a special meeting, they must be submitted to the clerk’s office no less than twenty-four hours prior to the special meeting. In order for materials to appear in the assembly packet, such materials must be submitted to the municipal clerk in compliance with the deadlines as established in the previous two sentences (noon on the preceding Wednesday for a regular meeting and twenty-four hours in advance of a special meeting). Other matters may be considered under administrative reports, unfinished business, or new business as applicable.

(Ord. 15-29 § 4, 2015; Ord. 15-15 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 09-79A § 4, 2010; Ord. 08-28 § 4, 2008; Ord. 06-30A § 4, 2006; Ord. 02-1694 § 4, 2002; Ord. 02-1693 § 4, 2002; Ord. 02-1692 § 4, 2002; Ord. 00-1593 § 4 (part), 2000; Ord. 72-4 (part), 1972.)


2.04.020 Meetings.

A.    Regular meetings of the assembly shall be held at six p.m. in the appointed meeting place on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each calendar month or as otherwise prescribed in Sections 2.04.170 and 2.04.180.

B.    The places of such meetings shall be prescribed by the assembly.

C.    Special meetings of the assembly may be held at any time upon call, briefly stating the purpose, of the mayor or of four or more members and, whenever practicable, upon no less than six hours’ notice to each member. Notice shall be given in either of the following manners:

1.    By call given at a regular or special meeting;

2.    By service either orally or in writing of the call by any municipal officials or employee upon the mayor and each member of the assembly, provided:

a.    That no such service need be made upon the officials, either mayor or assemblymen, who issue such call; and

b.    Delivery of the call to any person residing or working therein, who is over the age of fourteen years, at the home or usual place of business of any assemblyman shall be equivalent to personal service or call upon the person so to be served.

D.    All meetings shall be open to the public except that the following may be discussed in closed executive session:

1.    Matters, the immediate knowledge of which would adversely affect the finances of the municipality;

2.    Subjects that tend to prejudice the reputation and character of any person, provided the person may request a public discussion;

3.    Matters which by law, municipal Charter or ordinances are required to be confidential;

4.    Communications with the municipal attorney or other legal advisors concerning legal matters affecting the municipality or legal consequences of past, present or future municipal actions.

E.    Meetings will adjourn at ten-thirty p.m. unless extended by a unanimous vote of the members present. However, if seven members are present, meetings can be extended by a vote of at least six members, but the meeting will adjourn at eleven p.m. unless extended by a unanimous vote of all seven members. 

F.    The municipal administrator (or his/her designee) serving as chief administrative officer for the assembly; the municipal attorney to assure compliance with Alaska’s Open Meetings Act and to advise on legal issues; and the municipal clerk as parliamentary advisor will attend executive sessions of the assembly, unless otherwise excluded in the motion to enter into executive session. Other persons may be invited into the executive session by an approved motion of the assembly and must be named in said motion.

(Ord. 14-41 § 4, 2015; Ord. 09-50 § 4, 2009; Ord. 01-1604 § 4, 2001; Ord. 87-747 § 4, 1987; Ord. 83-550 § 3, 1983; Ord. 83-531 § 3 (part), 1983; Ord. 72-4 (part), 1972.)


2.04.035 Introduction of ordinances and resolutions.

A.    Introduction of Ordinances and Resolutions by the Assembly. Each ordinance and resolution introduced by an assembly member shall have the sponsorship of two assembly members before introduction of the ordinance and resolution. The supporters of the introduction of the ordinance and resolution shall be listed as sponsor and co-sponsor, and their names shall appear as such on the ordinance or resolution.

B.    Introduction of Ordinances and Resolutions by the Municipal Staff. Each ordinance and resolution introduced by the municipal staff shall be through the city administrator. The administrator’s name shall appear on the ordinance or resolution for introduction.

C.    On adoption of the ordinance or resolution the sponsors’ names shall be removed.

(Ord. 83-585 § 4, 1984.)


2.04.040 Committees.

A.    The assembly shall have the following standing committees:

1.    Police and fire;

2.    Utilities and finance;

3.    Airport, harbors and transportation;

4.    Streets and roads;

5.    Parks and recreation;

6.    Public sanitation;

7.    Public health services;

and shall have such special committees as may be appointed. Any assemblyman shall be privileged to sit with any committee at all times; such assemblyman shall have the right to participate in committee discussion except that members of the committee shall have priority to obtaining the floor and only committee members may vote. Reasonable opportunity for the public to be heard shall be allowed. Special committees automatically terminate upon completion of the assignment given to them upon formation of the committee.

B.    Selection of the Committees. Upon organization annually at the first meeting following certification of the election for assembly members, a committee on committees shall be appointed by the mayor to recommend committee appointments to the chair. The mayor then appoints the committees, but he is not bound by the recommendation of the committee of committees. The committee appointments are subject to ratification by a majority of the members of the assembly.

C.    Committee of the Whole. The presiding officer may appoint another member of the body to preside over the committee of the whole. Upon adjourning, the committee of the whole, the mayor resumes the chair and the member who acted as chairman of the committee of the whole shall make a report of the proceedings and recommendations of the committee of the whole to the assembly. Generally the rules of the assembly shall be followed in the committee of the whole except at the discretion of the chair the rules may be relaxed and the rules relating to participation by the presiding officer and the number of times a member should speak shall not be in effect unless a majority of the committee orders that they be. Reasonable opportunity for the public to be heard shall be allowed. (Ord. 72-4 (part), 1972.)


2.04.050 Debate.

A.    During assembly debate on a motion, a member or the administrator may speak more than once with priority of access to the floor given to members or the administrator who have not spoken on the motion.

B.    Assembly members, as well as members of boards, commissions and committees, staff, and members of the public, shall speak and refer to each other in a respectful manner, and shall not attack or question the motives of others.

C.    After obtaining recognition from the chair, a member may ask direct questions of another member of the assembly or to a person appearing before the assembly.

D.    Consideration of an ordinance by paragraph shall not be required unless demanded. A demand that consideration by paragraph take place may be overridden by a majority vote of the assembly. (Ord. 07-16 § 4 (part), 2007: Ord. 72-4 (part), 1972.)


2.04.060 Rules of public participation.

A.    The hearing will be conducted by the mayor, or by the presiding officer in the absence of the mayor.

B.    The mayor will open the hearing by summarizing its purposes and reemphasizing the rules of procedure.

C.    The mayor may set a time limit on speakers if it appears necessary to gain maximum participation and conserve time. Such time limit may be extended by a majority of the assembly.

D.    Citizens will be encouraged to submit written presentations and exhibits.

E.    The mayor will set forth the item or subject to be discussed and will rule nongermane comments out of order.

F.    All speakers, public and assembly members must be recognized by the chair.

G.    Members of the public will precede their remarks by stating their names and area of residence.

H.    Members of the assembly will be recognized by the chair by name.

1.    The assembly members, members of boards, commissions and committees, staff, and members of the public who speak during public participation will refrain from argument and debate.

2.    Assembly members, members of boards, commissions and committees, staff, and members of the public shall speak and refer to each other in a respectful manner, and shall not attack or question the motives of others.

I.    The administrator may participate in the same manner as an assembly member. (Ord. 07-16 § 4 (part), 2007: Ord. 72-4 (part), 1972.)


2.04.070 Motions, seconds.

A.    Seconds to motions are required.

B.    Renewal of Defeated Motions. Defeated motions may be renewed only under suspension of the rules.

C.    Priority of Privileged Motions. Privileged motions shall have the following priority:

1.    Fix time to adjourn;

2.    Give notice of reconsideration;

3.    Adjourn;

4.    Recess;

5.    Question of privilege of the body;

6.    Question of personal privilege. (Ord. 72-4 (part), 1972.)


2.04.080 Objections to consideration.

Objection to consideration to a question may apply to communications as in other cases. (Ord. 724 (part), 1972.)


2.04.090 Clerical errors.

Clerical errors that do not affect the substance of an ordinance or resolution such as errors in numbering or errors in spelling may be corrected by the staff upon discovery of such error. (Ord. 72-4 (part), 1972.)


2.04.100 Vote required.

A.    The affirmative vote of four members of the assembly shall be sufficient to take any action except as provided otherwise by Charter or ordinance and except in the following instances and as provided in subsection B of this section:

1.    Limiting, extending, or closing debates;

2.    Suspension of rules;

3.    Setting of or postponement of special orders;

4.    Objection to consideration of question;

5.    Motion for immediate vote (previous question);

6.    Rescind;

7.    To take up reconsideration where notice for reconsideration at next meeting was given.

B.    The affirmative vote of at least five assembly members shall be required to take any of the actions listed above, unless there are only four members voting on the action, in which case the vote only requires four votes.

(Ord. 08-39 § 4, 2008: Ord. 724 (part), 1972.)


2.04.105 Order of roll call vote.

When the assembly votes by call of the roll, the clerk shall call the roll by random order. There shall be no special consideration given to the mayor in this order. (Ord. 05-51S, § 4, 2005: Ord. 04-66 § 4, 2004.)


2.04.110 Parliamentarian.

The municipal clerk shall act as the parliamentarian. (Ord. 13-16 § 4, 2013: Ord. 72-4 (part), 1972.)


2.04.120 Sessions.

Each regular or special meeting of the assembly constitutes a session for purposes of the rules. (Ord. 72-4 (part), 1972.)


2.04.130 Public participation.

No person except a member of the assembly or the administrator may participate in assembly proceedings except as follows:

A.    Members of the public may participate during the public participation section concerning an agenda item;

B.    Parties to an appeal may testify in a quasi-judicial administrative or adjudicatory proceeding, except as provided otherwise in the code;

C.    The attorney or clerk may comment on parliamentary, procedural and/or legal issues; or

D.    Any assembly member may request municipal staff and/or members of commissions, committees, or boards to answer questions or provide information at any time during assembly proceedings.

(Ord. 06-08 (A-1) § 4, 2006: Ord. 72-4 (part), 1972.)


2.04.140 Reconsideration.

A.    What May be Reconsidered. Main motions, amendments to main motions, privileged motions involving substantive questions, and appeals are subject to reconsideration. Procedural motions may not be reconsidered.

B.    Who May Reconsider. Any assembly member who voted on the prevailing side may move for reconsideration.

C.    When Notice May be Given. Notice of reconsideration may be given only at the meeting at which the action to be reconsidered was taken.

D.    Effect of Notice. The effect of giving notice of reconsideration is to suspend all action on the subject of the notice until the motion to reconsider is acted upon or until the time within which the motion may be taken up has expired.

E.    Time in Which Notice Must be Taken Up. A notice of reconsideration expires unless it is acted upon prior to adjournment of the next regular meeting succeeding the meeting at which the action to be reconsidered occurred.

F.    Successive Reconsiderations. There may be but one reconsideration even though the action of the assembly after reconsideration is opposite from the action of the assembly before reconsideration.

G.    Vote Required. A reconsideration requires only a majority vote regardless of the vote necessary to adopt the motion reconsidered.

H.    Precedence. The notice of reconsideration has precedence over every main motion and may be taken up at any time during the meeting when there is no other motion on the floor.

I.    Effect. The adoption of the motion for reconsideration cancels the previous vote on the question to be reconsidered as completely as though it had never been taken.

(Ord. 01-1642 § 4, 2001; Ord. 72-4 (part), 1972.)


2.04.150 Appointments to boards, commissions, and committees.

A.    Public Notice. When a vacancy occurs on an existing board or commission, or upon the establishment of a new board or commission, the assembly shall advertise such vacancy or positions through the public media in order to encourage interested individuals in the community to make their interest known to the assembly. Such notification shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation no later than three days before consideration of the appointment by the assembly.

B.    Method of Nomination. All interested individuals shall submit an application to the clerk on a form provided by the clerk, after which consideration shall be given to the qualifications and merits of each applicant by including the applications in the assembly packet for each assembly member’s review. The assembly shall only select from the list of applicants who have submitted applications, but may request opening the application period to consider additionally submitted applications.

C.    Special Committees. Special committees may be appointed from the general public without notification or advertising if such committee is of an investigative or fact-finding nature and pertains to only one special issue. Special committees shall have no authority other than to provide information and submit recommendations to the assembly.

(Ord. 08-27 § 4, 2008; Ord. 93-1219 § 4, 1994; Ord. 72-4 (part), 1972.)


2.04.160 Adoption of Robert’s Rules of Order.

The conduct of the meeting of the assembly shall be governed by the mayor according to Robert’s Rules of Order, except as otherwise provided by Charter or this code. (Ord. 00-1593 § 4 (part), 2000.)


2.04.170 Regular meetings.

Regular meetings of the assembly shall be held at six p.m. in the appointed meeting place on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each calendar month. If such day is a holiday, or if other reasonable conflict occurs making a change appear to be necessary, such meeting shall be held at an hour and on a day more convenient to the members and the public.

Regular meetings may be held more frequently, but not more than once a week, at the option of the assembly, if it appears to be necessary and reasonable.

Call for additional regular meetings shall be made in the same manner as for special meetings, provided at least five days’ notice shall be given. (Ord. 15-15 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 83-531 § 3 (part), 1983; Ord. 71-1 § 1, 1971.)


2.04.180 Special meetings.

Special meetings of the assembly may be held at any time upon call, briefly stating the purpose, of the mayor or of four or more members and, whenever practicable, upon no less than six hours’ notice to each member. Notice shall be given in either of the following manners:

A.    By call given at a regular or special meeting;

B.    By service either orally or in writing of the call by any municipal official or employee upon the mayor and each member of the assembly, provided:

1.    That no such service need be made upon the officials, either mayor or assemblymen, who issue such call; and

2.    Delivery of the call to any person residing or working therein who is over the age of fourteen years, at the home or usual place of business of any assemblyman, shall be equivalent to personal service or call upon the person so to be served.

(Ord. 71-1 § 2, 1971.)


2.04.185 Teleconference participation.

A.    The use of teleconferencing at assembly meetings is for the convenience of government officials and the public. Teleconference participation by the mayor, assembly members and the public is authorized by AS 44.62.310(a) and 44.62.312. While physical presence of the mayor, assembly members and the public is the preferred method of participation at assembly meetings, the mayor, assembly members, and the public are allowed to participate at assembly meetings in the following manner:

1.    Participation of Mayor and Assembly Members by Teleconference.

a.    Any assembly member may participate in any assembly meeting by teleconference. Teleconference participation is solely at the discretion of the assembly member who requests this method of participation if the assembly member is out of town or incapacitated. The assembly member shall notify the clerk to arrange for teleconference participation by four p.m. on the Friday before the Tuesday regular assembly meeting, and at least twelve hours before any special assembly meeting. 

b.    The mayor, or the presiding officer in the absence of the mayor, may also participate in any assembly meeting by teleconference. The mayor, or the presiding officer in the absence of the mayor, shall notify the clerk to arrange for teleconference participation by four p.m. on the Friday before the Tuesday regular assembly meeting, and at least twelve hours before any special assembly meeting. However, the mayor, or the presiding officer in the absence of the mayor, shall not preside over the assembly meeting when participating by teleconference. 

c.    The mayor and any assembly member participating by teleconference shall be deemed to be present at the assembly meeting for all purposes, including for quorum and voting, except as provided in subsection (A)(1)(b) of this section.

d.    The mayor and any assembly member participating by teleconference shall have the same right to participate in any matter as if physically present at the assembly meeting, including debate under Section 2.04.050, executive sessions, adjudicatory matters, and presentations. Reasonable efforts shall be made to make available to the mayor and any assembly member participating by teleconference any pertinent documents that are to be discussed and/or acted upon, including the assembly packet. 

e.    The mayor and any assembly member participating by teleconference shall have the same right to vote on any matter as if physically present at the assembly meeting. All voting at the meeting shall be by roll call vote. The assembly member who is participating by teleconference, or the mayor when participating by teleconference, determines whether the member or the mayor has had the opportunity to evaluate all pertinent information, including any testimony and/or evidence, and is prepared to vote.

f.    Teleconference participation at any assembly meeting is limited to four times a year by each assembly member or by the mayor.   However, teleconference participation by a member or the mayor will not be allowed consecutively for more than two regular meetings.

2.    Participation of Public by Teleconference. Any member of the public who will not be present within the city and borough of Sitka during any assembly meeting, and who wants to participate by teleconference concerning any agenda item which allows for public participation under Section 2.04.060, may request participating by teleconference. The assembly agenda is available from the clerk and the city and borough of Sitka website prior to the assembly meeting, in accordance with Section 2.04.010. In order to participate by teleconference, the member of public shall provide the clerk with a telephone contact number for the teleconference participation by four p.m. on the Monday before the Tuesday regular assembly meeting, and at least twelve hours before any special assembly meeting. The clerk will call that phone number during the public participation section on the agenda item. 

B.    Cost of Teleconference Participation. The mayor, any assembly member, and any member of the public who participates by teleconference shall not be charged for any telephone costs associated with the teleconference participation.

(Ord. 06-01 A(2) § 4(A), 2006.)


2.04.190 Salaries and compensation.

The assembly, by ordinance, shall determine the salary of the mayor and other assembly members. With the exception of any increase adopted in July of 2002, an increase in salary shall not take effect until the assembly meeting following the regular election after the ordinance has been adopted. With the approval and authorization of the assembly, assembly members shall also receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties in office. (Ord. 02-1701 § 4 (part), 2002: Ord. 86-703 § 4, 1986.)


2.04.195 Salaries for assembly members and mayor.

A.    The salary for the mayor of the city and borough of Sitka is increased from two hundred fifty dollars per month to five hundred dollars per month.

B.    The salary for each assembly member is increased from one hundred dollars per month to three hundred dollars per month.

(Ord. 02-1701 § 4 (part), 2002.)


2.04.200 Vacancies.

The assembly shall, within twenty days after a vacancy occurs, select a qualified person to be an acting assembly member until the next regular election when a successor is elected and qualified to fill the remainder of the term. The qualifications shall be those set out in Section 2.04 of the Charter and in state law. (Ord. 04-55 § 4, 2004: Ord. 96-1379 § 4, 1996.)


2.04.210 Interim succession to offices of mayor and deputy mayor.

At the same meeting at which the assembly elects from its membership a deputy mayor, the assembly shall elect from its membership a deputy deputy mayor who shall act as mayor during the absence or disability of both the mayor and the deputy mayor. The deputy deputy mayor shall become mayor for the remainder of the elected mayor’s term if the offices of mayor and deputy mayor become vacant. If the assembly does not elect the deputy mayor and the deputy deputy mayor at the meeting immediately following the certification of the election as described in Section 2.06 of the Charter, the assembly shall do so at the next meeting with five or more members present. (Ord. 04-25 § 4, 2004: Ord. 01-1648 § 4, 2001.)


Chapter 2.08 CITY AND BOROUGH DEPARTMENTS2

Sections:

2.08.010    Departments.

2.08.015    Selection of acting administrator.

2.08.020    Responsibility.

2.08.030    Administration and finance department.

2.08.040    Electric department.

2.08.050    Department of public works.

2.08.070    Law department.

2.08.080    Public school system.

2.08.110    General provisions.

2.08.120    Respect for the public.

2.08.125    Local control of labor relations through collective bargaining.


2.08.010 Departments.

The following departments of the city and borough are established:

A.    Administration and finance;

B.    Electric department;

C.    Department of public works;

D.    Police and fire departments;

E.    Law;

F.    Public school system;

G.    Hospital;

H.    Library;

I.    Harbors department.

(Ord. 89-912 § 4(A), 1989; Ord. 72-5 § 3, 1972.)


2.08.015 Selection of acting administrator.

No later than January 15th of each calendar year, the administrator shall provide in writing to the assembly a list of at least three department heads from which the administrator can select a person to serve as acting administrator for a given period of time during the next twelve months. The administrator will select from that list, unless unforeseen circumstances require the administrator to select another person not on the list. If another person is selected, the assembly will be informed as soon as possible. The assembly by majority vote may direct the administrator to change the list or the selection. (Ord. 14-39A § 4, 2014: Ord. 03-1755 § 4, 2003.)


2.08.020 Responsibility.

The responsibility of the departments named in Section 2.08.010 shall be as follows in Sections 2.08.030 to 2.08.080. (Ord. 72-5 § 4 (part), 1972.)


2.08.030 Administration and finance department.

The administration and finance department is responsible for the following:

A.    Administration. Recording and safeguarding of all proceedings of the assembly, safeguarding of all other municipal records; publishing required notices; administration of elections, information and publicity;

B.    Accounting and Finance. All accounting, tax billings, treasury management, purchasing and property control;

C.    Management of Miscellaneous Funded Activities. Activities and programs merely requiring allocation of appropriations or grants, and other funds and assistance.

(Ord. 72-5 § 4 (part), 1972.)


2.08.040 Electric department.

A.    Office Manager. The office manager shall be responsible for the overall functions of the office. Records are to be kept in accordance with uniform accounts generally prescribed for public utilities.

B.    Utility Director. The utility director shall be responsible for all generation, distribution, maintenance and construction of electric utilities.

(Ord. 72-5 § 4 (part), 1972.)


2.08.050 Department of public works.

The department of public works shall be responsible for engineering, public works design, construction, maintenance and operation of all municipal public works, including streets, public buildings, public utilities, harbors, docks, parks, airports and central garage. (Ord. 72-5 § 4 (part), 1972.)


2.08.070 Law department.

The municipal attorney shall be responsible for providing legal services for the municipality. He shall be appointed by and be directly responsible to the assembly. (Ord. 72-5 § 4 (part), 1972.)


2.08.080 Public school system.

A.    The school board shall be responsible for operating the public school system for the city and borough subject to state statutes and authority of the assembly as provided in the Charter.

B.    In addition, it will be responsible for the supervision of the maintenance of all school buildings in the city and borough and it may consent, by resolution, to any consignment of such functions in relation to school buildings to the department of public works on an allocation-of-cost basis.

(Ord. 72-5 § 4 (part), 1972.)


2.08.110 General provisions.

A.    Administration of Departments. Departments shall be administered by the administrator of the city and borough, or his designated department head, supervisor, or other designee unless prohibited by Charter. Departments may be assigned additional responsibilities by the administrator. Department heads, supervisors, or other assigned personnel may be responsible for more than one department or division within the department.

B.    This Title Not a Grant of Power. This title grants no power not otherwise granted, nor does it make any service areawide, or add any services to a service area, but rather provides an organizational structure through which authority over performance of services otherwise authorized may be exercised.

(Ord. 72-5 § 5, 1972.)


2.08.120 Respect for the public.

A.    No municipal employee shall discriminate against any member of the public on the basis of a person’s race or cultural heritage in the performance of their duties.

B.    No municipal employee shall make uncomplimentary or demeaning comments about any member of the public, in the performance of their duties where such comments may be overheard by members of the public.

C.    All municipal employees shall keep as confidential at all times any personal or derogatory information learned about a member of the public, while performing municipal duties.

D.    Uncomplimentary or personal information may be disclosed in public only where it serves a legitimate municipal interest such as in court or is used to rebut assertions made by an individual, or where such information is by law part of the public record.

E.    This section applies to all employees of the municipality and also all administrative personnel. 

F.    Penalties. Violations of these regulations shall subject the employee to progressive discipline as set out in the municipal personnel policy. Termination may be resorted to on a first violation if necessary. In the event of the imposition of discipline, the aggrieved member of the public shall be notified of the nature of the discipline.

(Ord. 80-439 § 3, 1980.)


2.08.125 Local control of labor relations through collective bargaining.

A.    Declaration of Policy. The assembly declares that it is the policy of the city and borough to promote harmonious and cooperative relations between government and its employees and to protect the public by ensuring orderly and effective operations of government. These policies are to be effectuated by recognizing the right of employees to organize for the purpose of collective bargaining, negotiating with and entering into written agreement with a labor organization in matters of wages, hours and other terms of employment, and maintaining merit system principles among city and borough employees.

    It is further the policy of the city and borough to retain control over the management of its labor relations with its employees on a local level by providing a comprehensive scheme within the city and borough’s ordinance system.

B.    Rights of Employees. City and borough employees may self-organize and form, join or assist an organization to bargain collectively through representatives of their own choosing, and engage in concerted activities for the purpose of collective bargaining or other mutual aid and protection.

C.    Collective Bargaining Units. The board shall determine the unit or units appropriate for the purpose of collective bargaining. Bargaining units shall be as large as is reasonable and unnecessary fragmenting shall be avoided. A determination will be based on such factors as: community of interest, wages, hours, working conditions, history of collective bargaining and the desires of the employees. The board’s decision on the appropriateness of any bargaining unit shall be appealable to the assembly, as provided by Charter and ordinance, within thirty days of the date the clerk certifies that written notice of the board’s final order has been served.

D.    Exemptions from Collective Bargaining. The following employees shall not be included within any bargaining unit:

1.    Elected officials;

2.    Exempt employees, including department heads; and

3.    Confidential employees.

E.    Representatives and Elections.

1.    The board shall investigate a petition for representation of an employee group if it is submitted in a manner prescribed by the board and is:

a.    By an employee or group of employees or an organization acting in their behalf alleging that thirty percent of the employees of a proposed bargaining unit which has been determined to be appropriate by the board:

i.    Want to be represented for collective bargaining by an organization as the exclusive representative; or

ii.    Assert that the organization which has been certified by the board as a bargaining representative is no longer the representative of the majority of the employees in the bargaining unit; or

b.    By the city and borough administrator alleging that one or more labor organizations have presented to it a claim to be recognized as the representative of the majority of employees in an appropriate unit.

2.    Where a petition is filed the board shall provide for an appropriate hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given by publishing notice in a newspaper of general circulation, at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing, and by mailed notice to the city and borough and to each organization which has presented a claim to be recognized. If the board finds that there is a question of representation, it shall direct an election by secret ballot to determine whether or by which labor organization the employees desire to be represented, and shall certify the results of this election. The board shall determine who is eligible to vote in an election and shall establish rules governing the election. In an election in which none of the choices on the ballot receive a majority of the votes cast, a runoff election shall be conducted, the ballot providing for selection between the two choices receiving the largest number of votes cast in the election. If an organization receives a majority of the votes cast in the election, the organization shall be certified by the board at its next meeting as exclusive representative of all the employees in the bargaining unit.

3.    No certification or decertification election may be held in a bargaining unit if a valid election has been held within the preceding twelve months.

4.    Nothing in this chapter prohibits recognition of an organization as an exclusive representative by the city and borough by mutual consent.

5.    No certification or decertification election may be directed by the board in a bargaining unit in which there is in force and effect a valid collective bargaining agreement, except during a ninety-day period preceding the expiration date of that agreement. However, no collective bargaining agreement may bar an election upon petition of persons in the bargaining unit, but not parties to the agreement, if more than three years have elapsed since execution of the agreement or the last annual renewal, whichever was later.

F.    Recognition by Mutual Consent.

1.    The city and borough and the labor organization may agree that the labor organization is to be the representative of the employees within a bargaining unit, provided the organization presents a majority showing from the employees of the bargaining unit authorizing the union to represent them for purposes of collective bargaining. If the labor organization desires to obtain certification by the board, the recognition agreement shall be filed with the board thirty days before its effective date. The board shall post the recognition agreement within the established bargaining unit at least twenty days before the effective date of the recognition agreement. If the recognition agreement is not filed as provided by this section, or, if within twenty days of the posting of the recognition agreement, a labor organization intervenes, or ten percent of the permanent and probationary employees of the established bargaining unit object to the recognition agreement, the board shall refuse to certify the labor organization recognized by mutual consent. The board shall treat an intervention petition accompanied by a thirty percent showing of interest as a petition filed.

2.    If no intervention or objection occurs within twenty days of the posting of the agreement, the board shall, after appropriate investigation and verification of the majority status of the labor organization, certify the labor organization recognized by the agreement as a representative of employees in the agreed-upon bargaining unit.

G.    Collective Negotiations.

1.    The city and borough’s management representatives and representatives of an organized labor organization have a mutual obligation personally to meet and negotiate within a reasonable length of time in order to exchange freely information, opinions and proposals, and to endeavor to reach agreement on matters within the scope of representation. Requests for meetings or negotiations by recognized labor organizations on matters requiring budgetary financing shall be submitted to the city and borough administrator in time for adequate discussion and consideration and action in connection with the budget deadlines.

2.    The administrator shall keep the assembly apprised of the conditions of the negotiations from time to time during such negotiations, and shall be guided by the assembly as appropriate or necessary throughout the negotiations.

H.    Mediation and Fact-Finding. If, after a reasonable period of negotiation over the terms of a collective bargaining agreement, a deadlock exists between the city and borough and a labor organization, the board may, either on its own initiative or on the request of one of the parties to the dispute, appoint a competent, impartial, disinterested person to act as mediator in any dispute; alternatively, the parties may also select a mediator to bring the parties together voluntarily under such favorable auspices as would tend to settle the dispute, but neither the mediator nor the board has any power of compulsion in mediation proceedings. With the consent of both parties, the board may also appoint a neutral party to determine facts in the dispute and to make public recommendation.

I.    Impasse Submitted to an Arbitrator.

1.    If, upon conclusion of negotiations and after use of mediation and/or factfinding as appropriate, no agreement is reached, all questions and disputes shall be referred to a neutral arbitrator for final decision and determination. The arbitrator shall be selected upon written request of either party, or the board, either by mutual consent of the parties, or, if the parties cannot agree, from a list of regional arbitrators provided by such an organization as the American Arbitration Association or Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service.

2.    A hearing upon the matters in controversy shall be heard promptly by the selected arbitrator. The arbitrator shall have the power to determine all relevant facts including but not limited to workload, productivity, economic feasibility, cost of living, the parties’ bargaining history, relevant market comparisons in the public sector and relevant market comparisons in the private sector, taking into account the cost of living in the markets compared, the employer’s past practice and impact on personnel or workplace morale.

3.    The arbitrator shall be limited in his authority to selection on a subject-by-subject basis from each of the parties’ last best offers. On each subject, the arbitrator shall select one party’s proposal in its entirety. The arbitrator shall not have the authority to select or prepare his own offer nor select or combine portions of either party’s last best offers on a given subject. In exercising his or her discretion to select between competing proposals by subject, the arbitrator shall base his or her decisions solely on the facts determined in accordance with subsection (I)(2) of this section and applicable law.

4.    The decision of the arbitrator shall be reduced to writing and shall be final and binding upon the parties. The collective bargaining agreement, in compliance with the arbitrator’s decision, shall be prepared and executed by the parties. Collective bargaining agreements awarded through binding interest arbitration may not exceed three years in duration from the date of the arbitrator’s award. The city and borough shall submit the financial aspects of the negotiated agreement or of the arbitrator’s decision to the assembly for approval and funding.

5.    Decisions of the arbitrator may be appealed to the superior court for the state only for abuse of discretion, fraud or misconduct on the part of the arbitrator. On appeal to the superior court, legal determinations of the employee relations board shall be reviewed de novo by the superior court. An appeal must be made within thirty days of the certification of service of the arbitrator’s final decision.

J.    Strike Prohibited. Employees shall not engage in strikes. Upon a finding by the city and borough administrator that employees are engaging or about to engage in a strike, the assembly may authorize the city and borough attorney to petition the superior court for an injunction, restraining order or such other order as may be appropriate.

K.    Agreement. Upon completion of negotiations between the city and borough and the bargaining representative, the terms and conditions shall be reduced to writing in agreement form. The agreement shall be presented to the appropriate employee unit for ratification by secret ballot and to the city and borough assembly for ratification by resolution.

L.    Merit System and Efficient Delivery of Services.

1.    It is the purpose of this section to reserve to management, and to exclude from the bargaining process, those decisions which permit the city and borough to maintain the efficient delivery of uninterrupted service to the community and to take necessary actions to carry out its mission in emergencies; provided, however, that the exercise of these rights does not preclude employees or their representatives from consulting or raising grievances about the practical consequences that decisions on the above matters have on wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment.

M.    Unfair Labor Practices.

1.    The city and borough or its agents shall not:

a.    Interfere, restrain or coerce an employee in the exercise of rights guaranteed by this section;

b.    Dominate or interfere with the formation, existence or administration of an organization;

c.    Discriminate in regard to hire or tenure of employment or a term or condition of employment, to encourage or discourage membership in an organization;

d.    Discharge or discriminate against an employee because the employee has signed or filed an affidavit, petition or complaint, or given testimony under this section;

e.    Refuse to bargain collectively in good faith with a labor organization which is the exclusive representative of employees in an appropriate unit, including the discussion of grievances with the exclusive representative.

2.    A labor organization or its agents shall not:

a.    Restrain or coerce:

i.    An employee in exercise of rights guaranteed in this section; or

ii.    The city and borough in the selection of its representatives for the purpose of collective bargaining or the adjustment of grievances;

b.    Discriminate against any employee because of race, religion, creed, color, sex, national origin or ancestry, or any person with regard to the membership or terms and conditions of membership in a labor organization;

c.    Refuse to bargain collectively in good faith with the city and borough if it has been designated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter as the exclusive representative of the employees in an appropriate unit;

d.    Refuse to meet and confer in good faith at reasonable times, places and frequency with city and borough management representatives on matters which are properly within the scope of representation;

e.    Cause or attempt to cause an employer to discriminate against an employee in regard to hire or tenure of employment or a term or condition of employment, to encourage or discourage membership in an organization.

3.    Nothing in this section prohibits the city and borough from making an agreement with an organization to require as a condition of employment payment to the exclusive bargaining agent for the expense of representing the members of the bargaining unit; however, such payments shall not exceed that portion of the dues paid by a member which is retained by the organization for local use.

N.    Complaint.

1.    Filing and Investigation of Complaints. Any person claiming to be aggrieved by a practice prohibited under this section may file a verified written complaint with the board. The complaint must be filed with the clerk within thirty days of the time the person first learned of the claimed prohibited practice. The board shall investigate the complaint or accusation. If it determines after the preliminary investigation that probable cause exists in support of the complaint or accusation, it shall try to eliminate the prohibited practice by informal methods of conference, conciliation, and persuasion.

2.    Complaint and Accusation. If the board fails to eliminate the prohibited practice by conciliation and fails to obtain voluntary compliance with this section, it may serve a copy of the complaint or accusation upon the respondent. The complaint or accusation and the subsequent procedures shall be handled in accordance with procedures adopted by the board.

3.    Powers. At a minimum, the board’s powers shall include the power to conduct hearings, to investigate, to compel testimony, and to issue complaints, subpoenas and orders.

O.    Enforcement by Injunction. The board may apply to the superior court for an order enjoining the prohibited acts specified in the order or decision of the board.

P.    Funding. The monetary impact of any agreement negotiated under this section is subject to assembly approval and to funding through budgetary appropriations.

Q.    Payroll Deductions for Dues and Fees. Upon written authorization of an employee within a bargaining unit, the city and borough shall deduct monthly from the payroll of the employee the amount of dues, service fees and/or other fees as certified by the executive officer of the exclusive bargaining representative and shall deliver it to the chief fiscal officer designated by the exclusive bargaining unit representative.

R.    Employment Relations Board.

1.    There is hereby created an employment relations board which shall have the power in the first instance to enforce this section. The board shall be comprised of three members, of which a majority shall constitute a quorum at any meeting, and shall have the power to conduct hearings, compel testimony and the production of documents, and to perform all other acts necessary to effect the provisions of this section.

2.    The composition of the board shall be three members: one member shall be selected by the city and borough assembly; one member shall be chosen by the city and borough unions represented, nonexempt and non-confidential employees in a secret ballot election to be conducted by the city clerk; and a third member shall be selected by the two other board members who have been appointed/elected. The third member selected by the other two shall become the chairperson and shall preside at all meetings of the board. The term of each board member shall be for three years.

3.    Each board member shall serve without compensation, but shall be paid an appropriate per diem and/or reimbursed for other expenses reasonably incurred in the performance of official duties. The city and borough assembly shall fund the activities of the employment relations board.

4.    Matters to be filed with the board shall be presented to the city and borough clerk, who shall promptly inform the chairperson of any filings. The chairperson shall then contact any parties for the purpose of scheduling meetings, hearings, or other such proceedings for the purpose of exercising jurisdiction.

5.    Where appropriate, the board may delegate its hearing responsibilities to a hearing officer who shall not be employed by the city and borough nor have a conflict of interest by virtue of any relationship with the city and borough, but who shall have the skills necessary to conduct a quasi-judicial administrative proceeding, and who shall know applicable principles of labor law and rules of evidence and procedure. The hearing officer shall make a recommended decision to the board, which shall then review the record and, where it so deems necessary, conduct further proceedings, take further testimony and/or receive additional evidence. The board shall then decide whether to accept, modify, or reject the hearing officer’s recommendations. The hearing officer shall be paid by the city and borough a reasonable rate consistent with the value of the services provided.

S.    Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

1.    “Board” means the city and borough’s employment relations board.

2.    “City and borough” means the city and borough of Sitka, Alaska, and its nonexempt and exempt regular employees, including employees of the Sitka Community Hospital, but excludes the school district and its employees.

3.    “Collective bargaining” means the performance of the mutual obligation of the city and borough or its designated representative and the representatives of the employees to meet at reasonable times, including meetings in advance of the budget-making process, and negotiate in good faith in respect to wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment, or the negotiation of an agreement and execution of a written contract incorporating an agreement reached if requested by either party, but these obligations do not compel either party to agree to a proposal or require the making of a concession.

4.    “Confidential employee” means an employee who assists and acts in a confidential capacity to a person who formulates, determines or effectuates management policies.

5.    “Election” means a proceeding conducted by the board in which the employees in a collective bargaining unit cast a secret ballot for collective bargaining representatives or for any other purpose specified in this chapter.

6.    “Grievance,” under the terms of any agreement pursuant to this chapter, means a complaint, misinterpretation or inequitable application of any of the provisions of such agreement concerning wages, hours or terms and conditions of employment.

7.    “Management employee” means an employee classified as within the exempt service; an employee who regularly assumes, or is appointed to assume for a significant length of time, a substantial part of the duties of a department head during such employee’s absence; and any employee who is responsible for the effectuation or the supervision of the effectuation of management policies.

8.    “Organization” means a labor organization in which the employees participate and which exists for the primary purpose of dealing with employers concerning grievances, labor disputes, wages, rates of pay, hours of employment and conditions of employment.

9.    “Terms and conditions of employment” means the hours of employment and the compensation and fringe benefits and the employer’s personnel policies affecting the working conditions of the employees, but does not include the general policies describing the function, purpose and budget of the city and borough, reserved by ordinance, nor matters regulated by a personnel system adopted pursuant to the Charter of the city and borough.

(Ord. 08-11 § 4, 2008; Ord. 05-30 § 4, 2005.)


Chapter 2.10 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 

Sections:

2.10.010    Definitions.

2.10.020    Defense and indemnification.

2.10.030    Exclusions – Determination to defend and indemnify.

2.10.040    Conditions of defense and indemnification.

2.10.050    Disqualification.

2.10.060    Conflict with provisions of insurance policies.

2.10.070    Pending claims.

2.10.080    Union contracts.

2.10.090    Volunteer workers.


2.10.010 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings unless the context indicates otherwise:

A.    “Claim” means a claim or lawsuit.

B.    “Employee” means any person who is or has been employed in the service of the city and borough.

C.    “Official” means any person who is serving or has served as an elected official of the city and borough and any person who is serving or has served as an appointed member of any board, commission, agency, or committee of the city and borough.

D.    “Official duties” includes conduct, acts, and omissions done by an official or employee in the course and scope of their service to the city and borough. (Ord. 17-25 § 4 (part), 2017.)


2.10.020 Defense and indemnification.

Subject to the conditions and requirements of this chapter, the city and borough shall provide to an official or employee legal defense and indemnification, including protection from any expenses connected with the defense, settlement, or payment of monetary damages, related to any claim filed against the official or employee, arising out of the good faith performance, purported performance, or failure of performance of official duties. This defense and indemnification shall be a condition of employment with the city and borough and shall be provided by the municipal attorney or the municipal attorney’s designee or through such insurance policy or self-insurance or similar program as the city and borough may establish. (Ord. 17-25 § 4 (part), 2017.)


2.10.030 Exclusions – Determination to defend and indemnify.

A.    The obligation of the city and borough to provide defense and indemnification shall not apply to any act taken in bad faith or any act outside the scope of service or employment, or to any claim brought by or on behalf of the city and borough. The following are examples of acts which will normally be deemed to have been taken in bad faith:

1.    An act committed with the willful intention of causing injury or harm, or which was reckless or malicious in nature.

2.    An act committed in willful violation of law.

3.    An act committed while under the influence of alcohol or a controlled substance.

B.    The municipal attorney shall determine whether an official or employee was performing official duties in good faith, and whether an official or employee committed any act in bad faith. The municipal administrator shall make this determination regarding a claim against the municipal attorney.

C.    If, at the time the claim is initiated, the known facts are insufficient to allow for the determination under subsection B of this section, the city and borough may elect initially to provide defense only, reserving any final determination until such time as sufficient facts are available.

D.    The official or employee may appeal to the assembly an adverse determination under subsection B of this section. (Ord. 17-25 § 4 (part), 2017.)


2.10.040 Conditions of defense and indemnification.

The continued obligation of the city and borough to provide defense and indemnification shall be subject to the following conditions:

A.    The official or employee shall cooperate fully with the city and borough and its counsel in handling or resisting the claim, including:

1.    Providing the municipal attorney, as soon as practicable after receiving notice of a claim: written notice of the claim, specifying the names of the officials or employees involved, the date, time, place and circumstances surrounding the incident or conduct giving rise to the claim, the names and addresses of all persons allegedly injured, the names and addresses of owners of allegedly damaged property, and the names and addresses of all witnesses;

2.    Cooperating with the city and borough and its counsel in making settlements of any lawsuits, and in enforcing any claim for subrogation against any persons or organizations that may be liable to the city and borough because of any damages or losses arising from the incident or conduct; and

3.    Attending interviews, depositions, hearings, and trials as requested, and assisting in securing and giving evidence and obtaining the attendance of witnesses.

B.    The city and borough reserves the sole right to control the defense of the claim and to compromise, settle, or defend the matter. (Ord. 17-25 § 4 (part), 2017.)


2.10.050 Disqualification.

If any official or employee fails or refuses to meet the requirements of this chapter or elects to provide his or her own representation on any claim, this chapter shall be inapplicable and of no force and effect with respect to that claim. (Ord. 17-25 § 4 (part), 2017.)


2.10.060 Conflict with provisions of insurance policies.

Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to modify or amend any provision of an insurance policy or any coverage through a self-insurance or joint insurance program. If there is a conflict between this chapter and the provisions of any such policies or coverage, the provisions of any such policies or coverage shall control. (Ord. 17-25 § 4 (part), 2017.)


2.10.070 Pending claims.

This chapter shall apply to any pending claim against an official or employee and to any claim hereafter filed irrespective of the date of the events or circumstances giving rise to the claim. (Ord. 17-25 § 4 (part), 2017.)


2.10.080 Union contracts.

If a collective bargaining unit contract covers any of the terms and conditions of this chapter, all employees under the contract shall be governed by the provisions of the contract. If there is a conflict between the provisions of such contract and this chapter, the provisions of the contract shall control. (Ord. 17-25 § 4 (part), 2017.)


2.10.090 Volunteer workers.

The city and borough shall provide defense and indemnification to volunteer workers performing services on its behalf; provided, that such defense and indemnification:

A.    Shall be provided only to volunteer workers authorized in writing by the head of a municipal department to perform a particular scope of services to the city and borough;

B.    Shall cover only conduct, acts, and omissions undertaken in the course and scope of such authorized services; and

C.    Shall be subject to all other conditions and requirements of this chapter in the same manner as they apply to officials and employees. (Ord. 17-25 § 4 (part), 2017.)


Chapter 2.12 CITY AND BOROUGH OF SITKA HOSPITAL BOARD3

Sections:

2.12.010    City and borough of Sitka hospital board.

2.12.020    Oath.

2.12.030    Compensation.

2.12.040    Filling vacancies.

2.12.060    Removal—Definition.

2.12.070    Organization.

2.12.080    Duties and powers.

2.12.090    Receipts and disbursements.

2.12.100    Reports.


2.12.010 City and borough of Sitka hospital board.

There shall be a board known as the city and borough of Sitka hospital board which shall consist of five voting members none of whom will be employees of Sitka Community Hospital:

A.    The city and borough of Sitka municipal administrator will appoint a nonvoting, ex officio member of the CBS senior staff as well as an alternate. This position will be approved by the assembly. This person will not hold any board office, such as chair or secretary. This term will not expire.

B.    A person having professional financial experience such as a certified public accountant, auditor, or financial analyst. This is a three-year term.

C.    A person having professional healthcare experience, such as a physician, nurse, physical therapist or close equivalent. This is a three-year term.

D.    Three people from the community at large. These are two-year terms.

There shall also be two additional nonvoting, ex officio members:

A.    A member of the Sitka Community Hospital chief medical staff will be elected each December by SCH medical staff.

B.    An assembly member who will serve as liaison. Appointed each October.

All Sitka community hospital board voting members will be approved by the assembly. (Ord. 15-37A § 4 (part), 2015: Ord. 15-15 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 05-10 § 4 (part), 2005: Ord. 01-1610 § 4, 2001: Ord. 96-1371 § 4, 1996; Ord. 95-1308 § 4, 1995; Ord. 91-1000 § 4, 1991; Ord. 91-978 § 4, 1991; Ord. 79-74 § 4, 1979: Ord. 79-413 § 4, 1979: Ord. 73-55 § 3, 1973.)


2.12.020 Oath.

Before entering upon the performance of their duties, each member of the board shall take and subscribe to an oath to support the Constitutions of the United States and the state of Alaska, and to faithfully strive to obey and carry into effect the duties imposed by law and ordinances of the city and borough. (Ord. 05-10 § 4 (part), 2005: Ord. 73-55 § 4, 1973.)


2.12.030 Compensation.

Members of the board shall not receive compensation for services performed as board members, and shall not be considered officers of the municipality. (Ord. 05-10 § 4 (part), 2005: Ord. 73-55 § 5, 1973.)


2.12.040 Filling vacancies.

In the event of a vacancy on the board caused by death, resignation, inability to serve, or any other reason, before the expiration of the term of any member the assembly shall appoint some person to fill such vacancy for the unexpired term. At the time of a vacancy, the assembly shall give fifteen days’ public notice that there is a vacancy on the city and borough of Sitka hospital board and that interested persons may inform the assembly that they are willing to serve. The assembly is not limited, however, to those applying when appointing members. (Ord. 05-10 § 4 (part), 2005: Ord. 73-55 § 6, 1973.)


2.12.060 Removal—Definition.

The assembly may remove a member of the board as follows:

A.    For good cause shown, the assembly may remove a member of the board upon fifteen days’ written notice of removal to the board member. The notice shall set forth in detail what the alleged grounds for the removal are;

B.    The board member may appeal the proposed removal. Appeal shall be to the assembly. Hearing on the appeal shall be public unless the board member requests otherwise and the assembly concurs. Notice of appeal must be given to the assembly no later than ten days prior to the date the removal is to be effective. The hearing shall be held prior to the effective date of removal if reasonably possible. If a proposed removal is appealed, the removal shall not become effective until after the assembly decision on the appeal. Following an appeal hearing, assembly action of removal shall not take place unless it is authorized by affirmative assembly vote;

C.    As used herein “good cause” means a just, not arbitrary cause; one based on a showing of lack of competency or performance to the detriment of the public interest.

(Ord. 05-10 § 4 (part), 2005: Ord. 73-55 § 8, 1973.)


2.12.070 Organization.

The board shall organize itself by electing a president, vice-president and secretary who shall hold their offices as provided by hospital board by-laws.

A.    The board shall adopt by-laws for the conduct of its business; provided, that three voting members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and three affirmative votes shall be necessary to carry any questions;

B.    Board meetings shall be held in the city and borough at least once each month;

C.    The board shall cause a record of proceedings to be kept. A copy of that record shall be delivered to the assembly in a timely manner;

D.    All meetings are subject to the Alaska Open Meetings Act. All meetings shall be open to the public. No member of the assembly wishing to attend shall be excluded from an executive session.

(Ord. 16-07 § 4, 2016; Ord. 15-37A § 4 (part), 2015: Ord. 05-10 § 4 (part), 2005: Ord. 73-55 § 9, 1972.)


2.12.080 Duties and powers.

The city and borough of Sitka hospital board shall:

A.    Review and make recommendations to the assembly for proper maintenance of the Sitka Community Hospital building(s) and grounds thereof for all projects in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars;

B.    Review and make recommendations through the municipal administrator to the assembly of all hospital construction and architectural contracts prior to assembly approval. All such contracts will be executed in the name of the city and borough;

C.    Review and make recommendations through the municipal administrator to the assembly for development and approval of any new hospital construction and improvements;

D.    Have the authority to solicit grants and funds from any sources for the furtherance of the main purposes. Any solicitations from federal or state agencies shall, however, have prior approval of the municipal administrator. The board shall keep the municipal administrator advised of grants and funds being sought;

E.    Subject to approval of the assembly, make rules and regulations for the administration of the hospital;

F.    Have the power to adopt personnel policies for hospital employees subject to annual review by the assembly during May of each year;

G.    Appoint or remove the hospital administrator subject to the personnel regulations of the Sitka Community Hospital as the assembly from time to time may approve;

H.    At its discretion, organize and seek volunteers to operate and staff a community fund drive for hospital purposes.

(Ord. 05-10 § 4 (part), 2005: Ord. 01-1640 § 4, 2001; Ord. 86-714 § 4, 1986; Ord. 73-55 § 10, 1973.)


2.12.090 Receipts and disbursements.

A.    The hospital accounts receivable shall be the property of the municipality and shall be deposited in a local bank. Such account shall be known as the Sitka Community Hospital general fund account. Such fund shall be used for no purpose other than in connection with hospital operations.

B.    The hospital administrator and the mayor shall sign general fund checks. In the absence of the administrator of the hospital, or the mayor, checks shall be signed in accordance with Section 11.13(b) of the municipal Charter.

C.    The hospital may open a patient refund account. This account shall contain moneys belonging to patients to whom refunds of money are due after payment in full of their account. Overpayments of third party payors shall be deposited directly to this account. The hospital administrator and the mayor shall sign checks on this account. In the absence of either the administrator of the hospital or the mayor, or both, checks shall be signed in accordance with Section 11.13(b) of the municipal Charter. Appropriate bonding will be determined by the hospital board.

D.    The full amount budgeted for hospital purposes shall be made available to the hospital on a schedule determined by the hospital administrator subject to approval of the schedule by the municipal administrator.

E.    The hospital board may make acquisitions or contracts that the city and borough administrator or his or her designee would be authorized to make pursuant to Chapter 3.16.

(Ord. 05-10 § 4 (part), 2005: Ord. 04-61 § 4, 2004; Ord. 99-1532 § 4, 1999; Ord. 73-55 § 11, 1973.)


2.12.100 Reports.

The city and borough of Sitka hospital board shall:

A.    On or before April 1st of each year, submit to the municipal administrator a detailed and itemized budget for the next fiscal year;

B.    Provide the assembly with quarterly operations reports, which shall be sent to the assembly through the municipal administrator and/or municipal finance director;

C.    Submit to the assembly, through the municipal administrator, such periodic or special reports as requested by the assembly.

(Ord. 05-10 § 4 (part), 2005: Ord. 73-55 § 12, 1973.)


Chapter 2.13 HEALTH NEEDS AND HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION

Sections:

2.13.010    Health needs and human services commission.

2.13.020    Term.

2.13.030    Meetings.

2.13.040    Organization.

2.13.050    Resignation.

2.13.060    Powers and duties.


2.13.010 Health needs and human services commission.

There shall be a commission known as the health needs and human services commission which shall be composed of seven members appointed by the assembly and, to the extent deemed advisable by the assembly, include professionals from among the fields of health and human services including medicine, psychology, public health, social services, public safety, public administration and other related fields. A member of the Sitka assembly will serve as a liaison for the commission. All members of the commission shall be at-large members and represent a diverse cross-section of the community. (Ord. 13-23 § 4 (part), 2013.)


2.13.020 Term.

The term of a member shall be three years or until a successor is appointed; except, term of the assembly liaison shall be for one year. The first members appointed to the commission shall, upon appointment, determine the length of the terms so that the terms of three members shall be for one year and the terms of two members shall be for two years, and the terms of two members shall be for three years, resulting in staggered terms for members subsequently appointed. A vacancy on the commission shall be filled by appointment by the assembly for any remainder of an unexpired term. (Ord. 13-23 § 4 (part), 2013.)


2.13.030 Meetings.

A.    Meet a minimum of four times per year at such times that the chair or, in his or her absence, the vice-chair shall determine.

B.    Give reasonable public notice of its meetings and shall comply in all respects with the Alaska Open Meetings Law.

(Ord. 13-23 § 4 (part), 2013.)


2.13.040 Organization.

The commission shall organize itself by electing a chairman, vice chairman, and secretary, each of whom shall be elected by the members of the commission at the first meeting of the fiscal year and shall serve a term to expire upon election of officers at the first meeting of the following fiscal year. (Ord. 13-23 § 4 (part), 2013.)


2.13.050 Resignation.

Should an officer resign from their position prior to expiration of their term, or otherwise is unable or unwilling to perform duties as required of the office, the commission may elect an officer to serve out the remainder of that term. In addition to the above officers, the commission, by a majority vote of its members, may designate and elect or appoint such other officers, assistant officers and agents as it deems necessary at such time, in such manner, and upon and for such terms as it shall prescribe. All officers and agents shall serve at the pleasure of the commission, whenever in its judgment the best interest of the commission will be served. (Ord. 13-23 § 4 (part), 2013.)


2.13.060 Powers and duties.

A.    The commission will annually identify goals developed through the collection and consolidation of vital and current information on human service trends as well as public input. All goals shall be approved by the assembly prior to the commission initiating action. All findings of the commission will be made available to benefit and educate city and borough of Sitka decision-makers. 

B.    The commission will perform other activities which are necessary and proper to carry out the above duties and any other actions determined by the assembly to be beneficial to carry out the health and human service goals necessary in the city and borough of Sitka. 

C.    The commission will coordinate with local entities such as the Sitka Tribe of Alaska, Sitka Community Hospital, SEARHC as well as applicable nonprofits and local businesses providing health/human services to identify human service needs as well as to best streamline the collection and consolidation of vital and current information on human service needs.

(Ord. 13-23 § 4 (part), 2013.)


Chapter 2.14 HISTORIC TRUST BOARD

Sections:

2.14.010    Historic trust board established—Membership.

2.14.020    Organization and operation.

2.14.030    Duties and powers.

2.14.040    Receipts and disbursements.

2.14.050    Reports.


2.14.010 Historic trust board established—Membership.

There shall be a board known as the historic trust board which shall consist of five members all of whom shall serve terms of three years. The present members shall continue their terms and expiration of terms shall be staggered based upon termination or resignation of members. No person may serve on the board for more than two consecutive terms. (Ord. 91-975 § 4 (part), 1991.)


2.14.020 Organization and operation.

The organization and operation of the board shall be determined by its members. Its operation shall be governed by the provisions in Chapter 2.60 of this code. (Ord. 91-975 § 4 (part), 1991.)


2.14.030 Duties and powers.

The historic trust board shall:

A.    Have general supervision and care of buildings and grounds assigned to it and the power to do everything necessary for proper maintenance and operation thereof within the limits and appropriations authorized by the assembly;

B.    Review and make recommendations through the municipal administrator to the assembly for reconstruction and repair of all properties given to the board for supervision. All contracts will be executed in the name of the city and borough of Sitka;

C.    Review and make recommendations through the municipal administrator to the assembly for development and approval of any new improvements or construction to those properties given to their supervision;

D.    Have the authority to solicit grants and funds from any source for the furtherance of the main purposes. Any solicitations shall have the prior approval of the municipal administrator;

E.    Subject to approval of the assembly make rules and regulations for the administration and control of those properties entrusted to their care;

F.    Other properties may be added to the control and supervision of the board as the assembly shall direct;

G.    All tenants and rental agreements shall receive the prior approval of the assembly. It is not the assembly’s intent to compete with the private rental market and nonprofit or public tenants will be favored.

(Ord. 91-975 § 4 (part), 1991.)


2.14.040 Receipts and disbursements.

A.    The trust receipts shall be the property of the municipality. A fund shall be known as the Sitka historic trust account and shall be used for no purpose other than and in connection with trust operations.

B.    The municipal administrator and mayor shall sign general trust checks. In the absence of the administrator or the mayor the checks shall be signed in accordance with Section 11.13 (B) of the municipal charter.

C.    Disbursements from trust accounts shall be by check only but shall not be made unless approved by the trust board and by the assembly.

D.    The full amount budgeted for the historic trust purposes shall be made available to the trust on a schedule determined by the administrator.

E.    Within the limits of budgeted amounts the board may incur expenses. Bills shall not be paid, however, unless they have been approved by the assembly under the same procedures as ordinary bills.

F.    Nonoperational items with a unit cost in excess of two thousand dollars shall be approved by the assembly prior to any liability being incurred.

(Ord. 91-975 § 4 (part), 1991.)


2.14.050 Reports.

The historic trust board shall:

A.    On or before March 1st each year submit to the municipal administrator a detailed and itemized estimate of the probable revenues and a detailed and itemized budget for the next fiscal year;

B.    Provide the assembly with quarterly operations reports which shall be sent to the assembly through the municipal administrator;

C.    Submit to the assembly through the municipal administrator such periodic and special reports as requested by the assembly.

(Ord. 91-975 § 4 (part), 1991.)


Chapter 2.16 LIBRARY COMMISSION

Sections:

2.16.010    Board of library commissioners.

2.16.020    Oath.

2.16.030    Compensation.

2.16.040    Filling vacancies.

2.16.060    Removal.

2.16.070    Organization.

2.16.080    Duties.

2.16.090    Library property.


2.16.010 Board of library commissioners.

There shall be a board to be known as the board of library commissioners which shall consist of seven members who shall serve terms of three years. All commissioners shall be appointed by the assembly. (Ord. 03-1730 § 4, 2003: Ord. 72-50 § 3, 1972.)


2.16.020 Oath.

Before entering upon the performance of their duties, each member of the board shall take and subscribe to an oath to support the Constitution of the United States and the state of Alaska and to faithfully strive to obey and carry into effect the duties imposed by law and ordinances of the city and borough. (Ord. 72-50 § 4, 1972.)


2.16.030 Compensation.

Members of the board shall not receive compensation for services performed as commissioners. (Ord. 72-50 § 5, 1972.)


2.16.040 Filling vacancies.

In the event of a vacancy on the board caused by death, resignation, inability to serve, or any other reason, before the expiration of the term of any member, the assembly shall appoint some person having the qualifications herein provided to fill such vacancy for the unexpired term. At the time of a vacancy the assembly shall give fifteen days’ public notice that there is a vacancy on the board of library commissioners and that interested persons may inform the assembly that they are willing to serve. The assembly is not, however, limited to those applying when appointing members. (Ord. 72-50 § 6, 1972.)


2.16.060 Removal.

The assembly may remove a member of the board for cause. (Ord. 72-50 § 8, 1972.)


2.16.070 Organization.

The board shall organize by electing a chairman and secretary who shall hold their offices for such time as the board by resolution may prescribe.

A.    The board shall adopt by-laws for the conduct of its business; provided that three members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and three affirmative votes shall be necessary to carry any questions;

B.    Board meetings shall be held in the city and borough at least once each month;

C.    Permanent records or minutes shall record the votes of every member on each question and copies of the minutes shall be delivered to all members of the assembly and to the municipal administrator;

D.    All meetings shall be open to the public except that the following may be discussed in executive session (however, no member of the assembly or the municipal administrator wishing to attend shall be excluded from an executive session):

1.    Matters, the immediate knowledge of which would adversely affect the finances of the municipality,

2.    Subjects that tend to prejudice the reputation and character of any person; provided the person may request a public discussion,

3.    Matters which by law, municipal charter or ordinance are required to be confidential.

(Ord. 72-50 § 9, 1972.)


2.16.080 Duties.

The board of library commissioners shall:

A.    Have general supervision and care of the municipal library and the buildings and grounds thereof and power to do everything necessary for the proper maintenance and operation thereof within the limits of appropriations authorized by the assembly;

B.    On or before March 1st of each year, submit to the municipal administrator a detailed and itemized estimate of probable revenues from sources other than taxation and a detailed and itemized budget for the next fiscal year;

C.    Subject to the approval of the assembly, make rules and regulations for the administration and control of the municipal library;

D.    Make recommendations to the municipal administrator on the appointment of the library staff.

(Ord. 72-50 § 10, 1972.)


2.16.090 Library property.

No person shall wilfully detain any library material whatsoever, or any book, magazine, recording or pamphlet thereof, for more than thirty days after notification has been sent that the material is overdue. Such notification may be given to the person personally or by mail to the place of residence of such person last registered with the municipal library or in the phone book. Mailed notice shall be deemed given upon deposit in the mail so addressed and with postage prepaid. (Ord. 72-50 § 11, 1972.)


Chapter 2.18 PLANNING COMMISSION

Sections:

2.18.010    Terms of office.

2.18.020    Planning director.

2.18.030    Filling vacancies.

2.18.050    Organization.


2.18.010 Terms of office.

A.    The term of office for the membership shall be three years.

B.    The first planning commission members shall be appointed and serve terms as follows:

1.    Two commission members for a term of three years;

2.    Two commission members for a term of two years;

3.    One commission member for a term of one year.

C.    Thereafter, all appointments shall be for a three-year term.

D.    This schedule of terms of office shall be effective retroactive to February 2, 1972. 

(Ord. 74-118 § 3, 1974.)


2.18.020 Planning director.

The planning director shall be an ex officio member of the commission. (Ord. 74-118 § 4, 1974.)


2.18.030 Filing vacancies.

In the event of a vacancy on the commission caused by death, resignation, inability to serve, or any other reason, before the expiration of the term of any member, the assembly shall appoint some person to fill such vacancy for the unexpired term. At the time of a vacancy, the assembly shall give ten days’ public notice that there is a vacancy on the commission and that interested persons may inform the assembly that they are willing to serve. The assembly is not, however, limited to those applying when appointing members. (Ord. 74-118 § 5, 1974.)


2.18.050 Organization.

The commission shall organize itself by electing a chairman and vice chairman. Meetings shall be held at least once a month, with special meetings as required. Minutes of all meetings shall be furnished to the office of the administrator. (Ord. 18-01 § 4, 2018: Ord. 04-52 § 4, 2004: Ord. 74-118 § 7, 1974.)


Chapter 2.19 POLICE AND FIRE COMMISSION

Sections:

2.19.010    Established.

2.19.020    Oath.

2.19.030    Compensation.

2.19.040    Filling vacancies.

2.19.060    Removal.

2.19.070    Removal—Definition.

2.19.080    Organization.

2.19.090    Duties.


2.19.010 Established.

There shall be a municipal police and fire commission as established by Section 7 of the municipal Charter. The police and fire chiefs shall be ex officio members without vote. (Ord. 83-579 § 4(A) (part), 1983.)


2.19.020 Oath.

Before entering upon the performance of their duties, each member of the commission shall take and subscribe to an oath to support the Constitution of the United States and the state of Alaska and to faithfully strive to obey and carry into effect the duties imposed by law and ordinances of the city and borough. (Ord. 83-579 § 4(A) (part), 1983.)


2.19.030 Compensation.

Members of the commission shall not receive compensation for services performed as commissioners. (Ord. 83-579 § 4(A) (part), 1983.)


2.19.040 Filling vacancies.

In the event of a vacancy on the commission caused by death, resignation, inability to serve, or any other reason, before the expiration of the term of any member, the assembly shall appoint a person to fill such vacancy for the unexpired term.

At the time of the vacancy, the assembly shall give fifteen days’ public notice that there is a vacancy on the commission and that interested persons may inform the assembly that they are willing to serve. The assembly is not, however, limited to those applying when appointing members. All applicants may be subjected to a background check and must be prepared to answer any questions the assembly might ask. (Ord. 83-579 § 4(A) (part), 1983.)


2.19.060 Removal.

The assembly may remove a member of the commission for cause. (Ord. 83-579 § 4(A) (part), 1983.)


2.19.070 Removal—Definition.

The assembly may remove a member of the commission as follows:

A.    For good cause shown, the assembly may remove a member upon fifteen days’ notice of removal to the member. The notice shall set forth in detail when the alleged grounds for removal will become effective;

B.    The commission member may appeal the proposed removal. Appeal shall be public unless the commission member requests otherwise and the assembly concurs. Notice of appeal must be given to the assembly no later than ten days prior to the date the removal is to be effective. The hearing shall be held prior to the effective date of removal if reasonably possible. If a proposed removal is appealed, the removal shall not become effective until after the assembly decision on the appeal. Following an appeal hearing, assembly action of removal shall not take place unless it is authorized by affirmative assembly vote;

C.    As used in this chapter, “good cause” means a just, not arbitrary cause; one based on a showing of lack of competency or performance to the detriment of the public interest.

(Ord. 83-579 § 4(A) (part), 1983.)


2.19.080 Organization.

A.    The commission shall organize by annually electing a chairman at the first regular meeting in the month of January. The commission shall adopt bylaws for the conduct of its business, provided that three members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and three affirmative votes shall be necessary to carry any questions.

B.    Commission meetings shall be held in the city and borough at least once each month.

C.    Permanent records or minutes shall record whether the question passed or failed and the vote tally when applicable. Copies of the minutes shall be delivered to members of the commission and to the clerk’s office for distribution to the assembly and the public.

D.    The commission shall act as a body and not through individual members.

E.    All meetings shall be open to the public except that the following may be discussed in executive session; however, no member of the assembly or the municipal administrator wishing to attend shall be excluded from an executive session:

1.    Matters, the immediate knowledge of which would adversely affect the finances of the municipality;

2.    Subjects that tend to prejudice the reputation and character of any person; provided, the person may request a public discussion;

3.    Matters which by law, municipal Charter, or ordinance are required to be confidential.

(Ord. 11-18 § 4, 2011; Ord. 83-579 § 4(A) (part), 1983.)


2.19.090 Duties.

The police and fire commission shall:

A.    The police and fire commission shall advise the assembly concerning police and fire department matters, make recommendations concerning public safety, and undertake such other duties as the assembly may assign;

B.    Aid in the public relations efforts of each department;

C.    Make, through the administrator, such periodic or special reports as requested by the assembly;

D.    Advise the administrator or assembly on such other matters as may be requested, such as hold hearings, or act as a screening committee for applicants for of chief of either department.

(Ord. 83-579 § 4(A) (part), 1983.)


Chapter 2.20 FIRE DEPARTMENT

Sections:

2.20.010    Establishment.

2.20.020    Fire chief—Authority and responsibilities.

2.20.030    Training, reports and records.

2.20.040    Equipment owned by the city and borough.

2.20.050    Private vehicles of members of Sitka fire department.

2.20.060    Volunteer association.


2.20.010 Establishment.

A.    There shall be a fire department in and for the city and borough of Sitka to be known as the “Sitka fire department.”

 B.    The purposes of the fire department are to save lives and property through professional response to emergency situations and to minimize emergency occurrences via prevention programs.

C.    The department shall consist of a fire chief and assistant chief (or chiefs) and as many other positions as may be necessary for the effective operation of the department. Members of the fire department will include both paid and unpaid professionals.

 D.    The fire department includes a fire division, an emergency medical services (EMS) division, a dive rescue and recovery division, a search and rescue division, and an emergency management division. (Ord. 04-58 § 4, 2004; Ord. 04-35 § 4 (part), 2004.)


2.20.020 Fire chief—Authority and responsibilities.

A.    The fire chief shall be the emergency manager for the city and borough of Sitka under the authority of the city and borough municipal administrator.

B.    The fire chief shall adopt, update, implement and maintain the NIMS (National Incident Management System) for the city and borough of Sitka to include the ICS (Incident Command System) for the purpose of individual domestic incident management and emergency prevention, preparedness, response, recovery, and mitigation activities as well as in support of all actions taken to assist federal, state, local and tribal levels of government.

C.    The fire chief shall determine the organization of each division.

D.    The fire chief shall specify the response to emergencies.

E.    The fire chief shall appoint all officers (both paid and volunteer). Such appointments shall be, insofar as possible, done following a fair and impartial competitive examination. All officers shall be accountable to the fire chief.

F.    The fire chief shall appoint members (both paid and volunteer).

G.    The fire chief shall arrange for the services of a medical director.

H.    The fire chief shall be responsible to prepare, submit, and administer the fire department budget.

I.    The fire chief is responsible to recommend to the city and borough administrator and assembly, capital investments necessary for the effective operation of the fire department.

J.    The fire chief is responsible to safeguard and maintain all property of the fire department.

K.    The fire chief shall assure investigation into the origin, cause, and circumstances of all fires.

L.    The fire chief shall maintain and enforce an up-to-date, comprehensive set of rules and regulations governing the discipline, training, and operation of the fire department. The fire chief shall have the authority to carry out the enforcement of these rules and regulations and is authorized to suspend or remove from service any officer or member.

M.    The fire chief shall be responsible for notifying members of the fire department of such emergencies to assure prompt response to such incidents.

N.    The fire chief shall have the authority to dispatch resources to emergencies beyond the road system when such allocation of such resources will not jeopardize a reasonable level of protection for this municipality.

O.    The fire chief shall perform the duties incident to the office and such other duties as the city and borough administrator may assign.

(Ord. 05-55 § 4, 2005: Ord. 04-35 § 4 (part), 2004.)


2.20.030 Training, reports and records.

A.    The fire chief shall administer a comprehensive training program.

B.    The fire chief shall report monthly on the status of the fire department to the police and fire commission.

C.    The fire chief shall see that complete records are maintained. (Ord. 04-35 § 4 (part), 2004.)


2.20.040 Equipment owned by the city and borough.

A.    Fire department equipment shall be used only with proper authority.

B.    Fire department equipment may be assigned to members. Otherwise, equipment should not be taken without proper authorization.

C.    Fire department buildings and equipment are open to the public when accompanied by a member of the fire department. (Ord. 04-35 § 4 (part), 2004.)


2.20.050 Private vehicles of members of Sitka fire department.

A.    Members of the department shall be issued fire department insignia to be attached to their vehicles.

B.    Personal vehicles of fire department members may be equipped with a flashing blue light. The light may be energized only when responding to an alarm. Members shall observe all traffic ordinances. (Ord. 04-35 § 4 (part), 2004.)


2.20.060 Volunteer association.

A.    Members of the fire department may organize into a voluntary association with election of their own officers and by-laws.

B.    The purpose of the volunteer association is to support the fire department, its members and their families.

C.    The volunteer association shall in no way limit the authority of the fire chief.

D.    Funding for the volunteer association shall be through a separate line item in the fire department budget. (Ord. 04-35 § 4 (part), 2004.)


Chapter 2.25 SITKA POLICE DEPARTMENT

Sections:

2.25.010    Establishment.

2.25.020    Appointments.

2.25.030    Rank.

2.25.040    Duties of the chief.

2.25.050    Duties.

2.25.060    Serving process.

2.25.070    Conduct of members.

2.25.080    Rules and regulations.

2.25.090    Organization.

2.25.100    Equal opportunity in making appointments to the police department.


2.25.010 Establishment.

There shall be a police department in and for the municipality to be known as the Sitka police department. It shall consist of a police chief and such other officers as may be deemed necessary for the effective operation of the department. (Ord. 88-842 § 4 (part), 1988.)


2.25.020 Appointments.

The chief of police shall be appointed by the administrator with the approval of the assembly.

All other appointments to, or promotions within the department, shall be made by the chief of police subject to the approval of the administrator. (Ord. 88-842 § 4 (part), 1988.)


2.25.030 Rank.

The chief of police shall be the head of the department and have supervision over all officers and members thereof. (Ord. 88-842 § 4 (part), 1988.)


2.25.040 Duties of the chief.

The chief of police shall be the keeper of the municipal jail and shall have custody of all persons incarcerated therein. He shall keep such records, and make such records concerning the activities of his department as may be required by statute or by the assembly. The chief shall be responsible for the performance by the police department of its functions. All persons who are members of the police department shall serve subject to the orders of the chief of police. (Ord. 88-842 § 4 (part), 1988.)


2.25.050 Duties.

It shall be the duty of the members of the Sitka police department to see to the enforcement of all the ordinances of the municipality and all state statutes applicable therein; to preserve order therein; to prevent infractions of law and arrest violators thereof. (Ord. 88-842 § 4 (part), 1988.)


2.25.060 Serving process.

No member of the police department, except the chief, shall serve any process, except on command of the chief of the police department. (Ord. 88-842 § 4 (part), 1988.)


2.25.070 Conduct of members.

It shall be the duty of members of the police department to conduct themselves in a proper law-abiding manner at all times and to avoid the use of unnecessary force. Each member of the department shall obey the lawful orders and directions of their superior. (Ord. 88-842 § 4 (part), 1988.)


2.25.080 Rules and regulations.

The chief of police of the Sitka police department may make or prescribe rules and regulations as he deems advisable, consistent with accepted police practices. Such rules as approved by the administrator shall be binding upon members of the Sitka police department. Such rules and regulations shall cover, besides the conduct of members, uniforms and equipment worn or carried, hours of service, vacations, and all other similar matters necessary or desirable for the better efficiency of the department. (Ord. 88-842 § 4 (part), 1988.)


2.25.090 Organization.

The chief of police shall create such divisions within said department as he deems necessary for the correct performance of the duties assigned to the police department, subject to the approval of the administrator of the city and borough. (Ord. 88-842 § 4 (part), 1988.)


2.25.100 Equal opportunity in making appointments to the police department.

No person shall be deprived of an opportunity to serve on the police department because of race, religion, skin color, national origin, or sex. No arbitrary rules on height, weight, or achievement of strength, unrelated to job needs shall be imposed. No handicapped person shall be denied, merely by virtue of being handicapped, appointment to a position on the Sitka police department which the handicapped person is competent to fill. (Ord. 88-842 § 4 (part), 1988.)


Chapter 2.36 PUBLIC NOTICE OF MEETINGS5

Sections:

2.36.010    Required.

2.36.020    Publication.

2.36.030    Emergency meeting.

2.36.040    Meeting location.


2.36.010 Required.

Reasonable public notice shall be given of all meetings of an administrative body, board, commission, committee, subcommittee, authority, agency or other organization including subordinate units of the above groups of the city and borough including but not limited to assembly, school board, platting board, departments, commissions or organizations advisory or otherwise of the city and borough supported in whole or in part by public money or authorized to spend public money. (B.C.S. § 2.12.010.)


2.36.020 Publication.

Reasonable public notice is given if a statement containing the date, time and place of the meeting is published not less than twenty-four hours before the time of the meeting in a newspaper of general circulation published within the city and borough or not less than twenty-four hours before the time of the meeting by posting such statement in three public places within the city and borough or by announcement of such meeting twenty-four hours before the time of the meeting on radio or television stations within the city and borough with an affidavit of broadcasting given by such radio or television stations. If the meeting is a special meeting, then the above statement shall also contain the expected subjects of discussion, but the failure to list a subject shall not invalidate any action taken in respect thereto. (B.C.S. § 2.12.020.)


2.36.030 Emergency meeting.

An emergency meeting of the assembly or school board may be held after such public notice as is reasonable under the circumstances without regard to the publication requirements in Section 2.36.020, upon the affirmative vote of all members present, or the affirmative vote of three-quarters of those elected that a public emergency affecting life, health, welfare or property exists and that reasonable public notice of the meeting has been given. Any action taken at an emergency meeting is valid only for sixty days. (B.C.S. § 2.12.030.)


2.36.040 Meeting location.

Meetings required to be open to the public under this chapter and the state open meeting law shall be held in a location and at a time reasonably accessible to the public. (Ord. 00-1567 § 4, 2000.)


Chapter 2.38 GARY PAXTON INDUSTRIAL PARK

Sections:

2.38.010    Designation.

2.38.020    Gary Paxton industrial park board of directors.

2.38.030    Board of directors organization.

2.38.040    Vacancies.

2.38.050    Meetings.

2.38.060    Coordination.

2.38.070    Membership in associations.

2.38.080    General powers.

2.38.090    Leasing powers.

2.38.100    Adoption of regulations.

2.38.110    Gary Paxton industrial park director designated appointment.

2.38.120    Director duties and responsibilities.

2.38.130    Schedule of fees and charges.

2.38.140    Industrial park fees.

2.38.150    Preparation and submission of a budget.

2.38.160    Other fiscal matters.

2.38.170    Employee relations.

2.38.180    Definitions.


2.38.010 Designation.

The former Alaska Pulp Corporation mill site is designated as the Gary Paxton industrial park (GPIP), as described in Exhibit A, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and incorporated herein by reference, except for those portions of the GPIP described in Exhibit B, attached to the ordinance amending this chapter and incorporated herein by reference. The Gary Paxton industrial park is a municipal department subject to assembly general oversight. (Ord. 19-33 § 4, 2019: Ord. 14-21 § 4 (part), 2014: Ord. 00-1568 § 4 (part), 2000.)


2.38.020 Gary Paxton industrial park board of directors.

A.    There is established the board of directors of the city and borough of Sitka, which shall be known as the city and borough of Sitka Gary Paxton industrial park board of directors. The Gary Paxton industrial park board shall consist of five members appointed by the assembly to serve without compensation for staggered two-year terms. Terms shall commence on June 1st.

B.    No employee or the spouse of an employee or a member of the immediate family or household of a member of the board of the Gary Paxton industrial park may be a member of the board. To the extent possible, appointments to the board shall include persons having marine, engineering, financial or other skills relevant to industrial park matters. One member of the board shall hold a seat at large. The conflict of interest provisions set out in this code and the Charter shall apply to actions of the board of directors. A written disclosure by each board member of his or her ownership interests in lessees and lessee applicants shall be filed with the municipal clerk by March 15th annually.

C.    Members of the board of directors shall serve at the pleasure of the assembly and may be removed by the assembly at any time.

(Ord. 14-21 § 4 (part), 2014; Ord. 00-1568 § 4 (part), 2000.)


2.38.030 Board of directors organization.

The board shall elect annually from its members a chair and vice chair and such other officers as it deems necessary. (Ord. 00-1568 § 4 (part), 2000.)


2.38.040 Vacancies.

A.    A vacancy shall exist under the following conditions:

1.    If a person appointed to membership fails to quality and take office within thirty days of appointment;

2.    If a member departs from the city and borough with the intent to remain away for a period of ninety or more days;

3.    If a member submits his or her resignation to the assembly;

4.    If a member is physically unable to attend board and standing committee meetings for a period of more than ninety days; or

5.    If a member misses more than forty percent of the board and standing committee meetings in a twelve-month period.

B.    The chair of the board shall notify the assembly of any vacancy on the board. Upon notification, the assembly shall appoint a new member for the unexpired term. 

(Ord. 00-1568 § 4 (part), 2000.)


2.38.050 Meetings.

The board shall meet at least once each month at a place and time to be designated by the chair. Meetings of the board or any duly constituted committee of the board shall be subject to the state and local open meeting laws. (Ord. 00-1568 § 4 (part), 2000.)


2.38.060 Coordination.

A.    The board shall submit to the assembly, at least quarterly, a report on industrial park operations and pending issues.

B.    The municipal administrator or his designee shall be made an ex-officio member of the board.

C.    The board shall adopt safety policies acceptable to the municipal risk manager or such other officer as the director may designate.

D.    In emergencies, the industrial park shall, to the extent necessary to resolve the emergency, be under the control of the fire chief or such other officer as the municipal administrator may designate.

(Ord. 00-1568 § 4 (part), 2000.)


2.38.070 Membership in associations.

The board of directors may maintain membership in any local, state or national group or association organized and operated for the promotion, improvement, or assistance in the administration of port and harbor facilities, or industrial park facilities and, in connection therewith, pay dues and fees thereto. The assembly shall select one of its members to serve as the liaison to the board. (Ord. 00-1568 § 4 (part), 2000.)


2.38.080 General powers.

A.    Subject to state laws and municipal ordinances, the board of directors shall generally exercise all powers necessary and incidental to operation of all Gary Paxton industrial park facilities in the public interest and in a sound business manner. In particular, and without limitation on the foregoing, the board:

1.    Shall be responsible for the operation, maintenance, development, and marketing of the municipally owned and operated Gary Paxton industrial park, including such facilities as site development, docks, and facilities appurtenant thereto;

2.    Shall approve annual budgets prepared by the industrial park director to be submitted to the assembly for final approval and adoption;

3.    Shall formulate and prepare planning documents for the ongoing development of the industrial park;

4.    Shall enforce all rules and regulations necessary for the administration of the facilities under its management. Such rules and regulations shall be prepared and amended by the board and subject to the final approval of the assembly before implementation;

5.    Shall prescribe the terms under which persons and vessels may use the facilities and shall establish and enforce standards of operation, consistent with the prospective purchasers agreement and the state of Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation Management Plan and the conveyance agreement with Alaska Pulp Corporation;

6.    Shall, within the industrial park appropriation and in general conformity with the rates of pay established for municipal positions of similar responsibility, establish and may amend, the pay plan for industrial park municipal employees;

7.    Shall administer and dispose of tideland, submerged land, and other land identified by the assembly by ordinance as subject to Gary Paxton industrial park administration, subject to the following limitations:

a.    Any sale, purchase, or trade of land other than short term lease (which may be approved by the municipal administrator) shall be subject to approval by the assembly by resolution.

b.    All land transactions by the board in accordance with this section shall be governed by this chapter rather than Title 18 of this code, as follows:

i.    The long term leasing of all of the property at the Gary Paxton industrial park is authorized regardless of value.

ii.    Leases shall be granted to the highest responsible bidder unless the assembly determines that because of the nature of the trust to be leased, the nature of the business being sought for the lease or seeking a lease, or the number of jobs to be produced, that competitive bidding is inappropriate and the terms of the proposed lease, including price, should be negotiated. Applications for non-bid dispositions shall be referred to the board for recommendations;

8.    May propose capital improvement projects to and apply for funding from state and federal agencies; provided, that such request shall be subject to prioritization by the assembly with other municipal capital improvement funding requests;

9.    Shall, on behalf of the municipality, enter into memoranda of understanding, permit negotiations and similar agreements with public agencies for industrial park purposes. The board may negotiate and enter into contracts for goods and services pursuant to regulations set out in this chapter; provided, that all legal services shall be provided by or under the supervision of the municipal attorney. All services provided by a municipal agency other than the municipal attorney shall be pursuant to a memorandum of understanding or other instrument providing for payment or such other settlement as the municipal administrator and board may approve. Contracts for public improvements and, whenever practicable, other purchase of supplies, materials, equipment, and services, except professional services and services of officers and municipal employees, shall be by competitive bid and awarded to the lowest qualified bidder according to the procedures established in Title 18. All contracts and purchased items specifically identified within the Gary Paxton industrial park budget shall not require prior assembly approval. All contracts and purchases shall require municipal administrator approval.

(Ord. 14-21 § 4 (part), 2014; Ord. 00-1568 § 4 (part), 2000.)


2.38.090 Leasing powers.

All leases of land, whether uplands or tidelands, within the Gary Paxton industrial park are subject to the leasing provisions set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 14-21 § 4 (part), 2014: Ord. 00-1568 § 4 (part), 2000.)


2.38.100 Adoption of regulations.

The board of directors shall adopt regulations for the administration of the industrial park. The board shall submit regulations to the assembly for review prior to final adoption. (Ord. 00-1568 § 4 (part), 2000.)


2.38.110 Gary Paxton industrial park director designated appointment.

A.    The director of the Gary Paxton industrial park shall be the director appointed by the assembly upon the affirmative recommendation of a majority of the entire board. The board shall interview and recommend candidates to assembly for final approval. The director serves at the pleasure of the board. For purposes of Title 2, the director shall have the status of a department head as defined in Chapter 2.08. The assembly shall establish the compensation and benefits to be provided to the director.

B.    The assembly may alternatively elect to enter into a services contract with another entity to perform all duties and functions of the director of the Gary Paxton industrial park as described in Section 2.38.120.

(Ord. 14-21 § 4 (part), 2014: Ord. 00-1568 § 4 (part), 2000.)


2.38.120 Director duties and responsibilities.

A.    The director is responsible for the overall supervision and direction of the affairs of the Gary Paxton industrial park. The authority and duties of the director shall include the following:

1.    To be responsible for carrying out all applicable laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations;

2.    To be responsible for carrying out policies established by the board of directors and assembly;

3.    To prepare and submit to the board of directors for approval a plan of organization and a job classification plan for the personnel employed in the Gary Paxton industrial park;

4.    To prepare an annual budget as required by municipal ordinance;

5.    To select, employ, control, and discharge all Gary Paxton industrial park employees and such other employees as the assembly by ordinance hereafter places under the supervision of the director subject to the provisions of the municipal personnel policies, except that the director may recommend changes to the personnel plan to allow for the peculiarities of the operation of Gary Paxton industrial park;

6.    To prepare such reports as may be required on any phase of industrial park activity;

7.    To attend all meetings of the board of directors;

8.    To perform any other duty that may be necessary in the interest of the industrial park area.

(Ord. 14-21 § 4 (part), 2014; Ord. 00-1568 § 4 (part), 2000.)


2.38.130 Schedule of fees and charges.

A.    A schedule of fees and charges for use of the industrial park public dock and other industrial park facilities shall be submitted to the assembly annually or more often as deemed necessary, for approval.

B.    The assembly, prior to imposing any fee on activities related principally to or property located in the Gary Paxton industrial park, shall consider the extent to which such fee is necessary to support municipal services delivered by or facilities provided by the municipality.

(Ord. 14-21 § 4 (part), 2014; Ord. 00-1568 § 4 (part), 2000.)


2.38.140 Industrial park fees.

(Leave blank for now. To be determined). (Ord. 00-1568 § 4 (part), 2000.)


2.38.150 Preparation and submission of a budget.

The director shall prepare the budget in accordance with approved city and borough procedure and format and shall submit it to the board of directors for approval and recommendation to the assembly. The board of directors shall modify the budget as it deems necessary and forward it to the municipal administrator for transmittal to the assembly. The board shall annually prepare and submit to the municipal administrator a proposed six-year capital improvements program for submittal to and consideration by the assembly. (Ord. 00-1568 § 4 (part), 2000.)


2.38.160 Other fiscal matters.

All other fiscal matters, including, but not limited to, custody of and expenditure of funds, accounting, and collection shall be governed by the municipal charter and ordinances. (Ord. 00-1568 § 4 (part), 2000.)


2.38.170 Employee relations.

For purposes of that chapter, the director is a municipal employee department head as defined in Title 2, who formulates, determines or effectuates management policies. (Ord. 00-1568 § 4 (part), 2000.)


2.38.180 Definitions.

Whenever the following words and terms are used in this title, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.

“Board” or “board of directors” means the Gary Paxton industrial park board.

“Boats” means all vessels, ships, boats, skiffs, and water craft of every kind and description, and aircraft using or present in the boat harbor. The essential element of a boat is that its purpose and use is navigation as a means of transportation.

“City and borough” means the city and borough of Sitka, Alaska. (Ord. 14-21 § 4 (part), 2014; Ord. 00-1568 § 4 (part), 2000.)


Chapter 2.40 ELECTIONS6

Sections:

I. General Provisions

2.40.010    Application of state law.

2.40.020    Elections are nonpartisan.

2.40.030    Filling vacant municipal and school board elective offices.

II. Initiative and Referendum

2.40.040    Initiative and referendum.

2.40.050    Effect.

IIA. Recall

2.40.055    Recall.

2.40.056    Grounds for recall.

2.40.057    Procedures for recall.

III. Qualifications

2.40.060    Voter qualifications.

2.40.070    Candidate qualifications.

IV. Nomination of Candidates

2.40.080    Notice of offices to be filled.

2.40.090    Filing and review.

2.40.095    Candidate biographical information.

2.40.100    Acceptance of nomination.

2.40.110    Withdrawal or amendment of nomination.

2.40.115    Write-in candidates.

V. Ballots

2.40.120    Form.

2.40.130    Official ballot.

2.40.140    Official card ballots.

2.40.150    Permitted use of unofficial ballots.

2.40.160    Sample ballots.

2.40.170    Distribution.

2.40.180    Ballot security.

VI. Absentee or Advanced Balloting

2.40.190    Eligibility.

2.40.200    Assisted voting.

2.40.205    Voting by electronic transmission.

2.40.210    Examination of elector.

2.40.220    Issuance.

2.40.230    Casting absentee or advanced ballot.

VII. Conduct of Elections

2.40.240    Municipal clerk’s rules.

2.40.250    Election officials.

2.40.260    Dates and hours.

2.40.270    Notice of election.

2.40.280    Polling places and precincts.

2.40.290    Election supplies and equipment.

2.40.300    Instructions to voters.

2.40.310    Ballot box.

2.40.315    Voting procedure at polls.

2.40.316    Poll watchers.

2.40.317    Questioned ballots.

2.40.320    Reports of unused and damaged ballots.

2.40.330    Counting ballots—Hand counted.

2.40.340    Counting ballots—Optically read ballots.

2.40.350    Voting boards.

2.40.360    Use of computers.

2.40.370    Tests and security.

2.40.380    Receiving center operation.

2.40.390    Counting ballots.

2.40.400    Certificates of returns.

2.40.410    Preservation of ballot after counting.

2.40.420    Canvass board.

2.40.430    Election results.

2.40.435    Registration books.

VIII. Certification of Election

2.40.440    Assembly approval.

2.40.450    Record of results.

2.40.460    Certificate of election.

IX. Contested Elections

2.40.470    Notice of election contest.

2.40.480    Investigation of protests.

2.40.490    Recount.

2.40.500    Costs.

2.40.510    Appeal.

X. Prohibited Practices

2.40.520    Prohibited practices.

XI. Penalty

2.40.530    Penalty.

I. General Provisions


2.40.010 Application of state law.

Except as the Charter and the ordinances of the municipality relating to elections provide otherwise, (including procedures adopted by the municipal clerk) the general election laws of the state of Alaska shall apply to the conduct of all municipal elections, recounts of the returns therefrom and contests thereof insofar as they are applicable and not inconsistent with this chapter. (Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.020 Elections are nonpartisan.

All elections held by the municipality shall be conducted on a nonpartisan basis. (Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.030 Filling vacant municipal and school board elective offices.

A.    Vacant unexpired terms of elected municipal officials, including school board members, shall be filled as follows:

1.    Any vacancy shall be filled within the time limit set by Charter or state law by majority vote of the assembly or school board members present at a regular or special meeting.

2.    The assembly or school board may use any method of nomination and election they deem satisfactory so long as it is done in open session.

3.    Any person appointed must legally be qualified for the position at the time of appointment.

4.    Any such appointment shall terminate after the next regular election when a successor to the remainder of the unexpired term shall be declared elected by the assembly, and that successor is sworn into office.

B.    All vacant elective municipal offices, including school board positions, with unexpired terms shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by vote of the people at the next regular election.

C.    At any regular election where there are both unexpired terms and regular full terms to be filled for the same category of office, the qualified candidates shall be declared elected to office as follows:

1.    The candidate or candidates receiving the most votes shall be declared elected to the full term vacancy or vacancies;

2.    The candidate or candidates receiving the next highest number of votes shall be declared elected to the unexpired term or terms.

(Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)

II. Initiative and Referendum


2.40.040 Initiative and referendum.

A.    A petition for initiative or referendum will be filed with the municipal clerk. The assembly may direct the municipal attorney to assist in the wording of the petition. After the application has been filed and within ten working days, the municipal clerk with the assistance and legal advice of the municipal attorney shall certify the application or notify the initiative sponsors/committee of the grounds for denial.

B.    Contents of Petition. A petition for an initiative or referendum shall:

1.    Embrace only a single comprehensive subject; and

2.    Set out fully the ordinance or resolution sought by the petition; and

3.    State upon the petition, when circulated, the date of first circulation of the petition, the name of the petitioner and where he/she can be reached; and

4.    Contain the statements, when circulated, that the signatures on the petition must be secured within ninety days from the date of the first circulation and that all signators are qualified voters in the municipality; and

5.    Have the required number of signatures as set out in the Charter, spaces for each signature, the printed name of each signer, the date each signature is affixed, the residence and mailing addresses, and one of the following identifiers: Voter ID number, Social Security number, or birth date of each signer; and

6.    A statement, with space for the sponsor’s sworn signature and date of signing, that the sponsor personally circulated the petition, that all signatures were affixed in the presence of the sponsor, and that the sponsor believes the signatures are those of the persons whose names they purport to be; and

7.    Signers must be qualified voters in the municipality; and

8.    Space for indicating the total number of signatures on the petition.

The municipal clerk shall notify the contact person(s) by phone and/or in writing when the petitions are available for circulation. The contact person(s) is responsible for notifying sponsors. Copies of the petition shall be provided by the municipal clerk to each pre-registered sponsor who appears in the municipal clerk’s office and requests a petition.

C.    Required Signatures.

1.    The necessary signatures on a petition shall be secured within ninety days from the date of the first circulation of the petition. The petition shall be signed in ink or indelible pencil.

2.    Illegible signatures, unless accompanied by a legible printed name, may be rejected by the municipal clerk.

3.    A petition signer may withdraw their signature upon written application to the clerk within seven days after the petition has been initially filed with the clerk.

D.    Sufficiency of Petition.

1.    Within ten working days from the filing date, the municipal clerk shall certify on the petition whether or not it is sufficient.

2.    If the petition is deemed insufficient for any reason other than lack of required number of signatures, it may not be amended or resubmitted sooner than one year. Ten additional days will be allowed to obtain sufficient signatures.

3.    Within ten working days after supplementary filing the clerk shall recertify the petition. If it is still insufficient, the petition is rejected and filed as a public record.

E.    Implementation of Initiative or Referendum.

1.    If a majority of those voting favor the proposal, it becomes effective when the election results are officially certified by the clerk and approved by the assembly.

2.    The assembly may, at any time not less than forty-five or more than ninety days prior to the date of election, adopt an ordinance or resolution to implement the petition. In that event an election shall not be held.

(Ord. 06-28 § 4, 2006: Ord. 84-588 § 4(A), 1984; Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.050 Effect.

A.    The assembly may not, within one year, act in any way to modify or negate the effect of a successful initiative or referendum. If an ordinance against which a referendum is directed has been repealed by the assembly after a petition has been filed but before the referendum, the assembly may not enact a substantially similar ordinance for a period of one year after repeal.

B.    An unsuccessful initiative or referendum precludes the filing of a new petition for the same purpose sooner than one year after voter disapproval of the initiative or referendum.

(Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)

IIA. Recall


2.40.055 Recall.

An official who is elected or appointed to an elective municipal office may be recalled by the voters after the official has served the first one hundred twenty days of the term of which he is elected or appointed. (Ord. 86-690 § 4 (part), 1986).


2.40.056 Grounds for recall.

Grounds for recall are misconduct in office, incompetence, or failure to perform prescribed duties. (Ord. 86-690 § 4 (part), 1986.)


2.40.057 Procedures for recall.

Procedures for recall by voters of the municipality shall be as prescribed in Alaska Statutes Sections 29.26.260 through 29.26.350, which are adopted and incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 86-690 § 4 (part), 1986.)

III. Qualifications


2.40.060 Voter qualifications.

A person may vote at any municipal election who:

A.    Is at least eighteen years of age; and

B.    Has been a resident of the municipality for at least thirty days immediately prior to the election; and

C.    Is a citizen of the United States; and

D.    Is qualified to vote in state elections; and

E.    Is registered to vote in state elections in the precinct in which that person seeks to vote in municipal elections.

(Ord. 86-689 § 4, 1986; Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.070 Candidate qualifications.

A qualified elector who has resided continuously in the municipality during the twelve months immediately preceding the election may serve in an elective municipal assembly office including mayor. Qualifications for school board shall be set out in A.S. 14.12.080.

Petition. Nomination shall be by petition specifying the position sought on a form prescribed by the assembly, but the right to elect a qualified candidate by write-in vote shall not be limited. Such petition shall be signed by not less than twenty-five qualified municipal voters. No elector shall sign more than one petition for each office to be filled. If they do so, their signature shall be valid only on the first sufficient petition filed for the office. To each nominating petition shall be attached an affidavit of the circulator thereof, indicating the number of signers of the petition and stating that each signature appended thereto was made in their presence and is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. With each signature shall be stated the signer’s place of residence, identified by street number or other sufficient description. Petitions may include a space for printing the signatory names to aid the clerk in their identification. (Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.) 

IV. Nomination of Candidates


2.40.080 Notice of offices to be filled.

At least ninety days before each regular election the municipal clerk shall publish a notice of offices to be filled at the election and the manner of making nominations. (Ord. 05-28 § 4 (part), 2005: Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.090 Filing and review.

All nomination papers comprising a petition shall be assembled and filed with the municipal clerk as one instrument not earlier than eighty days nor later than sixty days before the election. The municipal clerk shall make a record of the exact time at which each petition is filed. The petition with the name and address of the person by whom it is filed shall be preserved for two months after the election is certified. If the petitions for any candidate are not signed by the required number of qualified electors, the municipal clerk shall notify the candidate and the person who filed the petition within five days after filing, either in person or by registered or certified mail or similar special mail. If the petition is insufficient in any other particular, the municipal clerk shall return it immediately in the same manner to the person who filed it, certifying in writing wherein the petition is insufficient. Such deficient or insufficient petition may be amended and filed again as a new petition, or a substitute petition for the same candidate if filed within the regular time for filing. (Ord. 05-28 § 4 (part), 2005: Ord. 84-588 § 4(B), 1984; Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.095 Candidate biographical information.

A candidate for elected office shall provide the municipal clerk with biographical information of not more than one hundred fifty words, a recent photo of the candidate, and a candidate’s advocacy statement of not more than two hundred fifty words for publication on the municipal website. All information must be received by the municipal clerk no later than ten working days after submittal of a completed candidate packet. A candidate may not make a change to the candidate’s biographical information or advocacy statement after the deadline. A candidate’s biographical information and advocacy statement must be submitted typewritten or, preferably, transmitted electronically. An article (i.e., a, and, the) will be counted as one word. Any words included in the candidate’s biographical information or advocacy statement beyond the allowed word counts will not be published. The municipal clerk can provide the candidate with acceptable topics for the biographical information and advocacy statement. The municipal clerk may reject any portion of a candidate’s biographical information or advocacy statement containing obscene, libelous, profane, slanderous or defamatory material. (Ord. 15-31 § 4, 2015; Ord. 14-34 § 4 (part), 2014.)


2.40.100 Acceptance of nomination.

No nominating petition may be accepted by the municipal clerk unless it is accompanied by a public official financial disclosure statement of the candidate as required by Alaska law and a signed acceptance of the nomination by the person nominated. The acceptance shall indicate the candidate’s state voter registration number and the length of time they have resided in the municipality and any other information requested. (Ord. 15-15 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.110 Withdrawal or amendment of nomination.

Any candidate nominated may withdraw their nomination not later than five p.m. on the forty-sixth day before the election by appropriate written notice to the municipal clerk. The municipal clerk will notify the media and public of the withdrawal. However, the ballots will not be modified to reflect the change unless the ballots have not yet been programmed and/or ordered. (Ord. 14-34 § 4 (part), 2014: Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.115 Write-in candidates.

If a qualified elector wishes to be a candidate in an election, but failed to properly file before the deadline, that person may file as a write-in candidate by following rules established by the municipal clerk. The write-in candidate must register with the municipal clerk and complete a form of intent not later than five days before the election. Votes for a write-in candidate will not be counted unless that candidate has properly filed with the municipal clerk and the ballot is marked in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 14-34 § 4 (part), 2014.)

V. Ballots


2.40.120 Form.

Ballots shall be prepared by the municipal clerk, who shall determine their form and preparation. (Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.130 Official ballot.

The official ballot shall contain, at the top thereof, the words “Official Ballot” and the date of the election, whether such election is a general municipal election or a special municipal election, and such instructions to the voters as will enable them to intelligently mark their ballots for the candidates for whom they desire to vote and to intelligently vote upon the questions which are submitted. Both sides of a ballot may be used and additional ballots may be used for additional questions.

Following the names of candidates for the various offices on the official ballot there may also be a statement of any propositions or questions to be submitted to the voters as well as such questions as the assembly may vote to submit to the voters for an expression of opinion for its guidance. (Ord. 98-1507 § 4 (part), 1998; Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.140 Official card ballots.

Computer-read or hand counted ballots are specifically authorized and may be used alone or in combination with each other. (Ord. 98-1507 § 4 (part), 1998: Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.150 Permitted use of unofficial ballots.

A.    If an insufficient number of official ballots is received, the judges may use substitute ballots or other election materials to indicate the intent of the voter. At least one judge will initial each substitute ballot to authenticate it prior to issuance, but they shall not be marked in such a way as to be able to tell which voter used which ballot.

B.    The election board shall certify the facts which prevented the use of official ballots and materials and shall include a certificate in the election returns to the clerk. The initial failure to certify to the facts or include the certificate required does not invalidate any ballots.

C.    On disclosure that unofficial ballots have been used without the certification under sub-section B of this section, the clerk shall notify the chairman of the election board in which the ballot was cast of their failure to certify the ballot properly.

D.    The certification shall be given to the clerk within two days of notice under subsection C of this section.

(Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.160 Sample ballots.

In addition to the official ballots as prescribed, there shall be printed under the direction of the municipal clerk, in any color except white, not less than two hundred ballots, which shall be marked as “Sample Ballots” which shall be available to the public. (Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.170 Distribution.

The municipal clerk shall have the ballots in possession at least fifteen days before each election. Sufficient ballots for the registered voters of each precinct shall be delivered to the election officials for that precinct. A receipt shall be taken from the election board member to whom ballots are delivered, the receipt to be preserved with other records of the election for two months following certification of the election. No ballots may be taken from the polling place before the closing of the polls except under the direction of the municipal clerk. (Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.180 Ballot security.

Each printer who prepares ballots for use at an election will be provided a certificate to sign indicating that any overruns have been destroyed and that all official ballots ordered by the municipality have been delivered to the municipal clerk or designee. (Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)

VI. Absentee or Advanced Balloting


2.40.190 Eligibility.

Any qualified voter may cast an absentee ballot on or after the day the ballots are available from the municipal clerk up to and including election day in a location and at times determined by the municipal clerk. An absentee ballot may also be referred to as an advanced ballot. The provisions of this chapter effectuating absentee or advanced voting rights shall be liberally construed.

Any qualified voter shall, not more than ninety days nor later than the opening of the polls before such election, apply to the municipal clerk for an absentee or advanced ballot. The application must be signed by the applicant and specify the election for which a ballot is requested. A separate request must be made for each subsequent election. (Ord. 14-34 § 4 (part), 2014: Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.200 Assisted voting.

A.    Application for Assisted Voting.

1.    A qualified voter who is unable to go to the polls due to age, serious illness or disability may apply to the municipal clerk or designee for an absentee ballot through a personal representative.

2.    The municipal clerk, designee, or election official shall provide the ballot and other absentee voting materials to the voter’s personal representative, who shall be a qualified Alaska voter.

3.    The personal representative shall deliver the absentee ballot to the voter. The representative may confidentially and without influencing the actual marking of the ballot, assist the voter in completion of that ballot. Safeguards will ensure that the ballot remains anonymous, and secure. The ballot must be returned to the municipal clerk, designee, or election official prior to the closing of the polls.

4.    The election official shall keep a record of the name and signature of each personal representative requesting an absentee ballot and the name of the person on whose behalf the ballot is requested. The election official shall record the date and time the absentee ballot is provided and the time the ballot is returned to the election official.

5.    A personal representative may not be a candidate for office at that election, may not be your employer, an agent of your employer, or an officer or agent of your union.

6.    The clerk or designee may accept absentee ballot applications by personal representative at the Pioneer Home or local hospitals, if requested during the absentee voting period and polling hours.

B.    Absentee Voting by Mail.

1.    A qualified voter may apply to the municipal clerk for absentee voting by mail-in ballot.

2.    An application for an absentee ballot by mail must be postmarked not more than ninety days nor less than seven days before an election for which the absentee ballot is sought.

(Ord. 14-34 § 4 (part), 2014; Ord. 00-1585 § 4, 2000; Ord. 98-1507 § 4 (part), 1998; Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.205 Voting by electronic transmission.

Although this should be considered a last alternative, voters may cast a ballot by electronic transmission with the municipal clerk (if other choices are unavailable to the voter). The voter submits an application form to the municipal clerk which also certifies that they are a qualified voter and that they recognize they are voluntarily waiving a portion of their right to a secret ballot when voting using electronic transmission. Voted ballots by electronic transmission must be submitted according to the municipal clerk’s instructions and received no later than eight p.m. on election day. (Ord. 14-34 § 4 (part), 2014.)


2.40.210 Examination of elector.

The municipal clerk shall make an investigation of the applicant and shall be satisfied that any absentee ballot applicant is a duly qualified elector. (Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.220 Issuance.

The municipal clerk shall deliver a ballot to the elector either personally, by a duly authorized representative, or by mail, and shall keep a register containing the number of ballots issued, the name of the elector and the date of delivery or mailing and date of receipt. The municipal clerk shall also deliver the following to the elector:

A.    An envelope with notations for a certification of voter eligibility and qualification, date of municipal election, that the ballot is enclosed, that it was properly marked with no undue influence, signature line, date of voting, and witness signature line, and a note on the front of the envelope that a ballot is enclosed.

B.    The municipal clerk shall issue rules and instructions to absentee voters to aid them in casting their ballots.

C.    After receipt of an application by mail, the municipal clerk shall send the absentee ballot and other absentee voting material as outlined in this section to the applicant by first class mail service. The return envelope sent with the materials shall be addressed to the municipal clerk and marked “Ballot Enclosed.” It shall be the duty of the voter to append sufficient postage to the return envelope.

D.    The municipal clerk shall maintain a record of each voter to whom an absentee ballot is sent by mail and the date of mailing.

(Ord. 14-34 § 4 (part), 2014; Ord. 98-1507 § 4 (part), 1998; Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.230 Casting absentee or advanced ballot.

A qualified voter may vote early, as soon as the ballots are available from the election official up to and including election day, in a location and at places and times determined by the municipal clerk. (Ord. 14-34 § 4 (part), 2014: Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)

VII. Conduct of Elections


2.40.240 Municipal clerk’s rules.

The municipal clerk is authorized to fashion rules and procedures for the conduct of the election so long as they are not in conflict with this chapter. Such rules may include, but are not limited to, procedures followed by the election judges at the polling places and procedures for the counting of ballots. The clerk shall prepare a manual for the conduct of election judges and a manual of procedures for counting of ballots. Any person aggrieved by such procedures may appeal to the assembly. The assembly shall retain the right to change such rules and procedures by motion. (Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.250 Election officials.

A.    Election Supervisor. The municipal clerk shall be the election supervisor. The election supervisor shall conduct the election and have authority to take such actions as are necessary to carry out the intent of this chapter.

B.    Judges. Prior to each election, the election supervisor shall appoint three judges for each polling place and at least three judges for the receiving board and data processing board. Up to three alternate judges may be designated for each polling place or board. One judge shall be designated chairman and shall be primarily responsible for administering the election in that precinct. If a judge is not able or refuses to serve on election day, an alternate shall serve in their place. Should additional need arise, the election supervisor may appoint a replacement. The assembly reserves the right to reject or disapprove election judges.

C.    Clerks. The election supervisor may appoint up to three election clerks and up to three alternate clerks at any polling place where they are needed to conduct an orderly election and to relieve the election judges. Alternates may be appointed to the receiving and data processing boards.

D.    Qualifications. Each election official serving at a precinct polling place must be a qualified voter and where practicable should reside within the precinct for which appointed.

E.    Oath. The election officials shall take or subscribe to the following oath:

    I “State your name” will honestly, faithfully, and promptly perform the duties of election board member according to law; and I will make every effort to prevent the violation of any provision of law in conducting the election.

F.    Training Session. All election judges and clerks and alternates must attend a training session unless excused therefrom by the election supervisor. Any appointed official who fails to attend a training session without being excused will be subject to dismissal by the election supervisor, who shall notify the municipal administrator of the dismissal. The election supervisor is authorized to make an appointment to fill the vacancy caused by such dismissal from the alternate judges or clerks.

G.    Compensation. Judges and clerks of election shall be paid such compensation for their services as is approved by the assembly,.

H.    No candidate for that election may serve as an election official.

I.    Certain familial relationships should not exist between candidates and election officials in any municipal election. Those familial relationships are:

1.    Mother, mother-in-law, stepmother;

2.    Father, father-in-law, stepfather;

3.    Sister, sister-in-law, stepsister;

4.    Brother, brother-in-law, stepbrother;

5.    Spouse; or

6.    Person sharing the same living quarters.

If the election supervisor knows or learns that any of these relationships exist, the election official shall be notified and replaced.

(Ord. 14-34 § 4 (part), 2014; Ord. 98-1507 § 4 (part), 1998; Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.260 Dates and hours.

A.    General Elections. A general election to elect officials and vote on propositions submitted by the assembly shall be held on the first Tuesday in October of each year.

B.    Special Elections. Special elections may be called and held at any time by resolution or ordinance specifying the purpose for which the same will be held.

C.    Hours. The polls shall be open in each precinct for the purposes of voting from seven a.m. to eight p.m. local time of each election day.

(Ord. 03-1713 § 4, 2003; Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.270 Notice of election.

The municipal clerk, subject to any directions from the assembly, shall give at least sixty days’ notice of each general election and special election by posting notice thereof at a conspicuous place in the municipal building and by publishing the notice for three consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the municipality. Notices may be posted in one public place in each precinct of the municipality. The first notice shall state the offices to be filled, the purpose of the election, whether a general or special election, the time of the election and the polling place for each precinct. The second notice shall include all of the first notice requirements, plus the ballot title of each measure to be voted upon. (Ord. 04-38 Charter amendment, 2004; Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.280 Polling places and precincts.

The assembly shall initially designate by motion the polling places by number and location. The municipality shall use the precincts and their boundaries as designated by the state. If the designated polling place becomes unavailable, the municipal clerk may designate an alternate polling place. Such polling place designations shall be deemed continuing until changed by the assembly. (Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.290 Election supplies and equipment.

A.    The municipal clerk shall cause to be erected in the polling places a sufficient number of booths in which the voter may prepare their ballot screened from observation, and shall provide such supplies and conveniences as will enable the voter to vote their ballot.

B.    The municipal clerk shall prepare and furnish:

Sample ballots

Official ballots (keeping strict record of the numbers of the ballots issued)

Registration books

State voter registration lists

Oaths for election board

Questioned ballot materials

Tally sheets if needed

Instructions to voters

Pens, pencils, forms, miscellaneous supplies as required by law

Rubber stamp marked “REJECTED” if needed

American flag

“VOTE HERE” sign

Suitable and sufficient numbers of ballot boxes with seals

(Ord. 15-15 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 98-1507 § 4 (part), 1998; Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.300 Instructions to voters.

A.    Instructions to voters shall be printed under the direction of the municipal clerk on cardboard or heavy paper, and one copy of such instructions shall be posted on the front entrance at each polling place, in each room where polling booths are located and in each of the voting booths provided for the election.

B.    The printed instructions to voters shall include at least the following information:

1.    When entering a polling place, give your name and your residence address to the judges of the election.

2.    If your name is found on the registration list and your vote is not questioned, sign the registration book and one of the judges or a member of the election board will hand you a ballot. If your name is not on the registration list, you can vote by the questioned ballot method.

3.    If your vote is questioned, you will not receive a ballot until you have established your right to vote by completing and subscribing to an affidavit or your qualifications.

4.    When you have received your ballot, retire at once, alone, into one of the voting booths and prepare your ballot for the ballot box by marking it.

5.    At the top of a ballot you will find instructions for the marking of the ballot, and below the instructions you will find the names of all candidates for the respective offices to be voted upon under the proper heading of the respective offices to be filled. Do not vote your ballot in any way except as directed below and do not make any erasures.

6.    To vote for a candidate, fill in the oval next to the name on the ballot. In order to vote for a write-in candidate, write in the candidate’s name in the space provided, and, in addition, mark the oval next to the written-in name.

7.    Do not vote for more candidates to any office than are to be elected to such office. If you do so, that portion of your ballot will be rejected.

8.    Before leaving the booth, place your ballot in the secrecy sleeve provided to conceal marks you made on it.

9.    After leaving the booth, insert the ballot into the optical scan voting system.

10.    You will not be allowed to occupy a voting booth with another voter. You will not be allowed to occupy a booth for more than four minutes if others are waiting to vote.

11.    You will not be allowed to take a ballot from the polling place except a sample ballot marked as such.

12.    You will not be allowed to vote any ballot except the one you have received from the judge. If you spoil a ballot in preparing it, you must return it to the judge and ask for another in place of it, but in no case shall a voter be entitled to receive more than three ballots. Do not vote a torn or mutilated ballot.

13.    If you are unable to mark your ballot for any reason which does not at the same time render you ineligible to vote, then, upon request, you will be assisted by an election official and this official will mark the ballot in the booth for you as directed by you. Intoxication will not be regarded as a physical disability and if intoxicated no assistance will be given in marking any ballot.

(Ord. 15-15 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 98-1507 § 4 (part), 1998; Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.310 Ballot box.

Before issuing any ballots, the election official must, in the presence of at least one other election official, open and exhibit the ballot box to be used at the polling place. The ballot box then shall be closed and locked and shall not be opened again or removed from the polling place until the pools have been closed. Ballot boxes shall be within plain view of the election officials and voters. (Ord. 14-34 § 4 (part), 2014; Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.315 Voting procedure at polls.

A.    Determination of Eligibility. The voters shall give the election officials their names and addresses and identification if requested. If it is determined that they are qualified voters of that precinct, they shall then place their signatures on the appropriate line in the registration book provided by the election supervisor. If any election official present believes the voter is not qualified the official shall immediately question the voter.

Registration is prima facie evidence of the voter’s qualification. However, it shall be the duty of election officials to challenge any voter who they believe is not qualified. Any election judge may question any person of doubtful qualification attempting to vote and may require identification of the voter. Any voter may be challenged by any qualified voter of the municipality; however, a person who frivolously, maliciously or in bad faith challenges a voter is guilty of a misdemeanor. A challenged voter may vote a questioned ballot if they execute the required affidavit.

B.    Registration Book. A registration book shall be used. The voter signs the book and supplies all necessary information. The information shall be checked by the judges against the registration list of voters. The voter should fill out a voter registration form indicating any change of address.

C.    Issuance of Ballot. If the voter is not questioned, or if they have complied with the questioned ballot procedure, the election official will issue to them the ballots to which they are entitled.

D.    Marking of Ballot.

1.    Each voter shall retire alone to a booth or private area to vote their ballot. If a voter is blind or otherwise physically unable to mark their ballot alone, they may request assistance and it will be provided by an election official. Intoxication will not be regarded as a physical disability and if intoxicated no assistance will be given.

2.    Voters with special needs that do not require assistance will be routed to a special ADA apparatus and special booth that will allow voters to hear the contents of the ballot and make selections on their own. Once the voter has made all selections, the voter’s ballot will be printed out on a printer. This will enable the voter to vote and cast his or her ballot unassisted.

E.    Deposit of Ballot in Box. Immediately after voting the ballot, the voter shall take the voted ballot to the ballot scanning system and insert the ballot into the top of the ballot box.

F.    Damaged Ballots. If a voter improperly marks or otherwise damages a ballot, they shall return it to the election official, concealing the manner in which it is voted, and shall request a new ballot. 

The voter shall destroy the damaged ballot the election official shall issue a new ballot to the voter and record the stub number of the newly issued ballot. A voter may request replacement of a damaged ballot no more than three times.

G.    Improperly Marked Ballots. If the voter marks more names than there are persons to be elected to an office, that race shall not be counted. If a voter marks more than one choice on a ballot issue, that issue shall not be counted. A failure to properly mark a ballot in a candidate race or issue shall not invalidate the entire ballot. If the voter mis-marks a ballot in this fashion, the voter will be advised that they can receive a replacement ballot, spoiling the mis-marked one.

H.    Closing of Polls. Fifteen minutes before the closing of the polls the time remaining before such closure shall be proclaimed. When the polls are closed for the purposes of voting, that fact shall likewise be proclaimed and thereafter no ballot shall be issued except to those voters who were present and waiting their turn to go through the voting procedure at the time prescribed for closing the polls.

(Ord. 14-34 § 4 (part), 2014; Ord. 98-1507 § 4 (part), 1998; Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.316 Poll watchers.

A registered poll watcher may observe election setup, general conduct throughout election day, and after polls close. A poll watcher has no duties in conducting an election and may not interfere with the orderly conduct of elections. One poll watcher may be registered for any candidate for elective office or advocate for or against a ballot proposition per precinct. The poll watcher must register with the municipal clerk prior to election day and agree to rules established by the municipal clerk. Poll watchers may not closely observe signatures on precinct registers, but may sit close enough to hear an election official say the voter’s name. Poll watchers may check polling booths after each voter leaves to ensure that no campaign material has been left behind. The poll watcher may utilize the municipal clerk’s complaint form to report problems. (Ord. 14-34 § 4 (part), 2014.)


2.40.317 Questioned ballots.

A.    If a voter’s name does not appear on the official registration list in the precinct in which they seek to vote, they shall be allowed to vote a questioned ballot.

B.    A person whose right to vote has been questioned will be issued a ballot if they first complete and subscribe, under oath administered by an election judge, an affidavit of their qualifications, gives other information requested to determine their eligibility to vote, signs the questioned ballot register giving their street address, mailing address, and voter registration number if known. They may then vote a questioned ballot.

C.    Voters who cast a questioned ballot shall vote their ballots in the same manner as prescribed for other voters. The voter shall insert the ballot into an unmarked envelope or sleeve and put this into the larger envelope on which the affidavit was completed. These larger envelopes shall be sealed and deposited in the ballot box. The election supervisor shall provide forms and materials for this procedure.

D.    When the ballot box is opened, these envelopes shall be segregated, counted, and compared to the questioned ballot register to determine the signatures equal the number of questioned ballot envelopes. The questioned ballots are delivered to the municipal clerk unopened. The merits of the questioned ballot shall be determined by the municipal clerk. Rejected questioned ballots shall not be opened. The clerk shall notify the voters of rejected questioned ballots of the reason for rejection so that the voter might repair the infirmity before the next election.

(Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.320 Reports of unused and damaged ballots.

The numbers of ballots not issued shall be recorded, and all unused, unmarked ballots will be destroyed according to the election law. After recording the ballot stub numbers of the unvoted ballots, election workers will return the stubs of used ballots to the municipal clerk with other election materials. The numbers of ballots damaged by voters and replaced pursuant to Section 2.40.315(F) shall also be recorded. The record of unused and damaged ballots shall be delivered to the election supervisor with other election materials. (Ord. 14-34 § 4 (part), 2014; Ord. 98-1507 § 4 (part), 1998; Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.330 Counting ballots—Hand counted.

A.    When the polls close, the election judges shall open the ballot boxes and segregate the questioned ballots. The number of regular and questioned ballots cast shall be checked with the registration lists to insure that the number of ballots cast agrees with the number of signatures in each registration book. Any discrepancy which cannot be resolved will be reduced to writing for delivery to the election supervisor. Upon direction of the election supervisor, the ballots may be further sorted, verified and fully or partially counted at the polling place or may be removed to a central counting area.

B.    For purposes of counting, a ballot box may be removed from the room in which the election has been held. The ballots shall be transferred accompanied by at least two election officials. During transportation, the ballot boxes containing the ballots shall be locked and registration books secured. When the polls are closed and the ballot boxes are in the room where the counting is to take place, the judges shall open the ballot boxes and the counting of ballots shall commence. The opening of the ballot boxes and the counting of the ballots shall in all cases be in public.

C.    Though the public may not be excluded from the general area in which ballots are counted, at the discretion of a majority of the judges, the public may be kept behind a guardrail or other natural barrier to prevent interference with the election officials. If the public is kept behind such a barrier, each candidate or their designated agent and one person known to represent each side of any issue on the ballot shall be allowed to closely view the ballots as counted, but may not interfere with the mechanics of counting ballots. The election officials shall not permit anyone present to interfere in any way or to distract the appointed officials from their duties.

D.    The ballots, after having been counted and checked as herein provided, shall be taken out carefully, by the judges of election, who shall open them and read aloud the name of each person voted for and/or Yes or No on issues; provided, that no more ballots be drawn from the box than shall tally exactly with the registration list. Questioned ballots shall be handled as prescribed in Section 2.40.317.

E.    1.	The judges shall write down each office to be filled and the name of each person to be voted for such office, and they shall keep the number of votes by tallies as they are read aloud. The counting of votes shall be continued without interruption or adjournment until all are counted.

2.    The municipal clerk shall issue instructions and shall provide forms and supplies for the tally of votes cast so as to assure accuracy and expedite the process. No person handling ballots may have a marking device in hand other than a rubber stamp of rejectment. If a ballot has a section containing a vote erasure, or a marked out vote, or a multiple vote on a single issue, or if a voter has voted for more candidates than stated on the ballot, or the mark is not within the box provided, then so much of the ballot as displays such defects shall be stamped as rejected. Remaining portions of such a ballot which are not defective shall be counted.

(Ord. 14-34 § 4 (part), 2014; Ord. 98-1507 § 4 (part), 1998; Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.340 Counting ballots—Optically read ballots.

A.    When the polls close, the election judges shall open the ballot box and remove the questioned ballots and place with questioned ballot register. The number of regular and questioned ballots cast shall be checked against the registration lists to insure that the numbers of ballots agree. Any discrepancy which cannot be resolved will be reduced to writing for delivery to the election supervisor.

B.    The procedure of the election officials when the ballot boxes are opened until the ballots are transported to a counting room shall be open to public view and attendance.

C.    The ballots shall be separated into three groups: regular ballots, questioned ballots, and write-in ballots. The regular ballots shall be placed in the voted ballot envelope and ballot transfer case for transportation to the election supervisor. Unlock the front compartment of the ballot box to show that all three compartments are empty. 

The ballots containing the write-in votes shall be segregated and placed behind the regular ballots. The write-in votes may be counted at the polling place if authorized by the municipal clerk. The questioned ballots shall not be opened but counted, stacked, banded together, and placed in the special container for questioned ballots and then sealed. Upon delivery to the counting area the ballots shall be receipted for on a form supplied by the election supervisor.

When the tally of all votes has been completed, the voted ballots shall be sealed into containers and delivered to the municipal clerk to be preserved for two months.

Write-in Votes. No write-in candidates receiving less than fifty votes need be reported in the final certification of results.

(Ord. 98-1507 § 4 (part), 1998: Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.350 Voting boards.

The election supervisor shall appoint a receiving board. The election supervisor shall appoint a chair and administer the oath prescribed for elections judges. A vacancy on the board shall be filled by the election supervisor. (Ord. 98-1507 § 4 (part), 1998: Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.360 Use of computers.

The election supervisor shall designate the computers to be used in counting the ballots and may negotiate and contract with the state of Alaska or a private computer service for the needed computer services. (Ord. 98-1507 § 4 (part), 1998; Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.370 Tests and security.

Logic and accuracy tests shall be performed as soon as ballots arrive from the printer. Processing of the test ballots shall check the following:

A.    Pre-determined test deck results equal the test results printout;

B.    Number of ballots in test deck equals number on public counter;

C.    Proper information on the printout;

D.    Counted ballots are in the proper ballot box compartment;

E.    Ensure that ballots that are supposed to be rejected are (i.e., over-voted ballots).

(Ord. 98-1507 § 4 (part), 1998.)


2.40.380 Receiving center operation.

A receiving center official shall receive the ballots and have those who transported the ballots sign the ballot receipt log. The receiving center official will see that all forms from the precincts are properly filled out and all ballots are accounted for along with any other rules that may be promulgated by the municipal clerk. (Ord. 98-1507 § 4 (part), 1998; Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.390 Counting ballots.

A.    A failure to properly mark a ballot as to one or more candidates does not in itself invalidate the entire ballot.

B.    A voter may mark the ballot with pencil or pen and ink. The marks will be counted only if they are substantially inside the ovals so as to indicate clearly that the voter intended the particular oval to be designated.

C.    If a voter marks fewer names than there are persons to be elected to the office, the vote will be counted for each candidate properly marked.

D.    If a voter marks more names than there are to be elected to office, the votes for that office will not be counted.

E.    Improper marks on the ballot will not be counted and will not invalidate marks for candidates properly made.

F.    Any erasures or correction invalidates only that section of the ballot on which it appears. Marks made on a ballot by a voter so as to identify it later will cause the entire ballot to be rejected.

G.    Write-in votes are not invalidated by writing in the name of a candidate whose name is printed on the ballot unless the printed name is for the same office and has also been marked or unless the election board determines on the basis of other evidence, that the ballot was so marked as to be for the purpose of identifying the ballot.

H.    In order to vote for a write-in candidate, the voter must write in the candidate’s name as it appears on the write-in declaration of candidacy and mark the oval next to the written-in name. Write-in votes will be counted when the oval is marked and the name as it appears on the write-in declaration of candidacy are written in these manners: first and last name or any reasonable spelling of the first and last name are used, first and last names with or without the suffix (e.g., Jr., Sr., III), last names with correct initial for the first name are used, commonly known nicknames with correct last name are used, or when the candidate’s name is already printed on the ballot. Write-in votes will be rejected in these circumstances: fictional names are used (e.g., Mickey Mouse, None of the Above); only initials are used; only first name is used; correct last name is used, but an incorrect first name or incorrect initial is used; or the oval next to the candidate’s name is not marked.

I.    Stickers bearing the candidate’s name may not be used on the ballot.

(Ord. 14-34 § 4 (part), 2014; Ord. 98-1507 § 4 (part), 1998: Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.400 Certificates of returns.

When the tally of votes is complete, a certificate of return shall be prepared and signed by the election judges. (Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.410 Preservation of ballot after counting.

A.    Hand Counted Ballots. It shall be the duty of one of the judges after all ballots have been counted to place the voted ballots in the envelope provided and to place any numbered tabs in the envelope provided. The outside of each envelope shall be marked with the precinct number and signatures of all judges and date of election. Unopened questioned ballots will also be placed in the ballot container to be removed by the municipal clerk or authorized representative who shall keep same in a secure place until certification of the election by the assembly. After that time, the municipal clerk shall put the ballots in a sealed container and write thereon, “Ballots of the City and Borough of Sitka election held on __ day of ______, 20__” and keep same for at least two months, to be used only in case of contest or recount. Two months from the date of the election certification, it shall be the duty of the municipal clerk to destroy the ballots unless a contest has been instituted and is still pending at that time.

B.    Optically Read Ballots. It shall be the duty of one of the judges at the receiving center to place the counted ballots in an envelope, sealed and signed by all of the judges. The envelope will be given to the municipal clerk for preservation the same as indicated in subsection A of this section.

(Ord. 15-15 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 98-1507 § 4 (part), 1998; Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.420 Canvass board.

There will be a canvass board consisting of an election board of at least up to two qualified voters and the municipal clerk. The canvass board is responsible for meeting in a public session to declare which absentee, advanced, questioned, special needs, and write-in ballots are valid. The canvass board will review, tally, and officially report the results of the ballots. No later than its next regular assembly meeting after the municipal clerk submits the certification of election, the assembly shall receive and adopt the certification. This meeting may be rescheduled by a majority vote of the assembly. If the assembly determines that the election was validly held, the assembly shall approve the certification of election. (Ord. 14-34 § 4 (part), 2014: Ord. 11-27 § 4, 2011; Ord. 83-557 § 4(part), 1983.)


2.40.430 Election results.

Following canvass board review, the candidates receiving the greatest number of votes shall be certified elected to office by the municipal clerk and approved by the assembly. In case of a tie, the election shall be determined by coin toss or by lot from among the candidates tying at a meeting of the assembly and under its direction and instructions. (Ord. 14-34 § 4 (part), 2014; Ord. 83-5 57 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.435 Registration books.

Within two months after the general election results have been certified, the municipal clerk will send the registration books, list of absentee voters, and questioned ballot register to the Elections Director in Juneau for the recording of voter history. A voter registration book, list of absentee voters and questioned ballot register from a special election may be destroyed two months after election results have been certified. (Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)

VIII. Certification of Election


2.40.440 Assembly approval.

At the first regular meeting of the assembly after the election, the assembly shall meet and approve the municipal clerk and canvass board’s certification of returns. The approval of certification may be postponed for cause as determined by the assembly from day to day, but not exceeding three postponements. The approval of certification shall be by motion duly made, seconded and passed and the results shall be set forth in the minutes of the meeting. In the case of a recount, the approval of certification of the recount may be postponed until the next regular assembly meeting following the recount. Upon approval of certification, the municipal clerk may issue a written certificate of election to the winning candidates.

The initial election returns shall be announced in public on election night. The certification of all election returns shall be made by examining the judges’ certificates of returns and compiling these along with the count of valid advanced or absentee and challenged ballots by the municipal clerk and canvass board. At the discretion of the assembly, an actual recount may be undertaken after due notice to candidates. (Ord. 14-34 § 4 (part), 2014: Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.450 Record of results.

A.    The results of all elections shall be noted in the minutes of the assembly. The record shall contain a statement of:

1.    The total number of votes cast at each election and in each precinct;

2.    The votes cast for each person and for and against each proposition;

3.    The name of each person elected to office and the office to which elected;

4.    A reference to each measure enacted or rejected.

B.    The election certificate shall contain such information as:

1.    Total number of votes cast at each election;

2.    Total number of votes cast in each precinct;

3.    Total number of absentee ballots;

4.    Total number of questioned ballots;

5.    Total number of questioned ballots allowed to be voted;

6.    Total number of rejected ballots;

7.    Names of those elected to office and the office to which elected;

8.    Issues on the ballot, whether enacted or rejected and how many votes for and against.

(Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.460 Certificate of election.

Immediately after the assembly’s approval of the municipal clerk’s certification is completed, the municipal clerk shall make and sign a general certificate of election to be filed as a permanent city record along with a sample ballot and a certificate of election of each person elected and deliver the certificate to them. A certificate so made shall be prima facie evidence of the truth of the statements contained in it. The municipal clerk shall also certify the results on all questions submitted. No person may take office before taking the Oath of Office and delivering an executed copy thereof to the municipal clerk. (Ord. 14-34 § 4 (part), 2014; Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)

IX. Contested Elections


2.40.470 Notice of election contest.

Any person who believes prohibited practices have occurred at an election may deliver to the municipal clerk prior to the time for the certification, a written notice of contest signed under oath, wherein shall be stated the ground for contest and citation of all alleged prohibited practices. The notice shall be in approximately the following form:

NOTICE OF ELECTION CONTEST

The undersigned believes that the following prohibited practices occurred at the election held on ____________. The undersigned states that the following persons violated _________ in the following manner _______________________ _____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Signature of Person Contesting

SUBSCRIBED AND SWORN to before me this __ day of ___________, 20__.

_____________________ Notary Public

The municipal clerk shall apprise the assembly of receipt of the notice before approval of certification of the returns has commenced. (Ord. 14-34 § 4 (part), 2014; Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.480 Investigation of protests.

Upon receiving such duly and timely filed notice of contest, the assembly shall order an investigation to be made by the municipal attorney, municipal clerk, and municipal administrator. The contestant, the person whose election is contested, the persons accused of violations and the public shall be allowed to attend all investigation proceedings which shall be conducted publicly. If the assembly so determines, the certification of the contested position may be delayed until the next regular assembly meeting following determination of the contest. (Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.490 Recount.

If the contestant demands only a recount of the ballots cast at the election, the investigation (which shall be conducted in accordance with Section 2.40.480) shall be limited in its scope to a recount of the ballots of the precinct which allegedly made the error. The results of such recount shall be reported forthwith to the assembly. Only the races or propositions being investigated need be recounted. (Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.500 Costs.

A.    The notice shall be accompanied by a deposit in an amount estimated by the municipal clerk to be sufficient to cover costs to be incurred by the investigation or recount, but not to exceed two hundred dollars. However, if the request is for only a recount of votes for an office for which candidates received a tie vote, or the difference between the number of votes cast was five or fewer, or was less than one percent of the total number of votes cast for that position or proposition, no deposit is required. The assembly may at its own discretion order a recount of close races.

B.    If, upon investigation or recount, the contentions of the person filing the notice are proven to be correct, the entire deposit shall be refunded.

C.    The contestant shall pay all costs and expenses incurred in a recount of an election demanded by the contestant if the recount fails to reverse any result of the election or if the difference between the winning and losing vote on the position or proposition contested is more than two percent after recount. If the entire deposit is not refunded, the municipal clerk shall refund any money remaining after the cost of the recount has been paid from the deposit.

(Ord. 14-34 § 4 (part), 2014; Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


2.40.510 Appeal.

No person may appeal or seek judicial review of an election for any cause or reason unless the person is qualified to vote in the municipality, has exhausted their administrative remedies before the assembly and has commenced, within ten days after the assembly has finally declared the election results, any action in the Superior Court in the judicial district in which the municipality is located. If no action is commenced within the ten-day period, the election and election results shall be conclusive, final, and valid in all respects. The period for judicial challenge shall be thirty days for those matters set out in Section 12.06 of the Municipal Charter. (Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)

X. Prohibited Practices


2.40.520 Prohibited practices.

A.    Prohibition of Political Persuasion. During the hours the polls are open, no person who is in the polling place or within two hundred feet of the entrance thereto may attempt to persuade any person to vote for or against any candidate, proposition, or question. Election judges shall post warning notices on the front entrance of each polling place to this effect on forms provided by the municipal clerk. Election officials may not discuss candidates or issues on the ballot while working at the polls or within two hundred feet of the entrance.

B.    Under Influence by Force. Any person who uses or threatens to use force, coercion, violence, or restraint, or who inflicts or threatens to inflict damage or harm upon or against any person to induce or compel the person to vote or refrain from voting for any candidate in any election or for any election proposition or question or to sign or not to sign any initiative or referendum is guilty of a Class C felony.

C.    Undue Influence by Offer. Any person who promises to give or offers money or a valuable thing to any persons with the intent to induce them to vote for or refrain from voting for any candidate at any election or for any election proposition or question, or to sign or not to sign any initiative or referendum petition is guilty of a Class C felony.

D.    Improper Subscription to Petition. Any person who signs any name other than their own to a petition proposing an initiative, referendum, or recall, or who knowingly signs their name more than once for the same proposition or question at one election, or who signs the petition knowing they are not a qualified voter shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.

E.    Under Influence of Election Official. Any person who by force, threat, intimidation, or offers of reward induces or attempts to induce any election official to fail in their duty, shall be guilty of a Class C felony (AS 15.56.060(a)(1)).

(Ord. 14-34 § 4 (part), 2014; Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)

XI. Penalty


2.40.530 Penalty.

A.    Violation of this chapter, wherever herein designated to be a misdemeanor, shall be punished by fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment for not more than thirty days, or by both.

B.    Other violations of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars.

(Ord. 83-557 § 4 (part), 1983.)


Chapter 2.44 MUNICIPAL COURT7

Sections:

2.44.160    Work release program.

2.44.200    Fines.


2.44.160 Work release program.

A.    Authority for Work Release. When a person is convicted under the ordinances of the municipality and subject to serve a jail sentence the chief of police, may, if he concludes that the person is a fit subject for a work release and is not prohibited from it under subsection (G) hereunder, direct that the person be permitted to continue in his regular employment during the hours of such employment, or may authorize the person to secure employment for himself; provided, further, that the court at the time of sentencing has not ordered that the person be denied a work release. The court may at its discretion and as a part of sentence also grant such work releases.

B.    Conditions. If the chief of police directs that the prisoner be permitted to continue in his regular employment, the chief of police shall arrange for a continuation of the employment so far as possible without interruption. If the prisoner does not have regular employment, and the chief of police has authorized the prisoner to secure employment for himself, the prisoner may do so, and the chief of police may assist him in doing so. Any employment secured must be suitable for the prisoner. The employment must be in accordance with prevailing working conditions and wages in the area. No employment may be permitted where there is a labor dispute in the establishment in which the prisoner is, or is to be, employed.

C.    Hours. Whenever the prisoner is not employed and between the hours or periods of employment, he shall be confined in the jail unless the court directs otherwise.

D.    Earnings. The earnings of the prisoner shall be collected by the chief of police and the prisoner’s employer shall transmit the wages to the chief of police at the chief of police’s request. Earnings levied upon under a writ of attachment or execution or in other lawful manner may not be transmitted to the chief of police. When an employer transmits the earnings to the chief of police, he has no liability to the prisoner for the earnings. From the earnings, the chief of police shall: Pay the prisoner’s board and personal expenses, both inside and outside the prison facility; deduct so much of the costs of administration of this section as is allocable to the prisoner, which costs shall accurately reflect the total costs to the municipality of keeping the prisoner under this program and which shall not be less than eight dollars per day; and, in an amount determined by the chief of police or the court, shall pay the support of the prisoner’s dependents, if any. If sufficient funds are available after making the foregoing payments, the chief of police may, with the consent of the prisoner, pay, in whole or in part, the preexisting debts of the prisoner. Any balance shall be retained by the chief of police and paid to the prisoner at the time of his discharge.

E.    Violations. If the prisoner violates the conditions established for his conduct, custody, or employment while on work release, the chief of police or court may order the balance of the prisoner’s sentence to be spent in actual confinement.

F.    Failure to Return. The wilful failure of a prisoner to return to the place of confinement no later than the expiration of any period during which he is authorized to be away from the place of confinement under this section is an escape from the place of confinement and is punishable under municipal and/or state laws relating to escape.

G.    Limitations. A work release may not be authorized for a prisoner:

1.    Identified with large-scale, organized criminal activity;

2.    With serious emotional or personality problems, as determined by the chief of police;

3.    With a history of repeated violent or assaultive behavior;

4.    Not in good health;

5.    Addicted to the use of drugs; or

6.    Whose presence in the community is likely to evoke adverse public reaction toward the inmate in the institution or the municipality.

H.    Rules and Regulations. The chief of police may, upon approval by the assembly, promulgate rules and regulations furthering the provisions of the “work release program.”

(Ord. 73-73 § 3 (part), 1973.)


2.44.200 Fines.

Total fines collected shall be set forth in the monthly police report and all such funds shall be transmitted to the finance director. (Ord. 73-73 § 3 (part), 1973.)


Chapter 2.46 MUNICIPAL CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS

Sections:

2.46.010    Employees to meet statutory requirements.

2.46.020    Retroactive.


2.46.010 Employees to meet statutory requirements.

All persons employed in the Sitka Correctional Facility shall meet the requirements of AS 18.65.130 through 18.65.290 that are applicable to municipal correctional officers. (Ord. 00-1588 § 4A, 2000.)


2.46.020 Retroactive.

This chapter is retroactive in that it applies to all those employed as of July 1, 1999, and any date thereafter. (Ord. 00-1588 § 4B, 2000.)


Chapter 2.47 STEPS FOR DISASTER PREPAREDNESS

Sections:

2.47.010    Post-disaster damage assessment evaluations.

2.47.020    Agreements to meet emergency public safety requirements and mutual aid agreements.


2.47.010 Post-disaster damage assessment evaluations.

Upon declaration of a disaster by the administrator under AS 26.23.140, the administrator and his or her designee is authorized to:

A.    Appoint such volunteer architects, engineers, and other persons as agents of the city and borough to conduct post-disaster damage assessment evaluations of buildings, structures, and facilities as needed to preserve life safety of the occupants, the public, and other emergency responders. Any volunteer appointed shall serve and may be compensated for their expenses as provided by the municipal administrator. To the extent that such volunteers under this section do not qualify as “employees of the state” pursuant to AS 23.30.244, such volunteers shall be considered employees of the city and borough for the purposes of liability and worker’s compensation. The city and borough will not indemnify, defend or hold harmless volunteer damage assessment evaluators for any intentional or reckless act or acts, any acts or acts which constitute gross negligence, or actions which exceed the procedures established for damage assessment evaluations.

B.    Evacuate persons from any designated area.

C.    Issue such other orders or regulations immediately necessary for the protection of life and property.

(Ord. 04-24 § 4 (part), 2004.)


2.47.020 Agreements to meet emergency public safety requirements and mutual aid agreements.

Where the city and borough of Sitka has entered into agreements with the state as contemplated in AS 9.65.070(d)(5) to meet emergency public safety requirements, or where mutual aid agreements with other municipalities call for the extraterritorial extension of services as contemplated in AS 9.65.070(d)(4), the administrator may exercise such powers as are necessary to satisfy the city and borough’s obligations under those agreements. (Ord. 04-24 § 4 (part), 2004.)


Chapter 2.54 SITKA TREE AND LANDSCAPE COMMITTEE

Sections:

2.54.010    Established—Membership—Terms.

2.54.020    Compensation.

2.54.030    Filling vacancies.

2.54.050    Organization.

2.54.060    Duties.


2.54.010 Established—Membership—Terms.

There shall be established a committee to be known as the Sitka tree and landscape committee which shall consist of seven members who shall serve terms of three years. The city and borough administrator or his or her designee shall be an ex officio member of this committee. All committee members shall be appointed by the assembly and the first Sitka tree and landscape committee members shall be appointed and serve terms as follows:

A.    Three committee members for a term of three years;

B.    Two committee members for a term of two years;

C.    One committee member for a term that ends at the same time the initial three-year terms end; and

D.    One committee member for a term that ends at the same time the initial two-year terms end.

(Ord. 03-1718 § 4, 2003; Ord. 01-1625 § 4, 2001.)


2.54.020 Compensation.

Members of the Sitka tree and landscape committee shall not receive compensation for services performed as committee members. (Ord. 01-1625 § 4, 2001.)


2.54.030 Filling vacancies.

In the event of a vacancy on the committee caused by death, resignation, inability to serve or any other reason, before the expiration of the term of any member, the assembly shall appoint some person to fill such vacancy for the unexpired term. At the time of the vacancy, the assembly shall give three days’ public notice that there is a vacancy on the committee and that interested persons may inform the assembly of their willingness to serve. The assembly is not, however, limited to those applying when appointing members. The Sitka tree and landscape committee shall have the power to suggest people to fill the vacancy and shall have the right to make recommendations for and against a person nominated to the position. (Ord. 01-1625 § 4, 2001.)


2.54.050 Organization.

The committee shall organize itself by electing a chair and secretary and shall schedule meetings as required, but in no event shall meetings be held less than every quarter. Minutes of all meetings shall be furnished to the office of the administrator. (Ord. 01-1625 § 4, 2001.)


2.54.060 Duties.

The Sitka tree and landscape committee shall:

A.    Study and make recommendations to the assembly, through the administrator, regarding the needs or renovations necessary to existing landscape areas or facilities in terms of trees and landscaping;

B.    Investigate sites and make recommendation to the assembly, through the administrator, for new trees and landscaping or areas which they deem necessary and/or desirable for such purposes;

C.    Plan, institute and maintain tree and landscape projects within the city and borough.

(Ord. 01-1625 § 4, 2001.)


Chapter 2.56 PARKS AND RECREATION COMMITTEE

Sections:

2.56.010    Established—Membership—Terms.

2.56.020    Compensation.

2.56.030    Filling vacancies.

2.56.050    Organization.

2.56.060    Duties.


2.56.010 Established—Membership—Terms.

There shall be established a committee to be known as the parks and recreation committee which shall consist of seven members who shall serve terms of three years. The city and borough administrator or his designee shall be an ex officio member of this committee. All committee members shall be appointed by the assembly and the first parks and recreation committee members shall be appointed and serve terms as follows:

A.    Four committeemen for a term of three years;

B.    Three committeemen for a term of two years.

(Ord. 75-199 § 3(a), 1975.)


2.56.020 Compensation.

Members of the parks and recreation committee shall not receive compensation for services performed as committeemen. (Ord. 75-199 § 3(b), 1975.)


2.56.030 Filling vacancies.

In the event of a vacancy on the committee caused by death, resignation, inability to serve, or any other reason, before the expiration of the term of any member, the assembly shall appoint some person to fill such vacancy for the unexpired term. At the time of vacancy the assembly shall give three days’ public notice that there is a vacancy on the committee and that interested persons may inform the assembly of their willingness to serve. The assembly is not, however, limited to those applying when appointing members. The parks and recreation committee shall have the power to suggest people to fill the vacancy and shall have the right to make recommendations for and against a person nominated to the position. (Ord. 75-199 § 3(c), 1975.)


2.56.050 Organization.

The committee shall organize itself by electing a chairman and secretary and shall schedule meetings as required, but in no event shall meetings be held less than every quarter. Minutes of all meetings shall be furnished to the office of the administrator. (Ord. 75-199 § 3(e), 1975.)


2.56.060 Duties.

The parks and recreation committee shall:

A.    Study and make recommendation to the assembly through the administrator, regarding the needs or renovations necessary to existing parks and recreational areas or facilities;

B.    Investigate sites and make recommendation to the assembly, through the administrator, for new park and recreational facilities, or areas which they deem necessary and/or desirable for such purposes;

C.    To promote interest in recreational resources; to investigate all recreational facilities, sites and programs in the municipality to assure that they are being utilized to the maximum extent possible, and to assist in locating facilities or space for various recreational activities;

D.    To make recommendations on all parks and recreation considerations to come before the assembly.

(Ord. 75-199 § 3(f), 1975.)


Chapter 2.58 SITKA HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION

Sections:

2.58.010    Establishment.

2.58.020    Membership—Terms of office.

2.58.030    Meetings, organization and officers.

2.58.040    Powers and duties.

2.58.050    Confidentiality.


2.58.010 Establishment.

There is established the Sitka historic preservation commission which shall be composed of seven members appointed by the assembly. (Ord. 92-1075 § 4 (part), 1992.)


2.58.020 Membership—Terms of office.

A.    Members of the commission shall, to the extent deemed advisable by the assembly, include professionals from among the fields of architecture or history, architectural history, planning, archeology or some historic preservation disciplines such as urban planning, American studies, American civilization, cultural geography or cultural anthropology. One member shall be a member of the assembly or its representative; one member shall be a member of the Sitka historical society; and the commission shall include at least two representatives of the Native community, one of whom shall be nominated by Sitka Tribes of Alaska; all other members shall be at-large members.

B.    The term of a member shall be for three years or until a successor is appointed; except, the term of the member who represents the assembly shall be for one year. The first members appointed to the commission shall, upon appointment, determine the length of the terms so that the terms of two members shall be for one year, the terms of two members shall be for two years and the terms of two members shall be for three years, resulting in staggered terms for members subsequently appointed. A vacancy on the commission shall be filled by appointment by the assembly for the remainder of an unexpired term.

(Ord. 92-1075 § 4 (part), 1992.)


2.58.030 Meetings, organization and officers.

A.    The commission shall meet a minimum of two times per year at such times that the chair or, in his absence, the vice-chair shall determine.

B.    The commission shall give reasonable public notice of its meetings and shall comply in all respects with the Alaska Open Meetings Law.

C.    The officers of the commission shall be a chairman, vice chairman, and secretary, each of whom shall be elected by the members of the commission at the first meeting each fiscal year and shall serve a term to expire upon election of officers at the first meeting of the following fiscal year. Should an officer resign his office prior to the expiration of his term, or be otherwise unable or unwilling to perform his duties as required of the office, the commission may elect an officer to serve out the remainder of his term of office. In addition to the above officers, the commission, by a majority vote of its members, may designate and elect or appoint such other officers, assistant officers and agents as it deems necessary at such time, in such manner and upon and for such terms as it shall prescribe. All officers and agents shall serve at the pleasure of the commission and may be removed, by a majority vote of the commission, whenever in its judgment the best interests of the commission will be served.

(Ord. 92-1075 § 4 (part), 1992.)


2.58.040 Powers and duties.

The commission shall:

A.    Prepare and maintain an inventory of buildings and sites of historical, cultural, architectural, geographical and archeological significance located in the city and borough of Sitka. The inventory system will be compatible with the Alaska Heritage Resources Survey (AHRS). Data will be released on a need-to-know basis to planners, land managers, qualified researchers and other appropriate users; otherwise, site location information should be held confidential to protect sites from vandalism;

B.    Develop a local historic preservation plan including provision for identification, protection and interpretation of the area’s significant resources. Such plan is to be compatible with the Alaska Historic Preservation Plan, and to produce information compatible with and for the Alaska Heritage Resources Survey (AHRS). The plan shall be subject to review and approval by the assembly of the city and borough of Sitka;

C.    With prior approval of the property owner, review and develop nominations to the National Register of Historic Places for properties within the city and borough of Sitka;

D.    Review and make recommendations about local projects that might affect properties identified in the local historic preservation plan;

E.    Work toward the continuing education of citizens regarding historic preservation of the community’s history;

F.    Support the enforcement of the Alaska Historic Preservation Act (AS 41.35);

G.    Act in an advisory role to the Sitka historical society, the city and borough of Sitka planning commission and the Alaska Historic Sites Advisory Committee on all matters concerning historical districts and historic, prehistoric and archeological preservation in the city and borough of Sitka;

H.    Perform other activities which are necessary and proper to carry out the above duties and any other actions determined by the assembly to be beneficial to carrying out the historic preservation goals of the city and borough of Sitka;

I.    Coordinate with the Sitka Tribes of Alaska in historical matters involving Alaska Natives with the understanding that the commission shall defer to the tribe in matters concerning Alaska Natives in Sitka.

(Ord. 93-1150 § 4, 1993; Ord. 92-1075 § 4 (part), 1992.)


2.58.050 Confidentiality.

The inventory is not a public document and the information it contains is exempt from requests under the federal and state Freedom of Information laws. The legal authority for withholding public access to this information is specified in AS 9.25.360, the Archaeological Resources Protection Act (16 USC 470 HH) and the National Historic Preservation Act (16 USC 470 W-3). (Amended during 3/15 supplement; Ord. 97-1409 § 4, 1997.)


Chapter 2.60 MUNICIPAL BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES

Sections:

2.60.010    Quorum.

2.60.020    Affirmative vote on actions.

2.60.030    Recommendations—Endorsement.

2.60.040    Unexcused absences—Vacancies.

2.60.050    Teleconference participation.

2.60.060    Municipal employees serving on municipal boards, commissions or committees.


2.60.010 Quorum.

In order for a municipal board, commission or committee to conduct a meeting, except to adjourn to a later time and/or date, a quorum must be present. A quorum shall be not less than fifty percent of the total membership of the board, commission or committee. Vacancies in memberships shall be counted in determining whether or not there is a quorum. (Ord. 74-114 § 3(b), 1974.)


2.60.020 Affirmative vote on actions.

Action by a board, commission or committee shall be by affirmative vote. The affirmative vote of no less than fifty percent of the membership of the board, commission or committee shall be required for such action to be taken. Vacant memberships shall be counted in determining whether or not this majority requirement is met. (Ord. 74-114 § 3(c), 1974.)


2.60.030 Recommendations—Endorsement.

All recommendations forwarded to the assembly of the city and borough shall have the endorsement of the majority of the entire committee, and the vote taken on the proposal shall be reflected in the forwarded recommendation. (Ord. 74-114 § 3(d), 1974.)


2.60.040 Unexcused absences—Vacancies.

A.    The minutes of each board or commission shall show those in attendance at each meeting, and whether an absent member is excused or not. Three unexcused absences, as determined by the appointed board or commission, in one year by a member shall automatically be cause for forfeiture of membership position.

B.    The vacancy shall be filled by the assembly. The person taking over the vacated position shall serve the remainder of the unexpired term.

(Ord. 86-700 § 4(B), 1986: Ord. 74-114 § 3(e), 1974.)


2.60.050 Teleconference participation.

A.    The use of teleconferencing at meetings of boards, commissions and committees is for the convenience of government officials and the public. Teleconference participation by the members of boards, commissions and committees and the public is authorized by AS 44.62.310(a) and 44.62.312. While physical presence of the members and the public is the preferred method of participation at the meetings, the members and the public are allowed to participate at assembly meetings in the following manner:

1.    Participation of Members by Teleconference.

a.    Any member may participate in any meeting by teleconference. Teleconference participation is solely at the discretion of the member who requests this method of participation if the member is out of town or incapacitated. The member shall notify the secretarial staff for that board, commission or committee to arrange for teleconference participation at least twenty-four hours before any regular meeting, and at least twelve hours before any special meeting.

b.    A member who is the presiding officer of any board, commission or committee may also participate in any meeting by teleconference. The presiding officer shall notify the secretarial staff for that board, commission or committee at least twenty-four hours before any regular meeting, and at least twelve hours before any special meeting to arrange for teleconference participation. However, the presiding officer shall not preside over the meeting when participating by teleconference.

c.    Any member participating by teleconference shall be deemed to be present at the meeting for all purposes, including for quorum and voting, except as provided in subsection (A)(1)(b) of this section.

d.    Any member participating by teleconference shall have the same right to participate in any matter as if physically present at the meeting, including executive sessions, adjudicatory matters, and presentations. Reasonable efforts shall be made to make available to the member participating by teleconference any pertinent documents that are to be discussed and/or acted upon. 

e.    Any member participating by teleconference shall have the same right to vote on any matter as if physically present at the meeting. All voting at the meeting shall be by roll call vote. It is at the discretion of the member who is participating by teleconference to determine whether the member has had the opportunity to evaluate all pertinent information, including any testimony and/or evidence, and is prepared to vote.

f.    Teleconference participation at any meeting is limited to four times a year by each member. 

2.    Participation of Public by Teleconference. Any member of the public who will not be present within the city and borough of Sitka during the meeting, and who wants to participate by teleconference concerning any agenda item which allows for public participation, may request participating by teleconference. The member of the public shall provide the secretarial staff for that board, commission or committee, who is listed on the city and borough of Sitka website, with a telephone contact number for the teleconference participation at least twenty-four hours before any regular meeting, and at least twelve hours before any special meeting. The secretarial staff will call that phone number during the public participation section on the agenda item. 

B.    Cost of Teleconference Participation. A member of any board, commission, or committee and any member of the public who participates by teleconference shall not be charged for any telephone costs associated with the teleconference participation.

(Ord. 06-01 A(2) § 4(B), 2006.)


2.60.060 Municipal employees serving on municipal boards, commissions or committees.

Notwithstanding the mandates set forth in the Sitka Home Rule Charter 2.11(a) with regard to elected positions such as assembly and school board, a municipal employee may be eligible for appointment to a municipal board, commission or committee if that board, commission or committee has no oversight or policy making authority over the department in which they, or an immediate family member, work or are assigned. “Immediate family member” has the same meaning as defined in Section 1.04.080(E). 

(Ord. 16-02 § 4, 2016.)


Chapter 2.62 SITKA INVESTMENT COMMITTEE

Sections:

2.62.010    Established—Membership—Terms.

2.62.020    Compensation.

2.62.030    Filling vacancies.

2.62.040    Organization.

2.62.050    Duties.


2.62.010 Established—Membership—Terms.

There shall be established a committee to be known as the Sitka investment committee, which shall consist of four members with one member serving as an alternate voting member for three-year terms. The city and borough finance director shall be an ex officio member of this committee. All committee members shall be appointed by the assembly. (Ord. 15-28 § 4, 2015: Ord. 01-1651 § 4 (part), 2001.)


2.62.020 Compensation.

Members of the Sitka investment committee shall not receive compensation for services performed as committee members. (Ord. 01-1651 § 4 (part), 2001.)


2.62.030 Filling vacancies.

In the event of a vacancy on the committee caused by death, resignation, inability to serve, or any other reason, before the expiration of the term of any member, the assembly shall appoint a person to fill such vacancy for the unexpired term. At the time of vacancy the assembly shall give public notice of no less than three days that there is a vacancy on the committee and that interested persons may inform the assembly of their willingness to serve. The assembly is not, however, limited to those applying when appointing members. The Sitka investment committee shall have the power to suggest people to fill the vacancy and shall have the right to make recommendations for and against a person nominated to the position. (Ord. 01-1651 § 4 (part), 2001.)


2.62.040 Organization.

The committee shall organize itself by electing a chair and secretary and shall schedule meetings as required, but in no event shall meetings be held less than every six months. Minutes of all meetings shall be furnished to the office of the administrator. (Ord. 01-1651 § 4 (part), 2001.)


2.62.050 Duties.

The Sitka investment committee shall:

A.    Make recommendations to update the investment policy as needed;

B.    Review current investments to determine if they meet the standards set forth by the investment policy;

C.    Recommend actions to be taken on investments that are downgraded or put on a negative credit watch;

D.    Recommend appropriate benchmarks for portfolio performance of the pooled investments and the permanent fund investments.

(Ord. 01-1651 § 4 (part), 2001.)


Chapter 2.64 SEAFOOD PROCESSING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE

Sections:

2.64.010    Established—Membership—Terms.

2.64.020    Compensation.

2.64.030    Filling vacancies.

2.64.040    Organization.

2.64.050    Duties.


2.64.010 Established—Membership—Terms.

There shall be established a committee to be known as the seafood processing economic development committee which shall consist of five members, with three of the members being the members of the Sitka investment committee. The other two members shall be appointed by the assembly for terms of three years, with one member who is a current or former professional of a financial institution, and the other member who is a current or former worker or manager involved in the seafood industry. The city and borough finance director shall be an ex officio member of this committee.

(Ord. 06-42 § 4 (part), 2006.)


2.64.020 Compensation.

Members of the seafood processing economic development committee shall not receive compensation for services performed as committee members.

(Ord. 06-42 § 4 (part), 2006.)


2.64.030 Filling vacancies.

In the event of a vacancy on the committee caused by death, resignation, inability to serve, or any other reason, before the expiration of the term of any member, the assembly shall appoint a person to fill such vacancy for the unexpired term. At the time of vacancy the assembly shall give public notice of no less than three days that there is a vacancy on the committee and that interested persons may inform the assembly of their willingness to serve. The assembly is not, however, limited to those applying when appointing members. The seafood processing economic development committee shall have the power to suggest people to fill the vacancy and shall have the right to make recommendations for and against a person nominated to the position.

(Ord. 06-42 § 4 (part), 2006.)


2.64.040 Organization.

The committee shall organize itself by electing a chair and secretary and shall schedule meetings as required, but in no event shall meetings be held less than every six months. Minutes of all meetings shall be furnished to the office of the clerk.

(Ord. 06-42 § 4 (part), 2006.)


2.64.050 Duties.

The seafood processing economic development committee shall:

A.    Recommend appropriate criteria for awarding funds to seafood processing operations that shall be subject to assembly approval, in addition to the following requirements:

1.    Seafood processors and directly related industries are eligible to apply for grants, including operations that process seafood, seafood by-products and seafood waste;

2.    Grants up to three hundred fifty thousand dollars may be available to seafood processors and directly related industries;

3.    All grantees shall be required to demonstrate that the funds should result in either of the following in order to be eligible for grant funds:

a.    Increase in raw fish taxes paid to the city and borough of Sitka based on the funding of the grant application; or

b.    Increase in seafood processing production within the city and borough of Sitka; and 

4.    Grant funds can only be used as a fifty-fifty match for the grantee’s proposal, allowing use of federal and state funds for the match;

B.    Make recommendations to update the criteria for awarding and monitoring funds;

C.    Monitor current economic development fund awards to determine if they meet the criteria set out in this section and any criteria proposed by the committee and approved by the assembly; and

D.    Review and recommend actions to be taken on grant applications.

(Ord. 06-42 § 4 (part), 2006.)


TITLE 2 FOOTNOTES

1    For Charter provisions concerning the assembly, see §§ 2.01—2.14; for provisions concerning the administrator executive, see §§ 4.01—4.04.

2    For Charter provisions concerning the police and fire commission, see § 7.01; for the provisions requiring establishment, alteration or abolishment of municipal departments by ordinance, see § 3.01(1).

3    For Charter provisions requiring an ordinance to establish, alter or abolish any municipal office or agency, see § 3.01(1); for the provision that all boards in effect at the time the Charter is ratified shall be dissolved within one year, unless sooner abolished or specifically continued by ordinance, see § 18.10.

5    For open public meetings law, see AS 44.62.310.

6    For statutory provisions concerning municipal elections, see AS Ch. 29.26.

Charter reference—For the Charter provisions concerning elections, see §§ 5.01, 2.03—2.05; for the provisions concerning initiative, referendum and recall, see §§ 6.01 and 6.02.

7    For statutory provisions concerning District Courts, see AS Ch. 22.15.

8    For statutory provisions regarding local civil defense organization, see AS 26.20.060 et seq.


Title 3 PROCUREMENT 

Chapters:

3.16    Procurement Policy 


Chapter 3.16 PROCUREMENT POLICY 

Sections:

3.16.010    Contract and purchase procedure.

3.16.020    Limitation on administrator’s authority.

3.16.025    Purchase splitting.

3.16.026    Types of vendor solicitations.

3.16.027    Alternative contracting methods.

3.16.030    Purchases or contracts exceeding fifty thousand dollars.

3.16.031    Purchases or contracts from twenty-five thousand to fifty thousand dollars.

3.16.032    Purchases or contracts of less than twenty-five thousand dollars.

3.16.040    Advertising.

3.16.050    Processing of bids.

3.16.060    Exceptions to competitive requirements. 

3.16.070    Lowest responsive and responsible bidder.

3.16.080    [Reserved.]

3.16.090    [Reserved.]

3.16.100    Change orders—Administrator authority.

3.16.110    [Reserved.]

3.16.120    Procurement procedure manual.


3.16.010 Contract and purchase procedure.

The administrator or his or her designee may carry out any of the following:

A.    Contract for, purchase or issue purchase authorizations for all supplies, materials, equipment, and services for the offices, departments, and agencies of the city and borough; and

B.    Contract for the construction, repair, or improvements of city and borough facilities.

(Ord. 16-12 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 04-16 § 4 (part), 2004.)


3.16.020 Limitation on administrator’s authority.

The administrator may not make an acquisition or contract authorized by Section 3.16.010 if the value of the property, service or contract exceeds the assembly approved appropriation without first obtaining assembly approval of the increased appropriation. 

(Ord. 16-12 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 09-58 § 4 (part), 2009: Ord. 04-16 § 4 (part), 2004.)


3.16.025 Purchase splitting.

Purchases for a single project or task shall not be split into smaller transactions with the intent to allow a lower level of review and approval.

(Ord. 16-12 § 4 (part), 2016.)


3.16.026 Types of vendor solicitations.

The following three types of bidding arrangements are acceptable forms of solicited procurement. Specific procedures governing the applicability of each will be set forth in the procedures manual:

A.    Requests for Bids: These bids shall be awarded on the basis of the lowest price to a responsive and responsible bidder as determined by the city administrator.

B.    Requests for Proposals: If the administrator determines that use of competitive bidding is not in the best interest of the city and borough, supplies, services, materials, and equipment may be procured by competitive proposals. These proposals shall be awarded based on scoring against the criteria defined in the specification including but not limited to price. Additionally, the administrator is empowered to negotiate terms which are in the best interest of the city and borough of Sitka.

C.    Requests for Qualifications: If the administrator determines that use of competitive bidding or proposals are not in the best interest of the city and borough, supplies, services, materials, and equipment may be procured by competitive statement of qualifications. Vendor award shall be made on a qualification based criteria as defined in the specifications. Additionally, the administrator is empowered to negotiate terms which are in the best interest of the city and borough of Sitka.

(Ord. 16-12 § 4 (part), 2016.)


3.16.027 Alternative contracting methods.

When the administrator determines it is in the best interest of the city and borough he or she may utilize alternative contracting methods such as: design build, energy services contracts, guaranteed maximum price, and on call contracting. These methods shall be defined within the city and borough purchasing procedures.

(Ord. 16-12 § 4 (part), 2016.)


3.16.030 Purchases or contracts exceeding fifty thousand dollars.

A.    If the value of the goods or service exceeds fifty thousand dollars, the administrator may authorize the acquisition or contract with the written certification by the finance director that appropriated funds are available, and seeking competitive formal sealed bids or as exempted by Section 3.16.060. Purchases or contracts authorized by Section 3.16.010 having an estimated value exceeding fifty thousand dollars must be made in the open market and meet the requirements of Section 3.16.040.

B.    Bids or proposals are considered formal bids and must be sealed and delivered to the submission point by the appointed time. Submission may be paper or electronic methods.

(Ord. 16-12 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 15-15 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 14-03A § 4 (part), 2014; Ord. 09-58 § 4 (part), 2009: Ord. 04-16 § 4 (part), 2004.)


3.16.031 Purchases or contracts from twenty-five thousand to fifty thousand dollars.

A.    If the value of the property, service or contract exceeds twenty-five thousand dollars but does not exceed fifty thousand dollars, the administrator may authorize the acquisition or contract with the written certification by the finance director that appropriated funds are available, and upon seeking at least three competitive quotes from a minimum of three vendors or as exempted by Section 3.16.060. Purchases or contracts authorized by Section 3.16.010 having an estimated value that does not exceed fifty thousand dollars may be made in the open market without publishing notice in a newspaper.

B.    All solicitations shall be awarded on the basis of Section 3.16.026.

(Ord. 16-12 § 4 (part), 2016.)


3.16.032 Purchases or contracts of less than twenty-five thousand dollars.

A.    If the value of the property, service or contract is below twenty-five thousand dollars, the administrator may authorize the acquisition or contract on the open market with such competition as is reasonable and practical in the circumstances as long as doing so does not interfere with the ability of the city and borough of Sitka to receive grants and other funding sources or as exempted by Section 3.16.060. It is the city and borough of Sitka’s intent to promote local purchases whenever the availability, quality, price and delivery is:

1.    Within a four percent advantage to what is available outside the municipality for purchases under two thousand five hundred dollars; and

2.    Within a two percent advantage to what is available outside the municipality for purchases two thousand five hundred dollars and above.

(Ord. 16-12 § 4 (part), 2016.)


3.16.040 Advertising.

Unless other procedures are authorized under this chapter, purchases or contracts authorized by Section 3.16.010 having an estimated value of more than fifty thousand dollars may be made only after a notice is printed in a newspaper of general circulation within the city and borough, unless another form of media is authorized by the administrator. The notice shall contain a general description of the property, work or service; state where the bid forms and/or specifications may be obtained; specify the place for submission of bids and the time by which they must be received.

(Ord. 16-12 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 09-58 § 4 (part), 2009: Ord. 04-16 § 4 (part), 2004.)


3.16.050 Processing of bids.

Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter relating to the award after competitive bid for purchases and contracts, the city and borough may take one or more of the following steps during procurement:

A.    Reject defective or nonresponsive bids;

B.    Waive any irregularities in any and all bids;

C.    Reject all bids;

D.    Readvertise for bids with or without making changes in the plans, specifications, or scope of work.

(Ord. 16-12 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 04-16 § 4 (part), 2004.)


3.16.060 Exceptions to competitive requirements. 

A.    Unless otherwise authorized by law, all procurement actions shall follow a competitive process. The following is a list of authorized exceptions which can be approved by department heads based on approval authority describing situations in which a competitive process is not required:

1.    Negotiated procurement following unsuccessful efforts to obtain a qualified bid through competitive bidding.

2.    Small procurement, below two thousand five hundred dollars.

3.    Emergency acquisitions approved by the administrator or department head based on authorization limits.

4.    Procurement of consultant and technical services.

5.    Procurement of real estate.

6.    [Reserved].

7.    Interagency agreements.

8.    Utilization of state or local government contracts.

9.    Specialized equipment where standardization is a primary criteria.

10.    Sole-Source Procurement.

a.    [Reserved].

b.    Placement of insurance coverage as defined in this chapter.

c.    Contracts for electronic data processing and system control software and hardware systems and other software systems shall be by professional services contract; provided, however:

i.    To be exempt from competitive bidding the service in question must be truly a “system” which is professionally designed.

ii.    The purchase of hardware which is not an inextricable part of the system and can be bid separately shall be competitively bid.

iii.    Software and systems readily available to the open market (e.g., computer operating systems) are not subject to this exception. Competition will be sought to the maximum extent practicable.

d.    Best interest of the city and borough.

B.    The provisions of subsection A of this section notwithstanding, all procurement actions utilizing federal support or funding, which are subject to the procurement standards outlined in applicable federal regulations, will comply with those procurement standards in all respects except in cases where city and borough procurement code is stricter than applicable federal regulations. In such a case, the code must be followed. The administrator shall ensure that sufficient documents and records required by applicable federal regulations are retained in order to detail all procurements utilizing federal support or funding.

(Ord. 18-50 § 4, 2018: Ord. 16-12 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 15-15 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 14-03A § 4 (part), 2014; Ord. 04-16 § 4 (part), 2004.)


3.16.070 Lowest responsive and responsible bidder.

The lowest responsive and responsible bidder is deemed to be the lowest qualified bidder under Section 11.14(a) of the Charter. In determining the lowest responsive and responsible bidder for purposes of award, the city and borough shall consider:

A.    The price;

B.    The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract within the time and price specified;

C.    The reputation and experience of the bidder; and

D.    The bidder performance and payment under previous contract.

(Ord. 16-12 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 04-16 § 4 (part), 2004.)


3.16.080 [Reserved.]

(Ord. 16-12 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 15-15 § 4 (part), 2015: Ord. 14-03A § 4 (part), 2014: Ord. 04-16 § 4 (part), 2004.)


3.16.090 [Reserved.]

(Ord. 04-16 § 4 (part), 2004.)


3.16.100 Change orders—Administrator authority. 

The administrator is authorized, without assembly approval, to enter into change orders where the amount of additional expenditure occasioned by the change order or orders does not, in the aggregate, exceed any contingency fund previously established with respect to the particular project or materially change the scope of work. Change orders exceeding in the aggregate the foregoing limitation or which change the scope of work beyond the assembly approved project are not binding without prior approval of the assembly.

(Ord. 16-12 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 04-16 § 4 (part), 2004.)


3.16.110 [Reserved.]

(Ord. 16-12 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 04-16 § 4 (part), 2004.)


3.16.120 Procurement procedure manual.

A.    The administrator will create, maintain and update a procurement procedures manual in compliance with the Sitka General Code. The manual may be updated by approval of the administrator with assembly notification. The procurement procedures may be more restrictive than the Sitka General Code where the municipal administrator deems necessary.

B.    A copy of the manual shall be available to the public at all times through the municipal clerk at the Sitka City Hall.

(Ord. 16-12 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 04-16 § 4 (part), 2004.)


Title 4 REVENUE AND FINANCE  

Chapters:

4.04    Budgetary Organization

4.05    Marine Passenger Fee Fund

4.06    Proceeds from Raw Water Sale Contracts

4.09    Sales Tax  

4.12    Property Tax

4.17    Driver Facility Charge

4.19    Sitka Permanent Fund

4.20    Miscellaneous Fees

4.24    Transient Lodging Tax 

4.25    Student Activities Dedicated Travel Fund

4.26    Excise Tax on Cigarettes and Tobacco Products

4.28    Investment Policy

4.32    Debt Service Priority

4.35    Delinquent Accounts

4.40    Uncollectable Accounts and Bad Debt Write-Offs—Municipal Credit and Collections Policy

4.42    Small Business Guaranteed Loan Program

4.44    Southeast Economic Development Fund

4.44A    Required Levels of Cash to Be Maintained in the General Fund

4.45    Long-Term Infrastructure Sinking Fund for the Repair and Replacement of General Fund Municipal Buildings, Streets, Sidewalks, Parking Lots, and Parks

NOTE:    Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this title.


Chapter 4.04 BUDGETARY ORGANIZATION

Sections:

4.04.010    Funds, divisions and departments.


4.04.010 Funds, divisions and departments.

The following funds, divisions and departments of the city and borough are established:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

	FUND	DIVISION	DEPARTMENT

	A. General	Administration	Administrator and Assembly

	Attorney

	Municipal Clerk

	Finance

	Assessing

	Planning

	General Office

	Other

	Public Safety	Police

	Fire

	Ambulance

	Search and Rescue

	Public Works	Administration

	Engineering

	Streets

	Recreation

	Building Officials

	Public Service	Library

	Centennial Building

	Convention and Visitors Bureau

	Senior Citizen Building

	Other	Debt Payments

	Support Payments

	Fixed Assets

	Transfers

	B. Electric	Operations

	C. Water	Operations

	D. Wastewater Treatment	Operations

	E. Solid Waste	Operations

	F. Harbor	Operations

	G. Airport Terminal	Operations

	H. Marine Service Center	Operations

	I. Gary Paxton Industrial Park	Operations

	J. Information Services	Operations

	K. Central Garage	Operations

	L. Building Maintenance	Operations

	M. Special Revenue Funds as needed

	N. Trust and Agency Funds as needed

	O. General Fixed Assets Account Group

	P. General Long-Term Debt Account Group

	Q. Public School System

	R. Hospital

(Ord. 14-21 § 4 (part), 2014; Ord. 06-31 § 4, 2006: Ord. 96-1387 § 4, 1996.)


Chapter 4.05 MARINE PASSENGER FEE FUND

Sections:

4.05.010    Establish fund.

4.05.020    Use of proceeds.

4.05.030    Procedures.


4.05.010 Establish fund.

A special revenue fund is established to accept the proceeds of the commercial passenger excise tax collected by the state of Alaska and passed through to the city and borough of Sitka. The proceeds shall be placed in the marine passenger fund. (Ord. 08-29 § 4 (part), 2008.)


4.05.020 Use of proceeds.

The proceeds of the marine passenger fund shall be appropriated to address the impacts caused by the marine passenger ship industry in full compliance with all state and federal regulations governing the use of these funds. CPET funds may be used for but are not limited to:

A.    For the design, construction, operation and maintenance of municipally owned port and harbor facilities engaged in interstate and foreign commerce and interstate marine passenger transportation;

B.    For the design, construction, operation and maintenance of municipally owned facilities with the exclusive purpose of enhancing the safety and efficiency of interstate and foreign commerce and interstate marine passenger transportation;

C.    To pay for personnel, supply, equipment, and rental costs which enhance the safety and efficiency of interstate and foreign commerce and interstate marine passenger transportation if such costs are directly and exclusively related to the safety and efficiency of interstate and foreign commerce and interstate marine passenger transportation, or, if such costs can be determined by an auditable allocation method which calculates the percentage of total costs which are attributable to interstate and foreign commerce and interstate marine passenger transportation;

D.    For the municipal portion of the costs of the design and construction of facilities funded through a matching grant from state of Alaska commercial passenger excise tax proceeds and with the approval of the state of Alaska.

(Ord. 16-32 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 08-29 § 4 (part), 2008.)


4.05.030 Procedures.

A.    The administrator will notify the assembly on an annual or as-needed basis when there is a sufficient balance in the marine passenger fee fund for a solicitation of project proposals. Upon approval of the assembly, the administrator will initiate a call for proposals consistent with the use of CPET funds per Section 4.05.020. The assembly will review and select proposals for funding.

B.    Project funds shall be transferred or expended from the marine passenger fee fund only to the extent approved by the assembly.

(Ord. 16-32 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 12-22 § 4, 2012: Ord. 11-29 § 4, 2011: Ord. 08-29 § 4 (part), 2008.)


Chapter 4.06 PROCEEDS FROM RAW WATER SALE CONTRACTS

Sections:

4.06.101    Establishment of raw water sale fund.

4.06.102    Reimbursing expenditures from other funds relating to the sale of raw water, maintenance of raw water distribution infrastructure, or retention of water rights.

4.06.103    Expenditure of net assets of the raw water sale fund.

4.06.104    Allocation of revenues from sales of raw water at Gary Paxton Industrial Park.


4.06.101 Establishment of raw water sale fund.

     There shall be established a new fund within the fund system of the city and borough of Sitka entitled the raw water sale fund. The purpose of the raw water sale fund shall be to receive all proceeds from bulk water sales contracts, to hold such deposits, and, to reimburse expenditures made by other funds relating to the sale of bulk water, maintenance of bulk water distribution infrastructure, or retention of water rights. (Ord. 14-24 § 4 (part), 2014.)


4.06.102 Reimbursing expenditures from other funds relating to the sale of raw water, maintenance of raw water distribution infrastructure, or retention of water rights. 

Any fund of the city and borough of Sitka which expends funds in order to facilitate the sale of raw water, negotiate raw water sale contracts, construct or maintain raw water distribution infrastructure, or pursue legal or regulatory action to maintain water rights may request of the administrator up to fifty thousand dollars, or the assembly for amounts exceeding this amount, that such expenditures be reimbursed out of the assets of the raw water sale fund. Upon approval of the request, such reimbursements will be accomplished by the finance department. Such requests may be made whenever appropriate, but shall not be made on a basis more often than quarterly. The assembly and administrator will consider recommendations from the GPIP board prior to disbursing funds. (Ord. 15-49 § 4 (part), 2015: Ord. 14-24 § 4 (part), 2014.)


4.06.103 Expenditure of net assets of the raw water sale fund. 

At any time, the administrator or the assembly of the city and borough of Sitka may authorize the transfer of the net assets of the raw water sale fund to any other fund within the city and borough of Sitka to be used for expenditures deemed appropriate by the assembly. The assembly will consider recommendations from the GPIP board and administrator prior to transferring raw water sale fund assets. For purposes of this section, net assets shall be defined as the assets of the raw water sale fund, less any liabilities. Any contractually mandated deposits for exclusive rights to purchase raw water from the city and borough of Sitka shall be defined as deposits until such deposits are either earned through application towards future water sales or through the expiration of the time period to exercise such rights. (Ord. 15-49 § 4 (part), 2015: Ord. 14-24 § 4 (part), 2014.)


4.06.104 Allocation of revenues from sales of raw water at Gary Paxton Industrial Park.

In the allocation of revenues from the raw water sale fund, the assembly and administrator will strive to ensure that the GPIP has adequate resources to market, manage and administer the assets of the park with the goal of maximizing economic returns to the community. Further, the assembly will allocate funds as it deems appropriate to other departments of the CBS. (Ord. 15-49 § 4 (part), 2015: Ord. 14-24 § 4 (part), 2014.)


Chapter 4.09 SALES TAX  

Sections:

4.09.010    Levy of sales tax.

4.09.020    Collection of tax. 

4.09.030    Presumption of taxability—Sales price and purchase price.

4.09.040    Separate statement of tax—No advertising to absorb or refund tax.

4.09.100    Exemptions.  

4.09.110    Residence construction tax refund.

4.09.120    Exemption from seasonal sales tax increase.

4.09.210    Exempt sales.

4.09.220    Exemption certificate—Form.

4.09.230    Exemption certificate—Requirements.

4.09.240    Improper use of subject of purchase obtained with exemption certificate—Penalty.

4.09.250    Liability for payment of tax—Security for retailer without place of business—Penalty.

4.09.260    Method of accounting.

4.09.270    Returns—Payment—Authority of city and borough of Sitka.

4.09.280    Form of return.

4.09.285    Reserved.

4.09.290    Substantiation of sales and exemptions.

4.09.300    Methods.

4.09.310    Deduction for bad debts.

4.09.320    Timely filing allowance.

4.09.330    Security—Limitations—Sales of security deposit at auction—Bond.

4.09.340    Taxpayer quitting business— Liability of successor.

4.09.345    Application of payments.

4.09.350    Procedures on delinquencies.

4.09.360    Tax as debt.

4.09.370    Refunds and credits.

4.09.380    Period of limitation.

4.09.390    Taxes lien.

4.09.395    General penalty provision.

4.09.400    Rules and regulations.

4.09.405    Confidential and nonconfidential tax information.

4.09.410    Sales tax audits.

4.09.420    Definitions.  


4.09.010 Levy of sales tax. 

A.    There is levied a consumer’s sales tax on sales, rents, and leases made in the city and borough of Sitka. This tax applies to sales, rentals, and leases of tangible personal property; sales of services sold within the city and borough of Sitka; sales of services performed wholly or partially within the city and borough of Sitka when the provision of such services originates or terminates within the city and borough of Sitka; and rentals and leases of real property located within the city and borough of Sitka. Notwithstanding any provision of law, air or sea charter services, provided a person or entity in the business of providing such charter services, are exempt from sales tax by the city and borough of Sitka if the charter does not commence and end within the city and borough of Sitka.

B.    The rate of levy of the sales tax levied under subsection A of this section is five percent on sales made during the months of October, November, December, January, February, and March. The rate of levy of the sales tax levied under subsection A of this section is six percent on sales made during the months of April, May, June, July, August, and September.1 

C.    A flat rate of ten dollars per fish box shall be levied on the packaged fish and/or seafood caught or taken and retained by fish charter customers as part of the fish charter. This tax shall be paid by the fish charter customer, collected by whoever packages the fish and/or seafood caught or taken by the fish charter customer, and is in addition to any sales tax paid based on the cost of the charter. This tax is effective January 1, 2007. For purposes of this subsection, a “fish box” means any packaging by a fish charter operator or processor of fish and/or seafood caught or taken as part of the charter by a fish charter customer. The sales tax collected from this levy on fish boxes shall be deposited by the finance director in the following funds in the following ratios:

1.    Thirty percent in the harbor fund;

2.    Thirty percent in a fisheries enhancement fund, available to be used for any fisheries enhancement proposal upon approval of the proposal by the assembly; and

3.    Forty percent in the general fund.

D.    Except as provided in subsection C of this section, all moneys accumulated under the terms of this chapter shall be deposited by the finance director in the general fund of the city and borough of Sitka and shall be used for the general operating expenses of the city and borough of Sitka in such a proportion as deemed advisable from time to time by the assembly.

(Ord. 12-46A § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 09-55 § 4, 2009; Ord. 06-38 § 4, 2006: Ord. 03-1758 § 4(B), 2004.)


4.09.020 Collection of tax. 

A.    The tax described in Section 4.09.010(A) is imposed on the purchaser and must be collected by the seller and paid to the city and borough of Sitka by the seller as provided in Section 4.09.270. The seller holds all taxes collected in trust for the city and borough of Sitka. The tax must be applied to the sales price.

B.    The assembly at their first meeting of September each year shall consider whether to authorize any sales tax free day(s) that have historically followed Thanksgiving. If authorized, the sales tax free day(s) will not be applicable to any sale of fuel, alcoholic beverages, tobacco products, and marijuana, as such are defined in this code, nor affect any sale which is part of a continuing obligation of the buyer to pay the seller over time.

(Ord. 18-41 § 4, 2018: Ord. 13-44 § 4, 2013: Ord. 03-1758 § 4(B), 2004.)


4.09.030 Presumption of taxability—Sales price and purchase price.

A.    In order to prevent evasion of the sales tax and to aid in its administration, it is presumed that:

1.    All sales by a person engaging in business are subject to the sales tax;

2.    All property purchased or sold by any person for delivery into the city and borough of Sitka is purchased or sold for a taxable use in the city and borough of Sitka;

3.    All liquor sales by lodges that hold an outdoor recreation liquor license under Alaska Statute 04.11.225 are considered individual sale units, and are taxable separately rather than as part of the lodge’s package sale.

B.    In a sale in which the amount of money paid does not represent the value of the property or service purchased, the sales tax must be imposed on the value of the property or service purchased.

C.    For purposes of this chapter, the sales price or purchase price of property must be determined as of the time of acquisition.

D.    For purposes of this chapter, a sale of services occurs at the time the services are provided.

(Ord. 06-19 (A-1) § 4(B) (part), 2006; Ord. 03-1758 § 4(B), 2004.)


4.09.040 Separate statement of tax—No advertising to absorb or refund tax.

A.    If any person collects a tax in excess of the tax imposed by Section 4.09.010(A), both the tax and the excess tax must be remitted to the city and borough of Sitka.

B.    The sales tax must be stated separately for all sales, except for sales from coin-operated or currency-operated machines, sales of drinks in a bar, sales on the dock, sales from street vending carts, admission fees, open markets, ticket sales, taxi fares, and other sales as determined by regulation by the assembly of the city and borough of Sitka.

(Ord. 12-46A § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 03-1758 § 4(B), 2004.)


4.09.100 Exemptions.  

The following sales are exempt from taxation:

A.    Casual Sales. A casual and isolated sale not made in the regular course of business is exempt from the levy of sales tax imposed by Section 4.09.010(A).

B.    Church Sales. Sale of tangible property or the sale of services by a church are exempt, except where the sale or service is incidental to a business for a profit.

C.    Court Fixed Fees. Any sale where the price is fixed by law, by a court of competent jurisdiction, or by other authority beyond the control of the seller, and where, if the tax were applied, in effect would become an income tax upon the seller, is exempt.

D.    Dues and Fees. Dues or fees paid to become or remain a member of a labor union, fraternal organization or nonprofit organization that has obtained an IRC 501(c) tax exemption certificate are exempt.

E.    Federal and State Prohibitions. A sale which the municipality is prohibited from taxing under the

Constitution and laws of the United State or the Constitution of the state of Alaska is exempt.

F.    Freight and Wharfage. Freight and wharfage charges, whether arising out of foreign, interstate or intrastate commerce, are exempt. Warehouse, storage services, and delivery services that begin and end within the city and borough of Sitka are taxable, unless such delivery services are included in a through bill of lading in conjunction with interstate commerce.

G.    Governmental Agencies. A sale directly to any federal, state, municipal or tribal government, or any department or agency of these governments, is exempt. 

H.    Insurance. The sale of insurance policies, guaranty bonds, and fidelity bonds are exempt.

I.    Loans. The principal amount of the loan and the interest charged for loaning of money are exempt. Any fees associated with the loaning of money are subject to sales tax, unless exempt under other sections of this chapter.

J.    Medical and Veterinary Services. The following sales are exempt:

1.    Professional services and supplies provided within the scope of a license or certificate issued by the state of Alaska (“Alaska licensed or certified”) to the following or similar positions: doctor of medicine and surgery; doctor of osteopathy and surgery; chiropractor; dentist; naturopath; optometrist; psychiatrist; psychologist; audiologist; hospital; medical clinic; midwife; birth center; acupuncturist; occupational therapist; physical therapist; certified nurse; nurse’s aide; or registered or practical nurse; 

2.    Prescription drugs and medical services prescribed or provided by a person or business listed in subsection (J)(1) of this section;

3.    Counseling services provided by an Alaska licensed or certified psychiatrist, psychologist, psychological associate, clinical social worker, substance abuse counselor, marital and/or family therapist;

4.    Assisted living services provided by an Alaska licensed or certified assisted living or respite care home;

5.    Purchase or rentals of hearing aids, crutches, wheelchairs and similar medical equipment prescribed or provided by a person or business listed in subsection (J)(1) of this section; and

6.    Veterinary services and prescribed supplies provided within the scope of an Alaska licensed or certified veterinarian.

K.    Newspapers. The sale of daily newspapers to a consumer is exempt.

L.    Nonprofit Charitable Organizations. Sales made by nonprofit charitable organizations which do not have paid employees and which do not keep normal business hours are exempt.

M.    Outside City and Borough. Sales of goods or services resulting from orders received from outside the city and borough by mail, telephone, or other similar public communication where delivery of the property or performance of services ordered is made outside the city and borough are exempt.

N.    Over Twelve Thousand Dollars on Sales and Rents of Tangible Personal Property and on Sales of Services, and Over Twelve Thousand Dollars in Rent or Lease of Real Property on a Monthly Basis. That portion of a selling price for a single piece of equipment or tangible personal property or sale unit in excess of twelve thousand dollars is exempt. A single sale unit is:

1.    Any retail merchandise sale where the selling price is totaled on one invoice or any sales slip, although this exemption does not apply if any portion of the invoice or sales slip refers to more than one business day;

2.    Any sale of services sold by an individual unit price; or

3.    Any liquor sale by lodges that hold an outdoor recreation lodge liquor license.

Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the exemption described in this subsection does not apply to any “running” invoice or sales slip representing the sale of items or commodities which are not services. The exemption described in this subsection applies to any sales of services in which services provided to more than one individual are packaged together or “bundled” for purposes of payment on one invoice or sales slip to the extent that such individuals are members of the immediate family of the person making the payment and the person making the payment provides to the seller a certification of such relationship on a form provided by the city and borough. For purposes of this subsection, “members of the immediate family” are the individual’s spouse, children, parents, parents-in-law, siblings, grandparents, grandchildren, and domestic partners.

O.    School Sales.

1.    Retail sales, rentals, or services at a school-approved activity by a school-approved group raising funds for a school-approved purpose;

2.    Retail sales in schools of food or beverages not sold to the general public; and

3.    As used in this subsection, school means a public or private, primary or secondary school, university, trade school or college. This subsection does not include tutor services.

P.    Resale. A sale for resale of a product, service or rental to a consumer where the resale is subject to tax is exempt.

Q.    Student Transportation. The service of transporting students to and from a school in vehicles is exempt.

R.    Reserved.

S.    Service Performed by a Licensed Undertaker or Mortician. Fees charged by a licensed undertaker or mortician for services and goods supplied in the course of the undertaking business are exempt.

T.    Reserved.

U.    Exemption for Games of Skill and Chance. Sales of lottery tickets and other forms of games of skill and chance allowed under Section 10.40.020 are exempt.

V.    Government-Funded Agencies. Nonprofit organizations that qualify as tax exempt under IRC Section 501(c) and derive fifty percent or more of their gross revenue from local, state, or federal government sources are exempt from paying sales tax if: 

1.    The organization files a bi-annual report setting out its qualifications; and

2.    The application for exemption is approved by city and borough of Sitka and an exemption certificate is issued. The date of the certificate becomes the effective date of the tax exemption. City and borough of Sitka has a maximum of thirty days to review an application and grant an exemption certificate.

W.    Child and Adult Dependent Care. The sales of child day care, pre-elementary school care, babysitting services and adult dependent care are exempt.

X.    Public Transportation. Fees for public transportation are exempt if agency providing public transportation qualifies under subsection V of this section, Government-Funded Agencies.

Y.    Exemption for Persons Who Have Reached the Age of Sixty-Five.

1.    Any person, sixty-five years of age or older, who is a resident of the state of Alaska may apply for and be issued by the finance director a senior citizen sales tax exemption certificate which entitles the person, person’s spouse, or the person’s qualified domestic partner to be exempt from sales tax for the purchase of goods, services or rentals which are solely for the personal use or consumption of the person, person’s spouse, or the person’s qualified domestic partner. This exemption does not apply for purchases for the person, person’s spouse, or the person’s qualified domestic partner:

a.    For use in any trade or business, including but not limited to commercial fishing; or 

b.    For purchase of alcoholic beverages, cigarettes, or other tobacco products.

2.    Definitions.

    “Alcoholic beverage” includes beer, wine, and all other spirituous, vinous, malt and other fermented or distilled liquid intended for human consumption and that contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume, for which a license or permit for its sale or barter is required by AS 04, entitled “Alcoholic Beverages.”

    “Cigarette” shall have the same meaning as defined in Section 4.26.190.

    “Other tobacco products” shall have the same meaning as defined in Section 4.26.190.

    “Resident of the state of Alaska” means a person who is physically present in the state with the intent to remain in the state indefinitely and to make a home in the state.

3.    Verification.

a.    The applicant, at the time of application for a senior citizen sales tax exemption card, will provide a minimum of two pieces of identification to prove Alaska residency. One of the identification documents must show birth date.

b.    The applicant shall fill out a formal application which will include a verification of their “intent to reside in Alaska.”

4.    A resident at least sixty years old, who otherwise qualifies for the exemption, and is the widow, widower, or qualified domestic partner of a deceased person who qualified for the exemption under subsection (Y)(1) of this section, may apply for and be issued a senior citizen sales tax exemption certificate.

Z.    Youth Camps. Fees charged for nonprofit youth camps primarily serving persons under eighteen years of age are exempt. 

AA.    Residential Rent. Rent paid for residential housing for thirty or more consecutive days or an entire calendar month by a person or persons for a room, set of rooms, structure, or suite is exempt from sales taxes. This exemption does not apply to any transaction taxable under Chapter 4.24 regarding the hotel, motel, and bed and breakfast transient room tax.

AB.    Sale of Service Costs or Commission. That part of the sales price paid by the buyer for Sitka travel and adventure services purchased outside the city and borough of Sitka which is not remitted, directly or indirectly, to the person providing or performing the service, and which is a selling cost or commission or similar charge.

(Ord. 18-35 § 4 (part), 2018; Ord. 18-14 § 4 (part), 2018; Ord. 17-03 § 4, 2017; Ord. 15-24A § 4, 2015; Ord. 12-46A § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 12-19 § 4, 2012; Ord. 12-07S § 4, 2012; Ord. 08-04 § 4, 2008; Ord. 07-12 § 4 (part), 2007; Ord. 06-19 (A-1) § 4(B) (part), 2006; Ord. 04-19 § 4(A), 2004; Ord. 03-1758 § 4(B), 2004.)


4.09.110 Residence construction tax refund.

Upon proper application the city and borough will refund sales tax paid on the construction of an owner-occupied single-family dwelling or duplex.

A.    The dwelling must be a new dwelling unit, not merely an extension of an existing unit.

B.    At the time of refund application, no more than two years shall have passed since the issuance of either a grading permit, foundation permit, or building permit. The applicant may choose which permit issuance date begins the two-year period. No refund shall be made for items purchased prior to the issuance of the permit selected by the applicant. No sales tax paid to businesses outside of the city and borough shall be refunded.

C.    The refund shall be the amount of sales tax actually paid for materials and services used in the construction of the dwelling. This shall include lumber, building materials, electrical and plumbing supplies or services, furnace and other heating apparatus and permanent carpeting and major appliances, such as kitchen stove, refrigerator, washer, dryer and freezer. Items not included are throw rugs, televisions, furniture, drapery, pictures and minor appliances, not built into the building. Also not included are tools and machinery purchased to use in the construction of the dwelling, nor shall it include spare material(s) not used.

D.    Upon application for a refund the applicant shall certify, under penalty of perjury:

1.    The sales tax requested to be refunded has actually already been paid to the supplier;

2.    That all items for which a refund is requested were consumed in the construction of the dwelling or have actually been installed in the dwelling.

3.    That all services were used to prepare the lot for construction, construct the dwelling, or install materials in the dwelling.

E.    Applications for refund shall be made to the finance director and shall be supported by detailed invoices. Such invoices must be presented in an orderly fashion with the total amount of refund being applied for totaled. The finance director will disallow unsupported application or portions thereof. Appeals may be made to the assembly.

F.    Only one refund will be issued in conjunction with the same building permit. If a builder chooses to apply for a refund prior to completion of construction during the two-year period commencing with the issuance of the building permit and subsequently incurs additional construction costs after the issuance of a refund, sales taxes paid on those additional costs will not be refunded, even if incurred within two years after the issuance of the building permit.

G.    If a noncontractor home builder completes and sells a home prior to the end of the two-year time period for refunds, the amount of applicable sales tax will be deducted from the amount of the refund. This is the amount of sales tax applicable to the sale of the home in effect at that time.

(Ord. 14-08 § 4, 2014: Ord. 12-46A § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 03-1758 § 4(B), 2004.)


4.09.120 Exemption from seasonal sales tax increase.

The following retail sales are exempt from any increase in the sales tax imposed on a seasonal basis, including the one percentage point increase for the months of April, May, June, July, August, and September set out in Section 4.09.010(B):

A.    Rentals of Real Property. Rent paid as consideration for the use of real property either for thirty or more consecutive days or an entire calendar month by a person or persons of a room, set of rooms, structure, or suite is exempt from the additional one percent increase for the months of April, May, June, July, August and September. This exemption does not apply to any transaction taxable under the hotel, motel, and bed and breakfast transient room tax set out in Chapter 4.24.

(Ord. 03-1758 § 4(B), 2004.)


4.09.210 Exempt sales.

All exempt sales under Section 4.09.100 must be documented in an invoice. The city and borough of Sitka shall prescribe on a form issued by the finance director the requirement for an invoice. (Ord. 03-1758 § 4(B), 2004.)


4.09.220 Exemption certificate—Form.

A.    The city and borough of Sitka shall provide an application for an exemption certificate. Upon approval of the application and issuance of the certificate, a purchaser shall present the certificate when purchasing goods or services for resale, for purchases by a government, approved government supported nonprofit agency, or by an authorized senior citizen. 

B.    The certificate must include:

1.    For resale:

a.    General character of property or service sold by the purchaser in the regular course of business intended for resale;

b.    Name and address of the purchaser;

c.    Signature or electronic signature of the purchaser;

d.    Expiration date; and

e.    City and borough of Sitka’s authorized exemption number.

2.    For senior citizen: 

a.    Name and address of the purchaser or purchaser’s designee;

b.    Signature or electronic signature of the purchaser or purchaser’s designee;        

c.    Expiration date as appropriate for the authorized exemption; and

d.    City and borough of Sitka’s authorized exemption number.

3.    For all others: 

a.    Name and address of the purchaser;

b.    Expiration date as appropriate for the authorized exemption; and

c.    City and borough of Sitka’s authorized exemption number.

(Ord. 12-46A § 4 (part), 2013: Ord. 03-1758 § 4(B), 2004.)


4.09.230 Exemption certificate—Requirements.

A.    An exemption certificate executed by a purchaser or lessee must be in the possession of the purchaser or lessee at the time that an exempt transaction occurs.

B.    An exemption certificate must contain the information and be in a format prescribed by the city and borough of Sitka.

C.    If the seller or lessor accepts an exemption certificate and believes in good faith that the purchaser or lessee will employ the property or service transferred in an exempt manner, the properly executed exemption certificate is considered conclusive evidence, as to the seller or lessor, that the sale is exempt.

D.    Resale exemption certificates may be issued annually to businesses who are current in filing and remitting sales tax, valid for one calendar year.

E.    Senior citizen exemption certificate is valid for life.

F.    The fee of an exemption certificate is twenty-five dollars, and five dollars for a replacement certificate.

G.    The exemption certificate shall be surrendered and is void when the holder no longer qualifies for the exemption.

(Ord. 12-46A § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 03-1758 § 4(B), 2004.)


4.09.240 Improper use of subject of purchase obtained with exemption certificate—Penalty.

A.    If a purchaser who uses an exemption certificate uses the subject of the purchase for a purpose other than one allowed as exempt under this chapter, the sale is considered a taxable sale as of the time of first use by the purchaser, and the sales price is the price that the purchaser paid. If the sole nonexempt use is rental while holding for sale, the purchaser shall include in the sales price the amount of the rental charged. Upon subsequent sale of the property, the seller shall include the entire amount of the sales price, without deduction of amounts previously received as rentals.

B.    A person who uses an exemption certificate for property that will be used for purposes other than the purpose claimed is subject to a penalty, payable to the city and borough of Sitka, of one hundred dollars or one hundred percent of the tax due, whichever is greater, for each transaction in which an improper use of a certificate has occurred.

C.    The finance director may revoke any exemption certificate if the holder has been found to have provided false information when applying for the certificate, used the exemption certificate to obtain an exemption to which the exemption holder is not entitled, has permitted another to use the exemption certificate to obtain an exemption to which the other holder is not entitled, or ceases to be entitled to the exemption from sales tax for which the certificate was issued. The revocation shall be permanent unless the finance director, upon approval of the administrator, provides for a shorter revocation period.

(Ord. 12-46A § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 03-1758 § 4(B), 2004.)


4.09.250 Liability for payment of tax—Security for retailer without place of business—Penalty.

A.    Liability for the payment of the sales tax is not extinguished until the taxes have been paid to the department.

B.    A retailer who does not maintain an office or other place of business in the city and borough of Sitka is liable for the sales tax on all property sold or leased and services provided in the city and borough of Sitka in accordance with this chapter and may be required to furnish adequate security to ensure collection and payment of the taxes. When authorized and except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the retailer is liable for the taxes on all property sold and services provided in the city and borough of Sitka in the same manner as a retailer who maintains an office or other place of business in the city and borough of Sitka. 

(Ord. 03-1758 § 4(B), 2004.)


4.09.260 Method of accounting.

A person shall report and pay the sales tax using the same method of accounting that the person uses for federal tax purposes. (Ord. 03-1758 § 4(B), 2004.)


4.09.270 Returns—Payment—Authority of city and borough of Sitka.

A.    A person who has a tax liability under Section 4.09.010 shall file a return on a form or in a format prescribed by the city and borough of Sitka and pay the tax due quarterly. The return shall be filed and the tax paid on or before the last day following the end of the period for which the tax is due. Each person engaged in business in the city and borough of Sitka subject to taxation under Section 4.09.010 shall file a return in accordance with the following:

1.    Quarterly. Unless as otherwise provided for in this section, sellers shall on or before the last day of the month succeeding the end of each quarter year ending March 31st, June 30th, September 30th, and December 31st, prepare a return for the preceding quarter year. Returns shall be filed personally, with the finance department by 4:45 p.m., placed in the drop box located outside of City Hall, or postmarked on the last day of the month following the end of each quarter year. In the event the last day of the month falls on a legal holiday, Saturday, or Sunday, then the return may be filed on the first business day following.

2.    Monthly. If a seller fails to file or is late in filing returns for two of the last four quarters, the finance director may require the seller to submit returns and payment each month.

3.    Yearly. If a seller submits within the dates required for the four quarterly returns for a calendar year and the total amount collected and remitted to the city and borough of Sitka is two hundred dollars or less, seller may request in writing to the finance director, to file a sales tax return once a year for the previous calendar year. The yearly sales tax return is due on January 31st of each year. If total sales tax collected and/or remitted to the city and borough of Sitka exceeds two hundred dollars, seller may be required to file quarterly sales tax returns for future sales. If seller fails to file yearly sales tax return by due date, seller may be required to file and remit sales tax quarterly. If the seller fails to file yearly sales tax return and the amount of sales tax collected during the period of the return exceeds five hundred dollars, seller may be required to submit sales tax returns and remit sales tax to the city and borough of Sitka monthly for a minimum of one year.

4.    Itinerant Seller. A person doing business within the city and borough of Sitka and liable for an itinerant nonresident business license on less than an annual basis shall file a sales tax return and remit in full the tax shown as due within twenty-four hours following the expiration of his license, but in any event prior to leaving the city and borough of Sitka.

5.    Filing to be Continuous. A person who has filed a sales tax return will be presumed to be making sales in successive quarters unless the person files a return showing termination or sale of their business.

B.    For the purposes of the sales tax, a return must be filed by the seller required to collect the tax.

C.    Each return must be authenticated by the person filing the return or by the person’s agent authorized in writing to file the return.

(Ord. 12-46A § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 03-1758 § 4(B), 2004.)


4.09.280 Form of return.

On forms furnished by the city and borough of Sitka, the seller shall furnish the following information, sign the form and certify that it correctly states the information purportedly set forth:

A.    Total sale divided into the following categories:

1.    Retail and wholesale sales/services, including materials;

2.    Long-term rentals of property or equipment (thirty days or more); and

3.    Short-term rentals of property or equipment (less than thirty days);

B.    All exemptions listed in Section 4.09.100 will be listed on the form separately by exemption category;

C.    The amount of any refund which the seller wishes to claim for tax paid on purchases made for resale and attachment of “Application for Sales Tax Refund” forms indicating payment of the amount;

D.    The amount of tax due;

E.    Such other information as may be reasonably required.

(Ord. 12-46A § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 07-04 § 4(A) (part), 2007: Ord. 03-1758 § 4(B), 2004.)


4.09.285 Reserved.

(Ord. 12-46A § 4 (part), 2013: Ord. 05-27 § 4(A), 2005.)


4.09.290 Substantiation of sales and exemptions.

The seller shall maintain records that will substantiate all amounts listed on the returns filed with the city and borough and include the following information needed by line item:

A.    Gross receipts should at a minimum provide documentation for the following sales:

1.    Retail and wholesale sales/services rendered, including materials;

2.    Long-term rentals of property or equipment (thirty days or more); and

3.    Short-term rentals of property or equipment (less than thirty days);

B.    A substantiation of sales exempt under Section 4.09.100(M), Outside City and Borough, by a listing of:

1.    The amount of sales or group of similar sale,

2.    The means by which the order was received,

3.    The point to which the sale was delivered,

4.    The means of transportation used for delivery of the goods;

C.    A substantiation of sales exempt under Section 4.09.100(G), Governmental Agencies;

D.    A substantiation of sales exempt under Section 4.09.100(P), Resale;

E.    A substantiation of the balance of all retail sales claimed exempt under Section 4.09.100(N), Over One Thousand Five Hundred Dollars on Sales and Rents of Tangible Personal Property and on Sales of Services, and Over One Thousand Five Hundred Dollars in Rent or Lease of Real Property on a Monthly Basis, by a listing of each sale and the amount of each which was not taxable;

F.    A substantiation of sales exempt from the tax under Section 4.09.100(Y), Exemption for Persons Who Have Reached the Age of Sixty-Five, that lists:

1.    Senior exemption number provided by the city and borough of Sitka to the senior citizen,

2.    Name of senior citizen;

G.    A substantiation of all other sales claimed exempt by documenting each exemption separately. 

(Ord. 12-46A § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 03-1758 § 4(B), 2004.)


4.09.300 Methods.

A.    The city and borough of Sitka shall adopt regulations providing for payment of the sales tax based on a rounding method.

B.    The city and borough of Sitka may use sampling principles or methods in lieu of one hundred percent examination of records in conducting a sales tax audit.

(Ord. 03-1758 § 4(B), 2004.)


4.09.310 Deduction for bad debts.

A.    A person filing a return under Section 4.09.280 may deduct sales found to be worthless. The bad debt may be deducted when it:

1.    Is written off as uncollectible in the person’s books and records; and

2.    Qualifies as a deduction for federal income tax purposes under 26 U.S.C. (Internal Revenue Code).

B.    If the amount of bad debt exceeds the amount of taxable sales during the period that the bad debt is written off, a person may file a refund claim with the city and borough of Sitka.

C.    If a bad debt deducted under subsection A of this section is subsequently collected, the person who claimed the deduction shall pay the tax levied under Section 4.09.010 on the amount collected. For purposes of this subsection, any payments made on a debt or account are applied:

1.    First to the taxable price of the property or service and the tax levied under Section 4.09.010 on the property or service; then

2.    To interest, service charges, and any other charges.

(Ord. 12-46A § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 03-1758 § 4(B), 2004.)


4.09.320 Timely filing allowance.

A.    A person filing a return under Section 4.09.270 may claim an allowance in the amount of three percent of the tax determined to be payable to the city and borough of Sitka or one hundred dollars a quarter, whichever is less, if the return is timely filed and the tax is timely paid provided:

1.    The person remits within the first fifteen days of the second month of the quarter the actual tax collected during the first month of the quarter or one-third of the total tax remitted during the previous quarter (or, if seasonal fluctuations in gross business receipts exist, not less than one-third of the total tax remitted during the same quarter of the previous year); and

2.    The person remits within the first fifteen days of the third month of the quarter the actual tax collected during the second month of the quarter or one-third of the total tax remitted during the previous quarter (or, if seasonal fluctuations in gross business receipts exist, not less than one-third of the total tax remitted during the same quarter of the previous year); and

3.    The person files a return and remits the balance of the tax due as required in Section 4.09.270.

B.    The allowance may be deducted on the return. The allowance may not be greater than the tax determined to be payable to the city and borough of Sitka.

(Ord. 12-46A § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 03-1758 § 4(B), 2004.)


4.09.330 Security—Limitations—Sales of security deposit at auction—Bond.

A.    The city and borough of Sitka may require a retailer to deposit with the city and borough of Sitka security in a form and amount that the city and borough of Sitka determines is appropriate. The deposit may not be more than twice the estimated average liability for the period for which the return is required to be filed or ten thousand dollars, whichever is less. The amount of security may be increased or decreased by the city and borough of Sitka, subject to the limitations provided in this section.

B.    If necessary, the city and borough of Sitka may sell at public auction property deposited as security to recover a sales tax or use tax amount required to be collected, including interest and penalties. Notice of the sale must be served personally on or sent by certified mail to the person who deposited the security. After the sale, any surplus above the amount due that is not required as security under this section must be returned to the person who deposited the security.

C.    In lieu of security, the city and borough of Sitka will require a retailer to file a bond issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state of Alaska to guarantee solvency and responsibility if such retailer failed to remit sales tax on a previous business to the city and borough of Sitka.

D.    In addition to the other requirements of this section, the city and borough of Sitka will require the corporate officers, directors, or shareholders of a corporation to provide a personal guaranty and assumption of liability for the payment of the tax due under this chapter.

E.    Appeals may be made to the assembly on the requirement to file a bond issued by a surety company.

(Ord. 12-46A § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 03-1758 § 4(B), 2004.)


4.09.340 Taxpayer quitting business—Liability of successor.

A.    All taxes payable under this chapter are due and payable immediately whenever a taxpayer quits business, sells, exchanges, or otherwise disposes of the business or disposes of the stock of goods. The taxpayer shall make a return and pay the taxes due within ten days after the taxpayer quits business, sells, exchanges, or otherwise disposes of the business or disposes of the stock of goods.

B.    Except as provided in subsection D of this section, a person who becomes a successor in the taxpayer’s business or stock of goods is liable for the full amount of the tax and shall withhold from the sales price payable to the taxpayer a sum sufficient to pay any tax due until the taxpayer produces either a receipt from the city and borough of Sitka showing payment in full of any tax due or a statement from the city and borough of Sitka that tax is not due.

C.    If a tax is due but has not been paid as provided in subsection A of this section, the successor is liable for the payment of the full amount of tax. The payment of the tax by the successor is considered to be a payment on the sales price and, if the payment is greater in amount than the sales price, the amount of the difference becomes a debt due to the successor from the taxpayer owing the tax under subsection A of this section.

D.    A successor is not liable for any tax due from the person from who the successor acquired a business or stock of goods if:

1.    The successor gives written notice to the city and borough of Sitka of the acquisition; and

2.    An assessment is not issued by the city and borough of Sitka against the former operator of the business within three months after receipt of the notice from the successor. If an assessment is issued by the city and borough of Sitka and a copy of the assessment is not mailed to the successor, the successor is not liable for the tax due.

(Ord. 03-1758 § 4(B), 2004.)


4.09.345 Application of payments.

A.    Any payment submitted to the finance department for any taxes, fees, penalties, interest or cost due under any provision of this chapter shall be credited to the tax period for which remitted in the following order:

1.    Costs;

2.    Fees/penalties;

3.    Interest; and then

4.    Taxes.

B.    If no tax period is specified, payment is applied to the balance due as a whole in the following order:

1.    Costs;

2.    Fees/penalties;

3.    Interest; and then 

4.    Taxes.

(Ord. 12-46A § 4 (part), 2013.)


4.09.350 Procedures on delinquencies.

A.    Late Fee, Penalty and Interest. Late fee, penalty and interest will be assessed as follows:

1.    A late fee will be charged if the seller does not file the proper form(s) in a timely manner for the tax due dates listed in Section 4.09.270. A fee of fifteen dollars will be charged the first month or any part of that month, with an additional twenty-five dollars added for each additional month or portion of a month, up to a maximum of one hundred dollars.

2.    If the seller does not remit the sales tax then due on the dates listed in Section 4.09.270, and an abatement has not been granted under subsection C of this section, a penalty equal to five percent of the delinquent tax shall be added to the tax for the first month or any part of that month, an additional five percent shall be added to the tax due for each month or part of a month for delinquency, with a total penalty of twenty-five percent. It shall be assessed and collected in the same manner as the tax is assessed and collected.

3.    In addition to the late fee and penalty provided in subsections (A)(1) and (2) of this section, interest at the rate of twelve percent per year on the delinquent tax from the date of delinquency until paid shall accrue and be collected in the same manner as the delinquent tax is collected.

B.    Written Demand and Additional Procedures. If a seller fails to file the return or make the remittance in accordance with Section 4.09.270, the finance director shall make written demand upon the seller, mailed to his last known address, for submission of the return and/or remittance. In the event of noncompliance with the demand, the finance director may do any or all of the following actions:

1.    Criminal Action. File a criminal complaint against the seller in the district court for violation of Section 4.09.270;

2.    Civil Action. Make a sales tax assessment against the seller, with the assessment based upon an estimate of the gross revenue received by the seller during the period and institute civil action to recover the amount of the tax. The estimate of gross revenue shall be derived from past returns of the seller, the general economic level on the business community and, if available, returns of comparable businesses;

3.    Hearing. Notify the seller in writing by certified mail that a hearing will be held to determine the sales tax liability of the seller at a specified time and place not less than fifteen days after the date of the notice. The seller shall present himself at the hearing and make available for inspection his books, papers, records, and other memoranda pertaining to gross revenues derived from his commercial transactions sufficient to enable the city and borough of Sitka to make a determination whether the return is required or tax due;

4.    Publish. Publish in a newspaper of general circulation within the city and borough of Sitka the name and amount of sales tax due, if any, of a person convicted of the crime of violating this chapter or a person against whom the city and borough of Sitka has recovered a judgment for unpaid sales tax.

C.    Waiver of Penalties. Penalties from a delinquent tax remission shall be waived if:

1.    The seller submits a penalty abatement request form to the finance department within seven calendar days of the due date and has paid the delinquent tax in full;

2.    The seller has no past due balances with any department of the city and borough of Sitka; and

3.    The finance department verifies that the seller has not filed a late sales tax return or been granted an abatement within three years of the request for abatement.

(Ord. 17-08 § 4, 2017; Ord. 12-46A § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 03-1758 § 4(B), 2004.)


4.09.360 Tax as debt.

A.    The tax imposed by this chapter and related interest and penalties become a personal debt of the person required to file a return from the time the liability arises, regardless of when the time for payment of the liability occurs.

B.    If the personal representative of an estate has voluntarily distributed the assets held in that capacity without reserving sufficient assets to pay the taxes, interest, and penalties, the personal representative is personally liable for any deficiency, to the extent permitted under AS 13.16.

C.    This section applies to corporate officers, directors, or shareholders required by the city and borough of Sitka to personally guarantee the payment of the taxes for their corporation. The officer or employee of a corporation whose duty it is to collect, truthfully account for, and pay to the city and borough of Sitka the taxes imposed by this chapter and who fails to pay the taxes is liable to the city and borough of Sitka for the taxes imposed by this chapter and the penalty and interest due on the taxes.

(Ord. 03-1758 § 4(B), 2004.)


4.09.370 Refunds and credits.

The city and borough of Sitka may credit or refund overpayments of taxes, taxes erroneously or illegally assessed or collected, penalties collected without authority, and taxes that are found unjustly assessed or excessive in amount, or otherwise wrongfully collected. The city and borough of Sitka shall set limitations, specify the manner in which claims for credits or refunds are made, and give notice of allowance or disallowance. When a refund is allowed to a taxpayer, it shall be paid out of the general fund on a warrant issued under a voucher approved by the city and borough of Sitka. (Ord. 03-1758 § 4(B), 2004.)


4.09.380 Period of limitation.

The amount of any tax imposed under this chapter may be determined and assessed at any time within a period of six years after the tax became due and payable. The period shall begin on the date when a return is required to be filed. Where no return has been filed, then the period does not begin to run until the discovery of the delinquency occurs. No suit or other proceeding for the collection of the tax shall be begun after the expiration of the period. (Ord. 03-1758 § 4(B), 2004.)


4.09.390 Taxes lien.

The tax, interest and penalty imposed under this chapter shall constitute a lien in favor of the city and borough of Sitka upon all property of the person owing the tax. This lien arises upon delinquency and continues until the liability is satisfied or the lien is foreclosed. When recorded, the lien authorized under this section shall have priority over all other liens, except those for property taxes and special assessments. (Ord. 03-1758 § 4(B), 2004.)


4.09.395 General penalty provision.

Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for not more than thirty days, or by both. Additionally, each and every day during any portion of which a violation or failure to comply is committed, permitted, or continued shall be a separate offense, and shall be charged and punished accordingly. (Ord. 12-46A § 4 (part), 2013.)


4.09.400 Rules and regulations.

The finance director shall from time to time cause to be promulgated rules and regulations as are necessary and advisable to provide for the application and interpretation of this chapter and to submit them to the assembly for its adoption or rejection, and to cause to be provided methods and forms for reporting and collecting the tax in accordance with this chapter and regulations. (Ord. 03-1758 § 4(B), 2004.)


4.09.405 Confidential and nonconfidential tax information.

A.    The following information is publicly available information:

1.    Names and addresses of business owners who have filed tax returns under this chapter;

2.    Whether a business is registered to collect taxes under this chapter in the city and borough of Sitka;

3.    Whether a business is current in tax returns and in remitting sales tax due under this chapter, and the number of returns not filed; and

4.    Names and exemption numbers of governmental agencies and government funded agencies which have received a tax-exempt number from the city and borough of Sitka relating to taxes due under this chapter.

B.    The city and borough of Sitka may permit any authorized representative of any federal, state or other local government agency to inspect and copy any tax returns filed and reports prepared under this chapter, if the other governmental agency provides substantially similar access to the city and borough of Sitka and if the city and borough of Sitka determines that other governmental agency provides adequate safeguards for the confidentiality of the tax returns and reports.

C.    Except as otherwise provided in this section, tax forms and their contents shall be confidential and shall not be disclosed by the finance department except:

1.    In connection with efforts by the city and borough of Sitka to collect the tax;

2.    In response to a subpoena issued by a court, state agency or governmental board or commission;

3.    In connection with legislative inquiry specifically authorized by the assembly;

4.    In connection with the city and borough of Sitka audits for purposes of verifying city and borough of Sitka accounting practices;

5.    In compilation of statistics and studies by the finance department for public distribution, so long as information from individual businesses is not identifiable as to source. (Ord. 07-04 § 4(A) (part), 2007.)


4.09.410 Sales tax audits.

A.    Any seller who has established a sales tax account with the city and borough of Sitka, who is required to collect and remit sales tax, or who is required to submit a sales tax return under the provision of Section 4.09.270 is subject to a discretionary sales tax audit at any time. The purpose of such an audit is to examine the business records of the seller in order to determine whether appropriate amounts of sales tax revenue have been collected by the seller and remitted to the city and borough of Sitka.

B.    The finance director shall be responsible for directing that sales tax audits take place and for selecting the particular sellers whose business records will be audited.

C.    Sales tax audits of seller’s business records may be accomplished by either an employee of the city and borough of Sitka’s finance department or by an individual or firm under contract with the city and borough of Sitka.

D.    Sellers selected for a sales tax audit will be notified by letter and will be required to meet with, and make available for inspection and copying all pertinent business records including income tax returns that may be requested for the prior six fiscal years for examination, to the finance department employee, or contractor conducting the audit, within thirty days of notification. Under extenuating circumstances, the finance director may grant an extension of time for compliance.

E.    After completion of a sales tax audit, sellers subject to the audit will be notified of the results of the audit by letter. If the audit has resulted in an additional sales tax liability to the city and borough of Sitka, the additional sales tax, with interest assessed retroactive to the date the sales tax was due, must be remitted to the city and borough of Sitka within fourteen days after the receipt of the letter, or the additional sales tax will be subject to the procedures on delinquencies outlined in Section 4.09.350. If the audit has resulted in a refund due the seller, the refund will be sent to the seller within fourteen days, or applied to the seller’s account, at the seller’s option.

F.    It shall be the seller’s responsibility to maintain business records in sufficient detail to substantiate all information reported on sales tax returns, including sales qualifying as retail sales exempt from taxation under the provision of Section 4.09.100. If insufficient detail exists within a seller’s business records to substantiate retail sales exemptions, such sales will be reclassified as taxable sales and subject to sales tax collection and remittance.

G.    Any seller notified of an additional sales tax liability as a result of a sales tax audit shall have the right to appeal the additional liability to the assembly. Such an appeal must be filed with the municipal clerk within thirty days of notification by letter of the liability. If an additional liability is appealed, the accumulation of penalties and interest under the provisions of Section 4.09.350 will be suspended on the date the appeal is filed with the municipal clerk; if the appeal is subsequently denied by the assembly, all such penalties and interest will be retroactive back to the original date of notification of additional liability by letter.

H.    Any seller refusing to comply with the provisions of this section shall be subject to any or all of the procedures on delinquencies as outlined in Section 4.09.350, including the filing of a criminal complaint against the seller in district court.

(Ord. 12-46A § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 03-1758 § 4(B), 2004.)


4.09.420 Definitions.  

In this chapter:

A.    “Consideration” means a valuable inducement and includes, without limitation, money, property, and services;

B.    “Engaging in business” means carrying on or causing to be carried on any activity with the purpose of direct or indirect benefit;

C.    “Lease,” “leasing,” or “rental,” regardless of whether a transaction is characterized as a lease or rental under generally accepted accounting principles, 26 U.S.C. (Internal Revenue Code), AS 45.01 through 45.08, 45.12, 45.14, and 45.29 (Uniform Commercial Code), or other provisions of federal, state, or local law:

1.    Means a transfer of possession or control of tangible personal property of a fixed or indeterminate term for consideration; a lease or rental may include future options to purchase or extend;

2.    Does not include:

a.    A transfer of possession or control of property under a security agreement or deferred payment plan that requires the transfer of title upon completion of the required payments;

b.    A transfer of possession or control of property under an agreement that requires the transfer of title upon completion of required payments if payment of an option price does not exceed the greater of one hundred dollars or one percent of the total required payments; or

c.    Providing tangible personal property along with an operator for a fixed or indeterminate period of time; a condition of this exclusion is that the operator is necessary for the equipment to perform as designed; for the purpose of this subsection, an operator must do more than maintain, inspect, or set up the tangible personal property;

3.    Includes agreements covering motor vehicles and trailers if the amount of consideration may be increased or decreased by reference to the amount realized upon sale or disposition of the property as defined in 26 U.S.C. 7701(h)(1);

D.    “Maintaining an office or other place of business” means:

1.    A person’s having or maintaining in the city and borough of Sitka, directly or by an affiliate, an office, distribution house, sales house, warehouse, or place of business; or

2.    An agent’s operating within the city and borough of Sitka under the authority of the person or its affiliate, whether the place of business or agent is located in the city and borough of Sitka permanently or temporarily or whether the person or affiliate is authorized to do business in the city and borough of Sitka;

E.    “Manufacturing” means combining or processing components or materials, including the processing of ores in a mill, smelter, refinery, or reduction facility, to increase the value of the components or materials for sale in the ordinary course of business; “manufacturing” does not include construction;

F.    “Person” means an individual, estate, trust, receiver, cooperative association, club, corporation, company, firm, partnership, joint venture, syndicate, or other entity, including a gas, water, or electric utility owned or operated by a borough, municipality, or other political subdivision of the state;

G.    “Purchase price” means “sales price” and applies to the measure subject to sales tax;

H.    Residential Rent. Rent paid for residential housing for thirty or more consecutive days or an entire calendar month by a person or persons for a room, set of rooms, structure, or suite is exempt from sales taxes. This exemption does not apply to any transaction taxable under Chapter 4.24 regarding the hotel, motel, and bed and breakfast transient room tax;

I.    “Sale,” “selling,” or “purchasing” means the transfer of property for consideration or the performance of a service for consideration;

J.    “Sales price”:

1.    Means the total amount of consideration, including cash, credit, property, and services, for which personal property or services are sold, leased, or rented, valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, without any deduction for the following: 

a.    The seller’s cost of the property sold;

b.    The cost of materials used, labor or service cost, interest, losses, all costs of transportation to the seller, all taxes imposed on the seller, and any other expense of the seller;

c.    Charges by the seller for any services necessary to complete the sale, other than delivery and installation charges;

d.    Delivery charges;

e.    Installation charges;

f.    The value of exempt personal property given to the purchaser where taxable and exempt personal property have been bundled together and sold by the seller as a single product or piece of merchandise;

g.    Credit for a trade-in, as determined by state law;

2.    Does not include:

a.    Discounts, including cash, term, or coupons that are not reimbursed by a third party that are allowed by a seller and taken by a purchaser on a sale;

b.    Interest, financing, and carrying charges from credit extended on the sale of personal property or services if the amount is separately stated on the invoice, bill of sale, or similar document given to the purchaser;

K.    “Sales tax” means the applicable tax imposed by Section 4.09.010;

L.    “Service” means an activity that is engaged in for another person for consideration and that is distinguished from the sale or lease of property; in determining what a service is, the intended use, principal objective, or ultimate objective of the contracting parties is irrelevant; “service” includes:

1.    Activities performed by a person for its members or shareholders;

2.    Construction activities and all tangible personal property that will become an ingredient or component part of a construction project; and

3.    Labor; professional services; transportation; telephone or other communications service; entertainment, including cable, subscription, or pay television or other telecommunications service; the supplying of food, lodging, or other accommodations in hotels, restaurants, or elsewhere; admission to exhibitions; the use of a computer, computer time, a computer system, a computer program, a computer network, or any part of a computer system or network; and the supplying of equipment for use;

4.    Travel and adventure services means tours and charters on land and water, guide services, admissions, lectures, transportation services (excluding air transportation), and the rental of lodging, aircraft, vehicles, watercraft, and equipment, including fishing, boating, camping and other tour or adventure related goods. Travel and adventure services also include sales of goods incidental or related to such services;

M.    “Tangible personal property” means personal property that can be seen, weighed, measured, felt, or touched, or that is in any other manner perceptible to the senses; “tangible personal property” includes electricity, water, gas, steam, and prewritten computer software;

N.    “Tax” means the tax levied by Section 4.09.010.

(Ord. 18-35 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 18-14 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 12-46A § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 07-12 § 4 (part), 2007; Ord. 03-1758 § 4(B), 2004.)


Chapter 4.12 PROPERTY TAX

Sections:

4.12.010    Definitions.

4.12.020    Property subject to tax.

4.12.025    Exemptions.

4.12.030    Assessor’s duties.

4.12.040    Assessment of property at full and true value.

4.12.045    Exemptions—Disaster damage.

4.12.050    Property owners’ returns.

4.12.055    Failure to file return—Fee—Penalty.

4.12.060    Report of property acquisition by owner.

4.12.070    Assessment notice.

4.12.080    Board of equalization.

4.12.090    Assembly clerk ex officio clerk of board.

4.12.100    Appeal to board of equalization.

4.12.110    Tax levy fixed by assembly.

4.12.120    Liability for taxes on personal property.

4.12.130    Due date.

4.12.150    Rates of penalty and interest—Priority for crediting payments.

4.12.160    Demand for payment of personal property taxes.

4.12.170    Methods of collection.

4.12.180    Collection by distraint and sale.

4.12.190    Taxes lien against property.

4.12.200    Action for collection of tax.

4.12.210    Real property tax collection.

4.12.220    Foreclosure list.

4.12.230    Clearing delinquencies.

4.12.240    List to lienholder.

4.12.250    General foreclosure.

4.12.260    Answer and objection.

4.12.270    Judgment.

4.12.280    Transfer and appeal.

4.12.290    Redemption period.

4.12.300    Effect.

4.12.310    Additional liens.

4.12.320    Possession during redemption period.

4.12.330    Expiration.

4.12.340    Deed to municipality.

4.12.350    Disposition and sale of foreclosed property.

4.12.360    Repurchase by record owner.

4.12.370    Proceeds of tax sale.

4.12.410    Effect on purchase of irregularities, omissions or defects.

4.12.420    Enforcement of special assessments.


4.12.010 Definitions.

The following terms and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section.

A.    “Real property” includes:

1.    Land itself, whether laid out in lots or otherwise,

2.    All buildings, structures, improvements, fixtures of whatsoever kind permanently fixed thereon,

3.    Mobile homes, modular homes, trailers, house trailers, trailer coaches and similar property used or intended to be used for residential, office, or commercial purposes and attached to the land or connected to water, gas, electric, or sewage facilities,

4.    All possessory rights and privileges belonging or in any way appertaining thereto, including possessory rights to tidelands;

B.    “Tangible property” means property which may be seen, weighed and measured by the physical senses and capable of being possessed. Stocks and bonds shall not be considered tangible property;

C.    “Tract” includes all lands, pieces or parcels of land, which may be separately assessed together with the fixtures and improvements thereon;

D.    “Business property” includes all personal property and real property as hereinabove defined which is used for business purposes;

E.    “Boat or vessel” means an item designed and constructed for the principal purpose of transporting goods or persons by water. Registration, licensing or documentation shall not be conclusive, but shall be considered along with the use and hull design, including whether or not the item is actually and reasonably used in transporting persons or articles in navigation.

1.    Materials that have been attached or installed as of January 1st of any year as part of the manufacture of a boat or vessel shall be taxed as a boat or vessel for purposes of this chapter if as of January 1st of any year the product of the manufacture is recognizable as a boat or vessel by a reasonable person;

F.    “Nonlight aircraft” means any aircraft with a maximum gross takeoff weight of greater than twelve thousand five hundred pounds;

G.    “Light aircraft” means any aircraft with max gross takeoff weight of twelve thousand five hundred pounds or less.

(Ord. 16-45 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 10-30 § 4 (part), 2010; Ord. 06-50 § 4 (part), 2007: Ord. 00-1597 § 4, 2000; Ord. 97-1470 § 4, 1998; Ord. 82-526 § 4 (part), 1983; Ord. 72-20 § 3 (part), 1972; B.C.S. § 3.20.010.)


4.12.020 Property subject to tax.

A.    All property within the corporate limits of the city and borough, both real and personal, of every nature, not exempt under the laws of the United States or the state of Alaska, is subject to taxation for school and municipal purposes, and taxes upon such property must be assessed, levied and collected as provided herein, except the following property shall not be subject to taxation:

1.    Personal property consisting of boats and vessels, light aircraft, household goods, jewelry, intangibles and personal effects, including motorcycles and snowmobiles not used in business and all motor vehicles subject to the motor vehicle registration tax.

B.    For the purpose of assessing, levying, and collecting taxes, any nonlight aircraft located within borough limits at any time in a tax year shall be considered taxable personal property and the owner shall file a property tax return indicating the fair market value of the property as of January 1st of each tax year. Property is assumed to be present within the borough year round unless demonstrated otherwise. An aircraft that is in transit and does not receive any benefit or services in the borough during the year is not subject to taxation under this section. If the owner can demonstrate the property was absent one or more days during the tax year, the owner shall file a personal property return indicating (1) the fair market value of the property, and (2) the number of days the property was within the borough. The assessed value of such property shall be determined by the following formula:

Assessed value = (fair market value/365 days) x number of days [including partial days] in borough

    Any nonlight aircraft operated by a scheduled carrier which is based outside of the borough shall be assessed in proportion to the number of landings in the borough. For purposes of determining the assessed value of the property, the assessor shall use the fair market value as of January 1st of the current tax year, and shall use the total number of landings in the borough by the property in the previous tax year. It shall be the responsibility of the carrier to provide the borough with a personal property return documenting the total landings for each aircraft. In the event the carrier fails to provide such documentation, the assessor shall assess the property based on its nonapportioned full value as of January 1st of the tax year. For the purpose of this section:

1.    “Scheduled carrier” shall mean any certified air carrier which maintains a regular schedule of flights within the borough;

2.    An aircraft is “based outside of the borough” if the airport at which the aircraft is usually based, as indicated by that aircraft’s registration, lies outside the borough limits, unless the borough has reason to believe that the aircraft is in fact based within the borough limits. This value shall be determined by the following formula:

Assessed value = (fair market value/17,520) × total landings

(Ord. 16-45 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 04-49 § 4, 2004; Ord. 94-1280 § 4, 1994; Ord. 93-1182 § 4, 1993; Ord. 91-989 § 4, 1991; Ord. 84-619 § 4(A), 1984; Ord. 82-526 § 4 (part), 1983; B.C.S. § 3.20.020.)


4.12.025 Exemptions.

A.    The following property is exempt from general taxation: All properties required to be exempt from taxation under AS 29.45.030 which are adopted and incorporated by reference.

B.    Required exemptions shall be granted and claimed as set forth under the procedures in AS 29.45.030 which are adopted and incorporated by reference.

C.    Definitions relating to required exemptions set forth in AS 29.45.030 are also adopted and incorporated by reference.

D.    For all tax years beginning with the 2002 tax year, the senior citizen or disabled veteran required exemptions set forth in AS 29.45.030(e) and (f) may not be granted except upon written application on a form provided by the assessor. A once qualified senior citizen or disabled veteran need not file the application for successive tax years but must notify the assessor of any change in ownership, residency, permanent place of abode or status of disability.

E.    The community purpose optional property tax exemption under AS 29.45.050(b)(1)(A) is adopted and incorporated by reference. All or a portion of the property of an organization not organized for business or profit making purposes and used exclusively for community purposes, may be exempted if income derived from rental of that property does not exceed the actual cost to the owner of the use by the renter.

F.    Business property inventory that is subject to sale and is nonreal property shall be exempt from taxation, as an optional exemption as set forth in AS 29.45.050(c).

G.    Exemption application shall be filed by February 15th of each year.

1.    The assembly for good cause shown may waive the claimant’s failure to make timely application and authorize the assessor to accept the application as if timely filed. “Good cause” shall mean:

a.    Extraordinary circumstances beyond the control of the claimant, including but not limited to a medical condition or disability, impaired mental capacity, illiteracy, family emergency, death in the family, or other similar serious condition or event, that substantially impaired the claimant’s ability to file a timely application.

b.    Extraordinary circumstances for a finding of good cause do not include late filing due to the claimant’s inadvertence, oversight, or lack of knowledge regarding the filing requirements or deadline, financial hardship or failure to pick up or read mail or to make arrangements for an appropriate and responsible person to pick up or read mail.

If a failure to timely file has been waived and the application approved, the amount of the tax that the claimant has already paid for the property exempted shall be refunded to the claimant.

2.    The city and borough shall not accept a late application for an exemption under subsection A or B of this section that is filed more than ninety days after the date the application was due for the assessment year for which the exemption is sought, regardless of good cause.

H.    Each optional exemption must receive prior approval by the assembly, giving consideration to the benefits provided the community by the organization and to the amount of property to be removed from the tax rolls.

In order to be considered a community service organization, an organization must:

1.    Benefit a significant portion of the public; and

2.    Not profit persons other than employees; and 

3.    Qualify for a federal income tax exemption under 26 USC 501.

I.    Required property tax exemptions shall be granted or denied by the assessor. Optional property exemptions shall be granted or denied by the assembly. Any appeal from the final administrative decision by the assessor or the assembly must be filed within thirty days of the decision to the Alaska Superior Court at Sitka in accordance with Alaska Rules of Appellate Procedure. 

J.    The assessor shall periodically review required and optional property exemption status to determine whether the taxpayer and use of the property still qualifies for the exemption.

K.    A taxpayer who files a timely business property return with the assessor shall be exempted the first twenty-five thousand dollars of assessed value of business property owned by each taxpayer from taxation as an optional exemption as set forth in AS 29.45.050(c). For taxpayers with multiple business property accounts, the optional exemption will be distributed among all of the accounts pro rata, based on the proportion of the assessed value in each account to the total assessed value of taxpayer’s business property. This exemption shall not apply to personal property affixed to land or improvements to land, float houses, nor to motor vehicles subject to a registration tax under AS 28.10.431 and as such statute may be hereafter amended, revised, or replaced.

(Ord. 16-45 § 4 (part), 2016; Ord. 13-29 § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 13-26 § 4, 2013; Ord. 11-23 § 4, 2011: Ord. 06-50 § 4 (part), 2007: 

Ord. 02-1658 § 4, 2002; Ord. 01-1616 § 4, 2001; Ord. 89-895 § 4, 1989; Ord. 86-694 § 4, 1986.)


4.12.030 Assessor’s duties.

A.    Manner of Listing Property. The assessor shall complete the listing of all real and personal property subject to taxation within the limits of the corporation before July 1st of each year. The listing of all taxable property may be made upon permanent separate ledger cards which will be the combined assessment roll and tax ledger. Real property shall be assessed to the owner of record as shown in the records of the recorder for the recording district; provided, however, that any other person having an interest in the property may be listed on the assessment records with the owner. The person in whose name any property is listed as owner thereof shall be conclusively presumed to be the legal owner of record. If the owner of land is unknown, such land may be assessed to an “unknown owner” or “unknown owners.” No assessment shall be invalidated by a mistake, omission or error in the name of the owner of the real property assessed, if the property is correctly described.

B.    Description of Real Property. The assessor may list real property located in a subdivision by lot and block or tract description, and unsubdivided property according to the land office section and township survey description, or by describing the boundaries of the property, or by reference to the book and page of the records of the recorder where the description may be found, or by tax lot number referring to a public record kept by the assessor of descriptions of real property, or by any other description capable of being made certain. Initial letters, abbreviations, fractions and exponents to designate the township, range, section or part of a section, or the number of a lot or block or part of a lot or block, or a distance, course, bearing or direction, may be used in a description of real property.

C.    Independent Investigation by Assessor. The assessor shall not be bound to accept as correct the return made by any person, but if he thinks it necessary or expedient, or if he suspects that a person who has not made a return has property subject to taxation he shall make an independent investigation as to the property of that person and may make his own valuation and assessment of the taxable amount thereof, which shall be prima facie evidence for all legal purposes and proceedings.

D.    Content of Assessment Roll. The assessor shall prepare an annual assessment roll in duplicate, after consideration of all returns made to the assessor pursuant to this chapter, and after careful inquiry from such sources as the assessor may deem reliable. On the roll the assessor shall enter the following particulars:

1.    The names and last known addresses of all persons with property liable to assessment and taxation;

2.    A description of all taxable property;

3.    The assessed value, quantity, or amount of the property.

E.    Corrections by Assessor. The assessor may correct any error or supply any omission made or arising in the preparation of the assessment roll at any time before the sitting of the board of equalization.

F.    Completion of Assessment Roll. After the hearings held by the board of equalization are concluded the assessor shall complete the annual assessment roll, at a time to be determined by the assembly which shall be based on values as of January 1st immediately preceding, and he shall certify the same.

G.    Supplementary Assessment Rolls. The assessor shall include property omitted from the assessment roll on a supplementary roll, using the procedures set forth in this chapter for the original roll.

I.    Entry of Changes by Assessor. The assessor shall enter changes authorized and approved by the board and certified to by the finance director upon his records and no assessed valuations shall thereafter be changed.

J.    Delivery of Assessment Roll to Assembly. When the final assessment records have been completed. by the assessor as herein provided, the assessor shall deliver to the assembly a statement of the total assessed valuation of all real and personal property within the city and borough.

(Ord. 13-29 § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 86-691 § 4, 1986; Ord. 84-6 19 § 4(B)(l), 1984; B.C.S. § 3.20.030.)


4.12.040 Assessment of property at full and true value.

Property shall be assessed at its full and true value in money, as of January 1st of the assessment year. Assessments on personal property shall not be prorated for the assessment year except as follows: nonlight aircraft operated in intrastate, interstate or foreign commerce shall be assessed on an apportionment basis according to Section 4.12.020(B). In determining the full and true value of property in money, the person making the return or the assessor, as the case may be, shall not adopt a lower or different standard of value because the same is to serve as a basis of taxation, nor shall he adopt as a criterion of value the price for which the property would sell at auction, or at a forced sale, either separately or in the aggregate with all of the property in the taxing district, but he shall value the property at such sum as he believes the same to be fairly worth in money at the time of assessment. (Ord. 16-45 § 4 (part), 2016: B.C.S. § 3.20.040.)


4.12.045 Exemptions—Disaster damage.

A.    Reassessment of Property Damaged by Disaster. An owner of any taxable property within the borough, or any person liable for the taxes thereon, whose property was damaged by a disaster without his or her fault, may apply for reassessment of that property under this section. In addition, the assessor may initiate such reassessment where the administrator determines that within the current assessment year taxable property located in the borough was damaged by a disaster. 

B.    Definitions. Unless the context clearly requires a different meaning, the following words and phrases as used in this section are defined as shown below: 

“Damage” means harm resulting from physical injury to property, including partial or total destruction, and a diminution in the value of improvements or land resulting from restricted access to property caused by the disaster. 

“Disaster” means the occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage, injury, loss of life or property, or shortage of food, water, or fuel resulting from: 

1.    An incident such as storm, high water, wind-driven water, tidal wave, tsunami, earthquake, volcanic eruption, landslide, mudslide, avalanche, snowstorm, prolonged extreme cold, drought, fire, flood, epidemic, explosion, or riot; 

2.    The release of oil or a hazardous substance if the release requires prompt action to avert environmental danger or mitigate environmental damage; or 

3.    Equipment failure if the failure is not a predictably frequent or recurring event or preventable by adequate equipment maintenance or operation. 

C.    Eligibility. To be eligible for reassessment, the damage to the property shall have been caused by any of the following: 

1.    A disaster in an area or region declared by the administrator, the Governor, or the President to be in a condition of disaster emergency;

2.    A disaster as that term is defined in this section; or

3.    A disaster that, with respect to a possessory interest in land owned by the state or federal government, has caused the permit or other right to enter upon the land to be suspended or restricted. 

D.    Application for Reassessment. 

1.    The application for reassessment must be filed with the assessor within sixty days of the disaster by delivering to the assessor a written application, on a form provided by the assessor, requesting reassessment and describing the condition and value of the property immediately before and after the damage or destruction. 

2.    If no application is made and the assessor determines that within the calendar year a property has suffered damage caused by disaster that may qualify the property owner for relief under an ordinance adopted under this section, the assessor may provide the last known owner of the property with an application for reassessment. The property owner shall file the completed application within thirty days of the date of the mailing of notification by the assessor but in no case more than sixty days after the occurrence of said damage. 

3.    Upon receiving the proper application, the assessor or assessor’s designee will inspect the property and verify the prior year’s full and true value of land, improvements, personal property, or the proposed or certified current year’s value immediately before and after the damage or destruction. 

4.    If an applicant has refused or failed to provide the assessor or the assessor’s agent full access to property or records reasonably requested by the assessor, the applicant shall be precluded from any reduction or relief, and any valuation or valuation issue affected by the lack of access shall be decided in favor of the assessor. 

5.    If the sum of the full and true values of the land, improvements, and personal property before the damage exceeds the sum of the values after the damage by ten thousand dollars or more, the assessor shall also separately determine the percentage reduction in value of the land, improvements, or personal property due to the damage or destruction. The assessor shall reduce the values appearing on the assessment roll by the percentage of damage or destruction computed pursuant to this section, and the taxes due on the property shall be adjusted as provided this section. However, the amount of the reduction shall not exceed the actual loss. 

6.    Any damages to land, improvements, personal property, or additions that do not appear on the assessment roll are not eligible for consideration under this section. 

E.    Notice of Reassessment. The assessor shall notify the applicant in writing of the amount of the proposed reassessment. The notice shall state that the applicant may appeal the proposed reassessment to the board of equalization within thirty days of the date of mailing the notice. 

F.    Appeal. Appeals of the reassessed value shall be heard in accordance with the valuation and flat tax appeal procedures provided in this chapter. A decision of the board of equalization regarding reassessment issued pursuant to this section shall create no presumption regarding the value of the affected property subsequent to the date of the damage. 

G.    Tax Roll Adjustment. Any reassessed value resulting from one or more reductions in full and true value of amounts, as determined above, shall be forwarded to the finance director. The finance director shall calculate and enter the reassessed tax values on the finance roll as a tax adjustment request (TAR). 

H.    Tax Adjustment. The tax rate fixed for the property so reassessed shall be applied to the amount of the reassessment as determined in accordance with this section. The owner of record shall be liable for a prorated portion of the taxes that would have been due on the property for the current calendar year had the disaster not occurred. This proration is determined on the basis of the number of days remaining in the calendar year beginning with the date of the disaster. For purposes of applying the calculation in prorating taxes, the term “calendar year” means the portion of the current tax year used to determine the adjusted amount of taxes based on a three-hundred-sixty-five-day year. If the damage or destruction occurred after January 1st and before the beginning of the next calendar year, the reassessment shall be utilized to determine the tax liability for the current year. Any tax paid in excess of the total tax due shall be refunded to the taxpayer as an erroneously collected tax within sixty days of the final determination of the adjusted tax liability. 

I.    Effect of Revised Assessment. The assessed value of the property in its damaged condition, as determined pursuant to this section, shall be the taxable value of the property until December 31st of the year in which the disaster occurred, unless the value is otherwise adjusted as allowed by law.

(Ord. 14-13A § 4, 2014.)


4.12.050 Property owners’ returns.

A.    Submission Basis. By no later than February 15th of each year, every person shall submit to the assessor a return of any business property or personal property, subject to taxation, owned by him, or in which he has an interest, and of the property held or controlled by him in a representative capacity, in the manner prescribed in this title, which return shall be based upon property values existing as of January 1st in the same year. For good cause shown, prior to delinquency, an extension of time of up to twenty-nine days may be granted by the assessor, but he may grant no extension ending later than March 15th of the tax year.

B.    Contents. The person making the return in every case shall state an address to which all notices required to be given to him under this title may be mailed or delivered.

    The returns shall show the nature, description, and true value of the property and the place where the property is situated and the return shall be in such form and include such additional information as the assembly may prescribe, and shall be signed and verified by the person liable or his or its authorized agent or representative.

    In addition the person making the return shall give the name or names of any person or persons to whom he conveyed property during the previous year and a brief description of the property so conveyed sufficient to identify it on the tax records.

C.    Additional Information. The assessor may, by notice in writing to any person by whom a return has been made, require from taxpayer a further return containing additional details and more explicit particulars and upon receipt of the notice, that person shall comply fully with its requirements within fourteen days.

(Ord. 13-29 § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 82-518 § 4, 1982; Ord. 76-257 § 4, 1976; Ord. 72-20 § 3 (part), 1972; B.C.S. § 3.20.050.)


4.12.055 Failure to file return—Fee—Penalty.

A.    A taxpayer who fails to file a return as provided in Section 4.12.050(A) shall be subject to a fee of one hundred dollars for the cost of the assessor’s preparation of a valuation based on information available or obtained by the assessor for the taxable property as allowed under Section 4.12.030 (also referred to as “forced filing”). The taxpayer shall be notified of the fee as of the date of mailing of business property and personal property assessment notices.

B.    A person or entity that knowingly makes a false affidavit to a business property or personal property return required by this section relative to the amount, location, kind or value of property subject to taxation with the intent to evade the taxation is guilty of a violation. Upon conviction, the violator shall be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1.12.010. 

(Ord. 13-29 § 4 (part), 2013.)


4.12.060 Report of property acquisition by owner.

A.    Every person, partnership, association, corporation or other entity who acquires ownership in or possession of any real property located within the city and borough or of the following types of personal property located within the city and borough: Boats, house trailers and similar structures not defined as real property under Section 

4.12.010(A)(3), self-propelled mobile equipment not licensed under the provisions of the laws of the state of Alaska and movable construction or logging equipment of a value of more than five hundred dollars, is required to register such acquisition with the city and borough assessor on forms supplied for that purpose within fifteen days after such acquisition.

B.    All persons, partnerships, associations, corporations, or other entities within the city and borough owning or possessing within the city and borough any trailers and similar structures not defined as real property under Section 4.12.010(A)(3), boat or movable construction or logging equipment shall within fifteen days after the relocation within the city and borough or removal from the city and borough of the personal property, notify the assessor of the city and borough of the relocation or removal on forms supplied for that purpose.

C.    Any person, partnership, association, corporation or other entity within the city and borough who violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.

(Ord. 10-30 § 4 (part), 2010; B.C.S. § 3.20.060.)


4.12.070 Assessment notice.

A.    Notice Mailed to Property Owners. The assessor shall give to every person named in the assessment roll a notice of assessment. The assessment notice shall be directed to the person to whom it is to be given and shall be sufficiently given if it is mailed by first class mail addressed to, or is delivered at, his address as last known to the assessor, the notice may be addressed to the person at the post office nearest to the place where the property is situated. The date on which the notice is mailed or is delivered shall be deemed to be on the date on which the notice is given for the purposes of this chapter.

B.    Notice Published in Newspaper, or Posted. When all valuation notices have been mailed, the assessor shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation which is published in the city and borough at least once each week for two successive weeks a notice that the assessment rolls have been completed. In the event no newspaper of general circulation is published in the city and borough the assessor shall cause such notice to be posted at two public places for a period of two weeks. Such notice shall state when and where the equalization hearings shall be held.

C.    Form of Notice. The notice shall show the assessed value of each tract assessed. On the back of each assessment notice shall be printed a brief summary for the information of the taxpayer, of the dates when the taxes are payable, delinquent, and subject to interest and penalty, dates when the board will sit for equalization purposes and any other particulars specified by the assembly.

D.    Duty to Call Attention to Errors. It shall be the duty of every person receiving a notice of assessment to advise the assessor of any error or omission he may have observed in the assessment of his property in order that ate assessor may correct the same.

(B.C.S. § 3.20.070.)


4.12.080 Board of equalization.

A.    Assembly to Sit as Board. The date on which the assembly shall sit as a board of equalization shall be the first Monday in May unless otherwise changed by resolution. The board shall adjourn over and continue its sessions as business requires.

B.    Purpose, Duties and Powers.

1.    The purpose of the board of equalization is to examine the assessment roll, to equalize and revise the assessment for the current year where the assembly considers it necessary, and to hear complaints and protests on the part of taxpayers or owners of property assessed;

2.    The assembly siting as the board has the power and the duty to raise or lower the valuation of any property, real or personal which they consider in any way in error and to add to the assessment list any and all parcels of real property and any and all tangible personal property they find has been omitted and to place a fair, just and correct valuation thereon and to assess it, and equalize the assessment. Assessment and equalization of the board has the same effect as though the property had been originally assessed by the assessor.

C.    Duties and Powers of Board. The assembly sitting as a board of equalization shall have the full power, and it shall be the duty of the board:

1.    To raise or lower the valuation of any property, real or personal, which may be by them deemed unequally or unfairly assessed or otherwise in error;

2.    To add to the assessment list any and all parcels or real property and any and all tangible personal property which they may find to have been unfairly omitted from such list:

a.    To place a fair, just and correct valuation thereon,

b.    To assess the same, and equalize such assessment.

Such assessment and equalization of the board shall have the same effect as though such property had been originally assessed by the duly appointed assessor.

D.    Board to Send Additional Notices. If it appears to the board of equalization that there are overcharges or errors or invalidates in the assessment roll, or in any of the proceedings leading up to or after the preparation of the roll, and there is no appeal before the board, or if the name of a person is ordered by the board to be entered on the assessment roll, by way of addition or substitution, for the purpose of assessment, the board shall require the assessor to mail notice of assessment to that person or his agent giving him at least thirty days from the date of the mailing within which to appeal to the board against the assessment.

(B.C.S. § 3.20.080.)


4.12.090 Assembly clerk ex officio clerk of board.

The clerk of the assembly shall be ex officio clerk of the board of equalization and shall record in the minutes of the meeting all proceedings before the board, the names of all persons protesting assessments, all changes, revisions, corrections and orders relating to claims or adjustments. Within three days following the final hearings of the board the clerk transmit to the assessor all corrections, revisions, or changes authorized and approved by the board and shall certify that the changes so reported are as approved by the board of equalization. (B.C.S. § 3.20.090.)


4.12.100 Appeal to board of equalization.

A.    Any person who receives notice or whose name appears on the assessment roll may appeal to the board with respect to any alleged error in the valuation, overcharge, omission or neglect of the assessor not adjusted to the taxpayer’s satisfaction.

B.    Filing of Appeal by Person Assessed. Notice of appeal, in writing, specifying the grounds for appeal, shall be filed with the board within thirty days after the date on which the assessor’s notice of assessment was given to the person appealing, and the notice must be filed not later than five p.m. of the day prior to the day of any board of equalization hearing at which the appeal shall be heard; provided however, that the board, in what it deems unusual circumstances, by unanimous vote may waive this time provision. Such notice must contain a certification that a true copy thereof was mailed or delivered to the assessor. If notice of appeal is not given within that period, the right of appeal shall cease as to any matter within the jurisdiction of the board, unless it is shown to the satisfaction of the board that the taxpayer was unable to appeal within the time so limited. A copy of the notice of appeal must be sent to the assessor as above indicated.

C.    Appeal Record. Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the assessor shall make a record of the same in such form as the assembly may direct, which record shall contain all of the information shown on the assessment roll in respect to the subject matter of the appeal, and the assessor shall place the same before the board from time to time as may be required by the board.

D.    Notice of Hearing. The board shall cause a notice of the sitting at which the appeal is to be heard to be mailed by the assessor to the person by whom the notice of appeal was given, and to every other person in respect of whom the appeal is taken, to their respective addresses as last known to the assessor.

E.    Hearing of Appeal. At the time appointed for the hearing of the appeal or as soon thereafter as the appeal may be heard, the board shall hear the appellant, the assessor, other parties to the appeal and their witnesses and consider the testimony and evidence adduced, and shall determine the matters in question on the merits and render its decision accordingly.

If any party to whom notice was mailed above set forth fails to appear the board may proceed with the hearing in his absence.

The burden of proof in all cases shall be upon the party appealing.

F.    Entry of Decisions. The board shall from time to time enter in the appeal record its decision upon appeals brought before it and shall certify to the same.

G.    Appeal to Court. An appellant or the assessor may appeal a determination of the board of equalization to the Superior Court as provided by Rules of Court applicable to appeals from the decisions of administrative agencies. Appeals are heard on the record established at the hearing before the board of equalization.

(Ord. 86-692 § 4, 1986; B.C.S. § 3.20.100.)


4.12.110 Tax levy fixed by assembly.

A.    Determination of Rate and Levy of Tax. When the final assessment records are completed by the assessor, the assessor shall deliver to the assembly a statement of the total assessed valuation of all real and personal property in the city and borough. The assembly shall then fix the rate of tax levy and designate the number of mills upon each dollar of value of assessed taxable real and personal property that shall be levied and shall levy the tax accordingly. The rate of levy shall be fixed by resolution and the levy for school and municipal purposes shall be made and fixed separately, but the aggregate thereof may not exceed three percent of the assessed value of the property assessed.

B.    Mailing Tax Statements—Billing Date. When the assembly has levied the tax, the finance director of the city and borough shall prepare tax statements to be mailed to the persons listed as the owners on the tax rolls, all of the tax statements shall be mailed on the same day. This day shall be known as the billing date. The finance director of the city and borough shall cause to be published in a newspaper having a general circulation within the city and borough, a notice that the tax statements have been mailed and the date upon which they are mailed as well as the date which has been determined to be the billing date.

C.    Lien for Taxes. General taxes levied by the city and borough are a lien upon the property assessed, and the lien is prior and paramount to all other liens or encumbrances against the property assessed.

D.    Taxes to Be Based on the Roll. All taxes levied or collected shall be calculated, levied and collected upon the assessed values entered in the assessment roll and certified by the assessor as correct, subject to the taxpayers’ rights of appeal and to the corrections and amendments made in the rolls.

E.    Validity of Assessment Rolls. An assessment roll as completed and certified by the assessor and as corrected and amended by him in conformity with the applicable provisions of this chapter and the decisions of the board is, except as amended as a result of an appeal to the court as provided by Section 4.12.100(G) of this chapter, valid and binding on all persons, notwithstanding any defect, error, omission or invalidity in the assessment roll, or proceedings pertaining to the assessment roll.

(Ord. 13-29 § 4 (part), 2013; B.C.S. § 3.20.110.)


4.12.120 Liability for taxes on personal property.

The owner of personal property assessed is personally liable for the amount of taxes assessed against his personal property, and the tax, together with penalty and interest, may be collected when due in a personal action brought in the name of the city and borough against the owner. (B.C.S. § 3.20.120.)


4.12.130 Due date.

A.    All property taxes become due sixty days after the billing date, unless that date falls on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, in which case the taxes shall be due on the next business day. The date of payment shall be the date of actual receipt by the municipality or the postmark date, whichever is earlier.

B.    Those taxes not paid by the due date are delinquent.

(Ord. 89-896 § 4(A), 1989.)


4.12.150 Rates of penalty and interest—Priority for crediting payments.

If the taxes are not paid when due and become delinquent, (a) a penalty of three percent of the total tax for the current year shall be added; (b) an additional penalty of seven percent shall be added to any tax more than thirty days delinquent; and (c) an additional penalty of five percent will be added to any tax amount remaining delinquent after sixty days. Interest at a rate of twelve percent per year shall be charged on all of the unpaid taxes, not including the penalties, from the due date until paid in full. All payments made for taxes, penalty and interest on any one piece of property shall be credited first to the penalty, then to the interest, then to the past due taxes, and then to the current taxes, in that order. (Ord. 07-22 § 4 (part), 2007: Ord. 99-1554 § 4, 1999; Ord. 97-1469 § 4, 1997.)


4.12.160 Demand for payment of personal property taxes.

Prior to December 31st of each year the finance director shall mail, postage fully prepaid, to all persons whose personal property taxes are delinquent demand for payment of the taxes plus penalty and interest. This shall be the date of mailing of the notice of tax due referred to in Section 4.12.180(B)(1) and (2). (B.C.S. § 3.20.160.)


4.12.170 Methods of collection.

Personal property taxes together with the penalty and interest may be collected, after the same become due, either by distraint or in a personal action brought in the name of the city and borough against such owner in the courts of the state, or both such methods of collection may be used, in the discretion of the assembly. Neither of such methods shall be deemed exclusive remedies. (B.C.S. § 3.20.170.)


4.12.180 Collection by distraint and sale.

A.    Persons Subject to Enforcement. If, at any time, a taxpayer is more than six months delinquent in any of the sales or personal property taxes levied by the city and borough or due the city and borough, he shall be subject to the enforcement procedures provided for herein, which are in addition to any other enforcement procedures already provided for and are not exclusive.

B.    Distraint. The lien of personal property taxes and other nonreal taxes may be enforced by distraint and sale of the personal property of the person assessed. The procedure shall be as follows:

1.    Demand shall be made of the person assessed by sending him a notice of the amount of the tax due, the penalty and interest and the total and notice to the effect that if the taxes and all penalty and interest are not paid by a date certain, which date shall be not less than thirty days from the date of mailing, that his personal property shall be subject to distraint and sale. The notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested or may be served in person with return of the person making service. The notice shall be signed by the finance director.

2.    If no payment is made within the time specified or any extension agreed to in writing between the parties, the finance director shall issue a warrant directed to an enforcement officer of the city and borough to be designated by the municipal administrator, direct him to forthwith seize, levy upon, distrain, and sell by public auction such personal property of the person assessed as the tax may have been levied upon, and that if the same is not sufficient to satisfy the tax, penalty, interest, costs, and expenses of sale, such warrant may authorize the seizure, levy, distraint and sale of such other personal property of the person against whom the tax was assessed as may be sufficient to satisfy such tax, penalty, interest, costs and expenses of sale.

3.    No sale of any property may be made without at least fifteen days’ notice being given by publishing a notice of the sale at least two times in a newspaper of general circulation within the city and borough and by sending a copy of the notice by certified mail to the person assessed.

4.    Sale. The sale of such property shall be made at public auction and such personal property shall be sold to the highest bidder for cash. All sales of personal property shall be made at a time of day to be fixed by the finance director in such notice, and the same shall be fixed between the hours of ten a.m. and five p.m. of the day of sale, and the sale may be adjourned by the finance director from day to day for want of purchasers or sufficient bids, or if for any valid reason the finance director is prevented from attending at the time and place set for the sale, the sale may be adjourned and continued from day to day if necessary until all of such personal property has been sold to pay the costs and expenses herein provided, and the tax, penalty and interest in full.

5.    From the proceeds of the sale which shall convey all the right title and interest of the person assessed, shall be paid, in the following order, the actual expenses of sale, tax, penalty, interest, other costs including attorney’s fees.

6.    Schedule of Costs. The following shall be the schedule of costs and attorney’s fees:

a.    If redemption is made prior to sale:

i.    Actual costs of seizing and preserving the property

ii.    Actual costs of publication and giving notice

iii.    Attorney’s fees in the amount of twenty percent of the first one hundred dollars, but with a minimum of ten dollars, fifteen percent of the next five hundred dollars, and ten percent thereafter,

b.    If no redemption is made and the property sold:

i.    All the costs stated next above plus any actual accruing costs

ii.    Attorney’s fees in addition to those stated of fifteen percent of the first one hundred dollars but with a minimum of ten dollars, five percent of the balance.

7.    Any remaining sums shall be returned to the person assessed, or if not claimed within three years become the property of the city and borough.

8.    Finance Director to Preserve Records. The finance director shall thereupon apply the proceeds of the sale in the manner hereinbefore set forth, and shall keep a record of all such sales and all such proceedings, and shall keep on file the returns of the finance director relating thereto, and in all cases of sale of personal property, he shall, if requested, give the purchaser a bill of sale on behalf of the city and borough under his hand and the seal of the city and borough.

(Ord. 86-693 § 4, 1986; B.C.S. § 3.20.180.)


4.12.190 Taxes lien against property.

Whenever the tax on real property has not been paid when due, the assembly may enforce the lien of such tax by the sale of the property assessed. (B.C.S. § 3.20.190.)


4.12.200 Action for collection of tax.

A.    If the tax on real property is not paid when due, the assembly may enforce the lien of the tax by the sale of the property assessed, after foreclosure in the special proceeding provided for herein by order of the Superior Court.

B.    If the tax on a leasehold interest in tax exempt property is not paid when due, the city and borough may enforce the tax by a personal action against the delinquent taxpayer brought in the magistrate or Superior Court, in addition to other remedies available to the city and borough to enforce the lien.

(B.C.S. § 3.20.200.)


4.12.210 Real property tax collection.

A.    The municipality shall enforce delinquent real property tax liens by annual foreclosure.

B.    If the tax on property described in AS 29.45.070 or on a taxable interest in tax exempt property is not paid when due, the municipality may enforce the tax by a personal action against the delinquent taxpayer brought in the district or superior court, in addition to other remedies available to enforce the lien.

(Ord. 86-718 § 4 (part), 1986.)


4.12.220 Foreclosure list.

A.    The municipality shall:

1.    Annually present a petition for judgment and a certified copy of the foreclosure list for the previous year’s delinquent taxes in the superior court for judgment;

2.    Publish the foreclosure list for four consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation distributed in the municipality;

3.    “Within ten days after the first publication or posting, mail to the last known owner of each property as the owner’s name and address appear on the list a notice advising of the foreclosure proceeding in which a petition for judgment of foreclosure has been filed and describing the property and the amount due as stated on the list.

B.    The list shall be arranged in alphabetical order as to the last name and shall include:

1.    The last known owner;

2.    The property description as stated on the assessment roll;

3.    Years and amounts of delinquency;

4.    Penalty and interest due;

5.    A statement that the list is available for public inspection at the clerk’s office;

6.    A statement that the list has been presented to the superior court with a petition for judgment and decree.

C.    Completion of the requirements of subsection A of this section constitutes and has the same force and effect as the filing of an individual and separate complaint and service of summons to foreclose a lien against each property described on the foreclosure list.

(Ord. 86-718 § 4 (part), 1986.)


4.12.230 Clearing delinquencies.

During the publication or posting of the foreclosure list and up to the time of transfer to the municipality a person may pay the taxes, together with the penalty, interest, and costs. The collector shall note payment on the foreclosure list. (Ord. 86-718 § 4 (part), 1986.)


4.12.240 List to lienholder.

A holder of a mortgage or other lien on real property may request the clerk to send by certified mail notice of a foreclosure list that includes the real property. (Ord. 86-718 § 4 (part), 1986.)


4.12.250 General foreclosure.

The municipality shall bring one general foreclosure proceeding in rem against the properties included in the foreclosure list. If the owner is unknown, the property is proceeded against as belonging to “unknown owner.” (Ord. 86-718 § 4(part), 1986.)


4.12.260 Answer and objection.

A person having an interest in a lot on the foreclosure list may file an answer within thirty days after the date of last publication, specifying the person’s objection. The court shall make its decision in summary proceedings. The foreclosure list is prima facie evidence that the assessment and levy of the tax is valid and that the tax is unpaid. (Ord. 86-718 § 4 (part), 1986.)


4.12.270 Judgment.

The court shall in a proper case give judgment and decree that the tax liens be foreclosed. It is a several judgment against each lot and a lien on each lot. (Ord. 86-718 § 4 (part), 1986.)


4.12.280 Transfer and appeal.

A.    Foreclosed properties are transferred to the municipality for the lien amount. When answers are filed the court may enter judgment against and order the transfer to the municipality of all other properties on the list pending determination of the matters in controversy. The court shall hear and determine the issues raised by the complaint and answers in the same manner and under the same rules as it hears and determines other actions.

B.    The court clerk shall deliver a certified copy of the judgment and decree to the municipal clerk. The certified judgment and decree constitutes a transfer to the municipality.

C.    The judgment and decree stops objections to it that could have been presented before judgment and decree. Appeal from a judgment and decree of foreclosure, or from a final order in the proceeding, may be taken in the manner provided for appeals in civil actions.

(Ord. 86-718 § 4 (part), 1986.)


4.12.290 Redemption period.

Properties transferred to the municipality are held by the municipality for at least one year. During the redemption period a party having an interest in the property may redeem it by paying the lien amount plus penalties, interest, and costs, including all costs incurred under subsection A of Section 4.12.330. Property redeemed is subject to all accrued taxes, assessments, liens, and claims as though it had continued in private ownership. Only the amount applicable under the judgment and decree must be paid in order to redeem the property. (Ord. 86-718 § 4 (part), 1986.)


4.12.300 Effect.

Receipt of redemption money by the municipality releases the judgment obtained under Section 4.12.270. The clerk or the clerk’s designee shall record the redemption and issue a certificate containing a property description, the redemption amount, and the dates of judgment and decree of foreclosure. The clerk or the clerk’s designee shall collect the recording fee at the time of redemption and shall file the certificate with the record as part of the judgment roll. (Ord. 86-718 § 4 (part), 1986.)


4.12.310 Additional liens.

If a property included in a foreclosure list is removed after payment of delinquencies or redemption by another lienholder, the payment represented by receipt for payment constitutes an additional lien on the property, collectible by the lienholder in the same manner as the original lien. (Ord. 86-718 § 4 (part), 1986.)


4.12.320 Possession during redemption period. 

Foreclosure does not affect the former owner’s right to possession during the redemption period. If waste is committed by the former owner or by anyone acting under the permission or control of the former owner, the municipality may declare an immediate forfeiture of the right to possession. (Ord. 86-718 § 4 (part), 1986.)


4.12.330 Expiration.

A.    At least thirty days before the expiration of the redemption period the clerk or the clerk’s designee shall publish a redemption period expiration notice. The notice shall contain the date of judgment, the date of expiration of the period of redemption, and a warning that all properties ordered sold under the judgment, unless redeemed, shall be deeded to the municipality immediately on expiration of the period of redemption and that every right or interest of a person in the properties will be forfeited forever to the municipality. The notice appears once a week for four consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation distributed in the municipality. The clerk shall send a copy of the notice by certified mail to each record owner of property against which a judgment of foreclosure has been taken and, if the assessed value of the property is more than ten thousand dollars, to all holders of mortgages or other liens of record on the property. The notice shall be mailed within five days after the first publication. The mailing shall be sufficient if mailed to the property owner and to the holder of a mortgage or recorded lien at the last address of record.

B.    The right of redemption expires thirty days after the date of the first notice publication.

C.    Costs incurred in the determination of holders of mortgages and other liens of record and costs of notice publication incurred by the municipality under subsection A of this section are a lien on the property and may be recovered by the municipality.

(Ord. 86-718 § 4(part), 1986.)


4.12.340 Deed to municipality.

A.    Unredeemed property in the municipality is deeded to the municipality by the clerk of the court. The deed shall be recorded in the recording district in which the property is located.

B.    Conveyance gives the municipality clear title, except for prior recorded tax liens of the United States and the state.

C.    No deed is invalid for irregularities, omissions, or defects in the proceedings under this chapter unless the former owner has been misled so as to be injured. Two years after the date of the deed, its validity is conclusively presumed and a claim of the former owner or other person having an interest in the property is forever barred.

(Ord. No. 86-718 § 4 (part), 1986.)


4.12.350 Disposition and sale of foreclosed property.

A.    The municipality shall determine by ordinance whether foreclosed property deeded to the municipality shall be retained for a public purpose. The ordinance shall contain the legal description of the property, the address or a general description of the property sufficient to provide the public with notice of its location, and the name of the last record owner of the property as the name appears on the assessment rolls.

B.    Tax-foreclosed property conveyed to a municipality by tax foreclosure and not required for a public purpose may be sold. Before the sale of tax-foreclosed property held for a public purpose, the municipality, by ordinance, shall determine that a public need does not exist. The ordinance shall contain the information required under subsection A of this section.

C.    The clerk or the clerk’s designee shall send a copy of the published notice of hearing of an ordinance to consider a determination required under subsections A or B of this section by certified mail to the former record owner of the property that is the subject of the ordinance. The notice shall be mailed within five days after its first publication and shall be sufficient if mailed to the last record owner of the property as the name appears on the assessment rolls of the municipality.

D.    The provisions of subsection C of this section do not apply with respect to property that has been held by the municipality for a period of more than ten years after the close of the redemption period.

(Ord. No. 86-718 § 4 (part), 1986.)


4.12.360 Repurchase by record owner.

A.    The record owner at the time of tax foreclosure of property acquired by a municipality, or the assigns of that record owner, may, within ten years and before the sale or contract of sale of the tax-foreclosed property by the municipality, repurchase the property. The municipality shall sell the property for the full amount applicable to the property under the judgment and decree, with interest not to exceed fifteen percent a year from the date of entry of the judgment of foreclosure to the date of repurchase, delinquent taxes assessed and levied as though it had continued in private ownership, and costs of foreclosure and sale.

B.    After adoption of an ordinance providing for the retention of tax-foreclosed property by the municipality for a public purpose, the right of the former record owner to repurchase the property ceases.

(Ord. 86-718 § 4 (part), 1986.)


4.12.370 Proceeds of tax sale.

If tax-foreclosed real property that has been held by the municipality for less than ten years after the close of the redemption period and never designated for a public purpose is sold at a tax-foreclosure sale, the former record owner is entitled to the portion of the proceeds of the sale that exceeds the amount of unpaid taxes, the amount equal to taxes that would have been assessed and levied after foreclosure if the property has continued in private ownership, penalty, interest, and costs to the municipality of foreclosing and selling the property. If the proceeds of the sale or tax-foreclosed property exceed the total of unpaid and delinquent taxes, penalty, interest, and costs, the municipality shall provide the former owner of the property written notice advising of the amount of the excess and the manner in which a claim for the balance of the proceeds may be submitted. Notice is sufficient under this section if mailed to the former record owner at the last address of record of the former record owner. On presentation of a proper claim, the municipality shall remit the excess to the former record owner. A claim for the excess filed after six months of the date of sale is forever barred.

(Ord. 86-718 § 4 (part), 1986.)


4.12.410 Effect on purchase of irregularities, omissions or defects.

No purchase, subsequent to a judgment or decree foreclosing a tax lien or liens upon property, shall be invalidated or no deed shall be declared void or set aside for irregularities, omissions or defects, unless the record owner of the property sold actually has been misled by the irregularities, omissions or defects to his injury. (B.C.S. § 3.20.410.)


4.12.420 Enforcement of special assessments.

The word “tax” as used in this chapter shall apply to special assessments for improvements as authorized by the city and borough and both such delinquent special assessments as well as delinquent general taxes may be included in the same delinquent tax roll and in the foreclosure list, but when so included shall be stated separately and the penalties and interest due on each shall also be stated separately. (B.C.S. § 3.20.420.)


Chapter 4.17 DRIVER FACILITY CHARGE

Sections:

4.17.010    Short title.

4.17.020    Use of funds.

4.17.030    Levy of charge.

4.17.040    Fee table.

4.17.050    Exemptions.

4.17.060    Remittance of driver facility charge collected.

4.17.070    Form of return.

4.17.080    Procedures on delinquencies.

4.17.090    Period of limitation.

4.17.100    Rules and regulations.

4.17.110    Record keeping.

4.17.120    Addition and identification of tax.

4.17.130    Finance director authorized to administer oaths.

4.17.140    Driver facility charge audits.


4.17.010 Short title.

This chapter may be cited as the “Sitka driver facility charge ordinance.” (Ord. 01-1621 § 4 (part), 2001.)


4.17.020 Use of funds.

All moneys accumulated under the terms of this chapter shall be deposited by the finance director in the airport terminal building fund of the city and borough and shall be used for the operating and capital expenditures at the airport terminal building enterprise fund. (Ord. 01-1621 § 4 (part), 2001.)


4.17.030 Levy of charge.

A consumers’ driver facility charge is levied on rental sales of motorized passenger vehicles made in the city and borough at the rate of four percent. Normally the burden of this charge rests upon the consumer. (Ord. 01-1627 § 4, 2001: Ord. 01-1621 § 4 (part), 2001.)


4.17.040 Fee table.

Seller shall add the charge levy in this chapter to the rental sales in accordance with a schedule promulgated by the administrator or his or her designee. (Ord. 01-1621 § 4 (part), 2001.)


4.17.050 Exemptions.

The following rental charges are exempt from the driver facility charge:

A.    Rental of motorized passenger vehicles for twenty-eight or more consecutive days.

(Ord. 01-1621 § 4 (part), 2001.)


4.17.060 Remittance of driver facility charge collected.

Sellers shall file returns and remit the charge collected in accordance with the following:

A.    Quarterly. Unless as otherwise provided for in this section, sellers shall on or before the last day of the month succeeding the end of each quarter year ending March 31st, June 30th, September 30th, and December 31st, prepare a return for the preceding quarter year upon forms furnished by the city and borough. Returns shall be filed personally with the finance department by five p.m. or postmarked prior to five p.m. on the last day of the month following the end of each quarter year. In the event the last day of the month falls on a legal holiday or weekend, then the return may be filed on the first business day following;

B.    Monthly. If a seller fails to file or is late in filing returns for two of the last four quarters, the finance director may require the seller to submit returns and payment each month;

C.    Sale of Business to Another Person. A seller who sells their business to another person shall make a final driver facility charge return within fifteen days after the date of selling the business. The purchaser of the business shall withhold a portion of the purchase money sufficient to pay any driver facility charges, penalties and interest that may be due until the seller displays a receipt from the city and borough showing that all charges obligations imposed by this chapter have been paid. If any purchaser of a business fails to withhold this sum, they shall be personally liable for the charges, penalties and interest owed by the seller to the city and borough;

D.    Upon Termination of Business Activities. If a seller terminates their business without the benefit of a purchaser, successor, successors or assigns, they shall make a final return and settlement of the charge obligations within fifteen days of the termination;

E.    Filings to be Continuous. A person who has filed a driver facility charge return will be presumed to be making sales in successive quarters unless they file a return showing termination or sale of their business.

(Ord. 01-1621 § 4 (part), 2001.)


4.17.070 Form of return.

On forms furnished by the city and borough the seller shall furnish the following information, sign the form and certify that it correctly stated the information purportedly set forth:

A.    Total rentals;

B.    A substantiation of sales exempt from the charge by virtue of Sitka General Code Section 4. 17.050(A);

C.    The amount of the driver facility charge due;

D.    Such other information as may be reasonably required;

E.    Driver facility charge forms and their contents shall be confidential and shall not be disclosed by the finance department except:

1.    In connection with efforts by the municipality to collect the charge, except that lists of delinquent driver facility charge payers shall not be made public until suit has been brought or the delinquency is over six months and the business owner has not controverted the claim;

2.    In response to a subpoena issued by a court of record, state agency or board;

3.    In connection with legislative inquiry specifically authorized by the assembly;

4.    In connection with municipal audits for the purposes of verifying municipal accounting practices;

5.    In compilation of statistics and studies by the finance department for public distribution, so long as information from individual businesses is not identifiable as to source.

(Ord. 01-1621 § 4 (part), 2001.)


4.17.080 Procedures on delinquencies.

A.    Penalty and Interest.

1.    If the seller does not file the proper forms and remit the driver facility charges then due on the dates designated above, a penalty equal to five percent of the delinquent tax, but in no event less than twenty-five dollars, shall be added to the charges for the first month or any part thereof, and an additional five percent shall be added to the charges due for each month or fraction thereof for delinquency until a total penalty of fifteen percent has accrued. It shall be assessed and collected in the same manner as the charges are assessed and collected.

2.    In addition to the penalty provided in subdivision 1 of this subsection, interest at the rate of twelve percent per year on the delinquent charges from the date of delinquency until paid shall accrue and be collected in the same manner as the delinquent charges are collected.

B.    Written Demand and Additional Procedures. If a seller fails to file the return or make the remittance in accordance with Sitka General Code Sections 4.17.060 or 4.17.070, the finance director shall make written demand upon the seller, mailed to their last known address, for submission of the return and/or remittance. In the event of noncompliance with the demand, the finance director may do any or all of the following procedures:

1.    Criminal Action. File a criminal complaint against the seller in the district court for violation of Sitka General Code Sections 4.17.060 or 4.17.070 with penalties upon conviction not to exceed one year in prison and five thousand dollars fine; and

2.    Civil Action. Make a driver facility charge assessment against the seller, with the assessment based upon an estimate of the gross revenue received by the seller during the period and institute civil action to recover the amount of the assessment. The estimate of gross revenue shall be derived from past returns of the seller, the general economic level of the business community and, if available, returns of comparable businesses.

(Ord. 01-1621 § 4 (part), 2001.)


4.17.090 Period of limitation.

The amount of any charges imposed under this chapter may be determined and assessed at any time within a period of three years after the tax became due and payable. The period shall begin on the date when a return is required to be filed. Where no return has been filed, then the period does not begin to run until the discovery of the delinquency occurs. No suit or other proceedings for the collection of the charges shall be begun after the expiration of the period. (Ord. 01-1621 § 4 (part), 2001.)


4.17.100 Rules and regulations.

The finance director shall from time to time cause to be promulgated rules and regulations as are necessary and advisable to provide for the application and interpretation of this chapter and to submit them to the assembly for its adoption or rejection, and to cause to be provided methods and forms for reporting and collecting the charges in accordance with this chapter and regulations. (Ord. 01-1621 § 4 (part), 2001.)


4.17.110 Record keeping.

A seller shall retain for a period of three years all of the driver facility charges returns, reports, forms, records and supporting schedules as may be required by the city and borough. (Ord. 01-1621 § 4 (part), 2001.)


4.17.120 Addition and identification of tax.

A seller shall add the amount of the driver facility charge levied in Sitka General Code Section 4.17.030 to the selling price. The charge shall be stated separately on any sales receipt or slips, rent receipts, charge tickets, invoices, statements of account, or other tangible evidence of sale. The driver facility charge(s) are exempt from the city and borough sales tax provisions. (Ord. 01-1621 § 4 (part), 2001.)


4.17.130 Finance director authorized to administer oaths.

The finance director is authorized and empowered to administer any oath necessary for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 01-1621 § 4 (part), 2001.)


4.17.140 Driver facility charge audits.

A.    Any seller who has established a driver facility charge account with the city and borough, who is required to collect and remit the driver facility charge, or who is required to submit a driver facility charge return under the provisions of Title 4, Chapter 4.17 of the Sitka General Code is subject to a discretionary driver facility charge audit at any time. The purpose of such an audit is to examine the business records of the seller in order to determine whether appropriate amounts of driver facility charges revenue have been collected by the seller and remitted to the municipality.

B.    The finance director shall be responsible for directing that driver facility charges audits take place and for selecting the particular sellers whose business records will be audited.

C.    Driver facility charges audits of seller’s business records may be accomplished by either an employee of the city and borough of Sitka finance department or by an individual or firm under contract with the municipality.

D.    Sellers selected for a driver facility charge audit will be notified by letter and will be required to meet with, and make available for inspection and copying all pertinent business records including income tax returns that may be requested for the prior three fiscal years for examination, to the finance department employee, or contractor conducting the audit, within thirty days of notification. Under extenuating circumstances, the finance director may grant an extension of time for compliance at the director’s discretion.

E.    After completion of a driver facility charge audit, sellers subject to the audit will be notified of the results of the audit by certified letter. If the audit has resulted in an additional driver facility charge liability to the municipality, the additional driver facility charges must be remitted to the municipality within fourteen days after the receipt of the letter, or the additional driver facility charges will be considered delinquent and subject to the procedures on delinquencies outlined in Sitka General Code Section 4.17.080. If the audit has resulted in a refund due the seller, the refund will be made to the seller within fourteen days, or applied to the seller’s account, at the seller’s option.

F.    It shall be the seller’s responsibility to maintain business records in sufficient detail to substantiate all information reported on the driver facility charges returns, including rentals qualifying as exempt from the levy under the provisions of Sitka General Code Section 4.17.050. If insufficient detail exists within a seller’s business records to substantiate the rental exemption, such rents may be reclassified as taxable at the auditor’s discretion and subject to the driver facility charge collection and remittance.

G.    Any seller notified of an additional driver facility charges liability as a result of a driver facility charge audit shall have the right to appeal the additional liability to the assembly. Such an appeal must be filed with the municipal clerk within thirty days of notification by letter of the liability. If an additional liability is appealed, the accumulation of penalties and interest under the provisions of Sitka General Code Section 4.17.080 will be suspended on the date the appeal is filed with the municipal clerk; if the appeal is subsequently denied by the assembly, all such penalties and interest will be retroactive back to the original date of notification of additional liability by letter.

H.    Any seller refusing to comply with the provisions of this section shall be subject to any or all of the procedures on delinquencies as outlined in Sitka General Code Section 4.17.080, including the filing of a criminal complaint against the seller in district court.

(Ord. 01-1621 § 4 (part), 2001.)


Chapter 4.19 SITKA PERMANENT FUND

Sections:

4.19.010    Fund established.

4.19.020    Annual transfer to permanent fund.


4.19.010 Fund established.

Under Section 11.16 of the Home Rule Charter of the City and Borough of Sitka Charter there is established a separate fund: the Sitka Permanent Fund. The Sitka Permanent Fund consists of money appropriated to the Sitka Permanent Fund by the assembly. Such appropriation may be made by inclusion of the amounts to be appropriated in the annual budget or may be made by separate ordinance. (Ord. 01-1650 § 4(A), 2001.)


4.19.020 Annual transfer to permanent fund.

As part of the annual budget submission to the assembly, the administrator will include an amount of funds to be transferred from the general fund to the permanent fund during the subsequent fiscal year. The purpose for the transfer will be to reduce the effective takeout from the permanent fund so that the purchasing power of the permanent fund is maintained as much as possible. The initial transfer will take place in FY2018 and will be one-quarter of one percent of the average market value of the Sitka Permanent Fund for the past three years, as measured on December 31st of each year. The amount of the annual transfer will increase by one-quarter of one percent per subsequent fiscal year, to a maximum of two percent. (Ord. 17-02 § 4, 2016: Ord. 16-23 § 4, 2016.)


Chapter 4.20 MISCELLANEOUS FEES

Sections:

4.20.010    Fees set by administrator.


4.20.010 Fees set by administrator.

A.    The municipal administrator is empowered to set fees and charges for the use of municipal lands, property and services for which no regular fee has been otherwise set.

B.    If any person believes that such fee or charge set by the administrator is unfair or excessive, he may apply directly to the assembly to have such fee or charge determined.

    If such person applies to the assembly in writing within five days of the fee determination by the administrator, the fee need not be deposited with the municipality until the assembly determination; otherwise, the fee as set by the administrator must be paid as soon as the fee accrues and be subject to possible refund upon assembly determination.

C.    The administrator or his or her written designee shall set fees for ambulance services and other emergency medical services provided by the city and borough. Such fees shall be published and available at both the finance department and the fire department.

(Ord. 01-1601 § 4, 2001; Ord. 80-420 § 4, 1980.)


Chapter 4.24 TRANSIENT LODGING TAX 

Sections:

4.24.010    Definitions. 

4.24.020    Imposition of transient lodging tax. 

4.24.030    Collection and accrual. 

4.24.040    Transient lodging tax audits. 

4.24.050    Youth camps. 

4.24.060    Confidential and nonconfidential tax information. 

4.24.070    Visitor activities enhancement fund. 


4.24.010 Definitions. 

For purposes of this section, the following words shall have the definitions below assigned:

A.    “Guest” means an individual, corporation, partnership or association paying monetary or other consideration for lodging.

B.    “Lodging” means a structure or portion of a structure which is occupied or intended and designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling or sleeping purposes and includes any hotel, motel, inn, bed and breakfast, lodge, or short-term rental.

C.    “Package plan” means multiple services offered at one set rate. A package plan is commonly referred to as “bundled services” or a “package tour.” This can include, but is not exclusive to, fishing charters with room and board included when the charter is purchased.

D.    “Rent” or “rents” means the amount paid or promised, in terms of money, as consideration for the use by a transient for lodging. It does not include the cost of food or entertainment, nor does it include the cost of banquet or other facilities not intended for use as lodging.

E.    “Short-term rentals” means rentals of single dwelling units, or portions thereof, for less than thirty consecutive days for money or other valuable consideration by one party which then occupies the dwelling.

F.    “Transient” means a person who occupies or has available for occupancy lodging for fewer than thirty consecutive days. An employee who occupies or has available for fewer than thirty days lodging, rented or leased for more than thirty days by an employer for use on a rotating basis by employees, is not a transient.

(Ord. 18-13S § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 85-644 § 4 (part), 1985.)


4.24.020 Imposition of transient lodging tax. 

A.    There is enacted a tax on lodging to transients computed on a percentage of the rent. This tax shall be applicable to all lodging rentals to transients, unless the rental is specifically exempted from taxation by constitution or other valid law.

B.    State and federal governments are exempt from this tax through purchase order or other device obligating the government to pay for the lodging. Government employees are not exempt from this tax if lodging is rented to them individually or they have the ultimate obligation to pay for lodging.

C.    The tax shall be six percent of the lodging rent charged.

D.    The tax shall be in addition to the general sales tax of the municipality. The tax imposed in this chapter shall not be levied on the municipal sales tax portion of a rental bill. Neither shall the general sales tax be levied on this tax. Both taxes shall be computed individually on the room rent.

(Ord. 18-13S § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 98-1499 § 4, 1998; Ord. 85-664 § 4 (part), 1985.)


4.24.030 Collection and accrual. 

A.    Every lodging operator renting lodging subject to taxation under this chapter shall levy and collect the taxes imposed by this chapter from the transient guest at the time of charge for the lodging and shall transmit the same, quarterly, to the city and borough. The tax imposed shall be shown on the billing to the guest as a separate and distinct item.

B.    This tax accrues each day of occupancy and shall be paid by the lodging operator to the municipality at the time a tax return covering such date is due, irrespective of when the guests actually pay their bill to the lodging operator.

C.    An operator may not advertise or state to the public or to any guest or renter, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part of it will be assumed or absorbed by the operator of lodging, or that the tax will not be added to the rental or that it will be refunded, nor may an operator absorb or fail to add the tax or any part of it or refund any tax or fail to separately state the tax to the renter or guest.

D.    Each transient guest is responsible for the lodging rental tax imposed by this chapter and the tax shall be due and payable to the lodging operator at the time the rent is paid. Any person who refuses to pay the tax shall execute a written refusal. A lodging operator is not responsible for the payment of that tax to the municipality if it forwards to the municipality the signed refusal to pay executed by the guest. The municipality may proceed against the guest directly for collection of the tax. If the lodging operator does not collect the tax from the guest nor receive a written refusal, both the lodging and the guest shall be jointly and severally liable for payment to the municipality.

E.    Enforcement and collection of this tax shall be according to the provisions of Chapter 4.09.

F.    The municipal finance director is empowered to prepare and distribute a standard form of refusal to pay this tax by a guest.

G.    When a guest pays for a package plan which includes lodging:

1.    The amount applicable and apportioned to lodging for determination of the transient lodging tax shall be the same charge made for lodging when lodging is not part of a package plan.

2.    The minimum amount of tax paid shall not be less than five dollars per person, per night, or one half of one percent of the package plan, whichever is greater in value.

(Ord. 18-13S § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 85-664 § 4 (part), 1985.)


4.24.040 Transient lodging tax audits. 

A.    Any operator who has established a transient lodging tax account with the city and borough of Sitka, who is required to collect and remit a transient lodging tax, or who is required to submit a transient lodging tax return under the provisions of this chapter, is subject to a discretionary transient lodging tax audit at any time. The purpose of such an audit is to examine the business records of the operator in order to determine whether appropriate amounts of transient lodging tax revenue have been collected by the operator and remitted to the municipality.

B.    The finance director shall be responsible for directing that transient lodging tax audits take place and for selecting the particular operators whose business records will be audited.

C.    Transient lodging tax audits of operators’ business records may be accomplished by either an employee of the city and borough of Sitka finance department or by an individual or firm under contract with the municipality.

D.    Operators selected for a transient lodging tax audit will be notified by letter and will be required to meet with, and make available for inspection and copying, all pertinent business records, including income tax returns that may be requested for the prior six fiscal years for examination, to the finance department employee, or contractor conducting the audit, within thirty days of notification. Under extenuating circumstances, the finance director may grant an extension of time for compliance at the director’s discretion.

E.    After completion of a transient lodging tax audit, operators subject to the audit will be notified of the results of the audit by letter. If the audit has resulted in an additional transient lodging tax liability to the municipality, the additional transient lodging tax must be remitted to the municipality within fourteen days after the receipt of the letter, or the additional transient lodging tax will be considered delinquent and subject to the procedures on delinquencies outlined in Section 4.09.350. If the audit has resulted in a refund due the operator, the refund will be made to the operator within fourteen days, or applied to the operator’s account, at the operator’s option.

F.    It shall be the operator’s responsibility to maintain business records in sufficient detail to substantiate all information reported on transient lodging tax returns, including rentals qualifying as exempt from taxation under the provisions of Section 4.24.020. If insufficient detail exists within an operator’s business records to substantiate rental exemptions, such rentals may be reclassified as taxable rentals at the auditor’s discretion and subject to transient lodging tax collection and remittance.

G.    Any operator notified of an additional transient lodging tax liability as a result of a transient lodging tax audit shall have the right to appeal the additional liability to the assembly. Such an appeal must be filed with the municipal clerk within thirty days of notification by letter of the liability. If an additional liability is appealed, the accumulation of penalties and interest under the provisions of Section 4.09.350 will be suspended on the date the appeal is filed with the municipal clerk; if the appeal is subsequently denied by the assembly, all such penalties and interest will be retroactive back to the original date of notification of additional liability by letter.

H.    Any operator refusing to comply with the provisions of this section shall be subject to any or all of the procedures on delinquencies as outlined in Section 4.09.350, including the filing of a criminal complaint against the operator in district court.

I.    All business records will be returned to the business after the audit is completed and all copies will be destroyed no later than five years after the audit.

(Ord. 18-13S § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 12-46A § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 95-1303 § 4 (part), 1995.)


4.24.050 Youth camps. 

The provision of housing to students attending youth recreation, summer, and similar camps primarily serving persons under eighteen years of age are exempt from the tax levied in this chapter.

(Ord. 18-13S § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 12-46A §4 (part), 2013: Ord. 04-19 § 4(B), 2004.)


4.24.060 Confidential and nonconfidential tax information. 

A.    The following information is publicly available information:

1.    Names and addresses of business owners who filed tax returns under this chapter;

2.    Whether a business is registered to collect taxes under this chapter in the city and borough of Sitka;

3.    Whether a business is current in filing tax returns and in remitting tax due under this chapter, and the number of returns not filed; and

4.    Names and exemption numbers of governmental agencies which have received a tax-exempt number from the city and borough of Sitka relating to taxes due under this chapter.

B.    The city and borough of Sitka may permit any authorized representative of any federal, state or other local government agency to inspect and copy any tax returns filed and reports prepared under this chapter, if the other governmental agency provides substantially similar access to the city and borough of Sitka and if the city and borough of Sitka determines that the other governmental agency provides adequate safeguards for the confidentiality of the tax returns and reports.

C.    Except as otherwise provided in this section, transient lodging tax forms and their contents shall be confidential and shall not be disclosed by the finance department except:

1.    In connection with efforts by the city and borough of Sitka to collect the tax;

2.    In response to a subpoena issued by a court, state agency or governmental board or commission;

3.    In connection with legislative inquiry specifically authorized by the assembly;

4.    In connection with the city and borough of Sitka audits for purposes of verifying city and borough of Sitka accounting practices;

5.    In compilation of statistics and studies by the finance department for public distribution, so long as information from individual businesses is not identifiable as to source.

(Ord. 18-13S § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 07-04 § 4(B), 2007.)


4.24.070 Visitor activities enhancement fund. 

A.    A new special revenue fund of the city and borough of Sitka, entitled the “visitor activities enhancement fund,” is henceforth created. The purpose of the visitor activities enhancement fund shall be to serve as a depository for all transient lodging taxes henceforth collected until such funds are appropriated for visitor enhancement purposes.

B.    All transient lodging taxes collected shall be deposited into the visitor activities enhancement fund.

C.    The administrator, through the preparation of the annual consolidated operating budget of the municipality, shall plan for the appropriation of funds contained in the visitor activities enhancement fund. If appropriations are required above the amount authorized in the annual consolidated operating budget of the municipality, the administrator shall bring forth supplemental appropriation ordinances, in accordance with the Home Rule Charter of the City and Borough of Sitka.

D.    The proceeds contained in the visitor activities enhancement fund may be appropriated by the assembly for any purpose related to the enhancement of tourism and visitor-related activities in the municipality, to include but not be limited to, contractual funding of a convention and visitor’s bureau, funding of travel of municipal officials to travel-related conventions and trade shows, and procurement of tourism-related advertising. All such procurements shall be subject to municipal procurement regulations in accordance with Title 3.

E.    If at any such time the visitor activities enhancement fund is dissolved, the net proceeds of the fund will revert back to the general fund. Also, at any time through an appropriation the assembly may direct the transfer of any amount of unexpended proceeds in the visitor activities enhancement fund to any other fund of the municipality to be used for any lawful purpose.

F.    Any investment earnings on the unspent proceeds contained in the visitor activities enhancement fund shall be added to the corpus of the fund and will be available for appropriation by the assembly.

(Ord. 18-13S § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 15-04 § 4, 2015.)


Chapter 4.25 STUDENT ACTIVITIES DEDICATED TRAVEL FUND

Sections:

4.25.010    Student activities dedicated travel fund.

4.25.020    Revenue source for the student activities dedicated travel fund.


4.25.010 Student activities dedicated travel fund.

A student activities dedicated travel fund is hereby created. The student activities dedicated travel fund shall be maintained separate and apart from all other funds and accounts of the city and borough. The student activities dedicated travel fund shall only be used to assist with the payment of expenses associated with travel that is part of a Sitka School District sponsored activity. (Ord. 16-39 § 4 (part), 2016.)


4.25.020 Revenue source for the student activities dedicated travel fund.

Notwithstanding any other provision of law, all proceeds received by the city and borough of Sitka from the state of Alaska resulting from marijuana licensing fees shall be deposited in their entirety in the student activities dedicated travel fund.

Proceeds will be appropriated during the annual budget process. The amount transferred is to be included in the calculation of the local support of education per AS 14.17.410. 

(Ord. 16-39 § 4 (part), 2016.)


Chapter 4.26 EXCISE TAX ON CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS

Sections:

4.26.010    Applicability of chapter.

4.26.020    Tax on cigarettes.

4.26.030    Tax on other tobacco products.

4.26.040    Intent and purpose of chapter.

4.26.050    Exemptions.

4.26.060    Exemption cards.

4.26.070    License required for dealers in cigarettes or tobacco products— Issuance.

4.26.080    License fee.

4.26.090    Expiration and renewal of licenses.

4.26.100    Transfer of license.

4.26.110    Refund of tax or license fee.

4.26.120    Display of license—Surrender of license—Suspension or revocation of license.

4.26.125    Tax returns.

4.26.130    Involuntary returns.

4.26.135    Amended tax returns.

4.26.140    Application of payments.

4.26.145    Prohibited acts and penalties.

4.26.150    Civil fraud.

4.26.155    Tax lien.

4.26.160    Interest on unpaid tax.

4.26.165    Taxpayer, licensee, cardholder, or other person remedies.

4.26.170    Reports by manufacturers.

4.26.175    Inspection and maintenance of documents and records.

4.26.180    Administrative regulations.

4.26.185    Confidential and nonconfidential tax information.

4.26.190    Definitions.


4.26.010 Applicability of chapter.

Unless provided otherwise, this chapter shall apply to the taxation of all cigarettes and tobacco products, including smokeless tobacco products and electronic cigarettes, brought into or acquired in the city and borough. (Ord. 15-25 § 4 (part), 2015: Ord. 05-37 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


4.26.020 Tax on cigarettes.

A.    The municipality hereby levies an excise tax of one hundred twenty-three and one-tenth mills, adjusted annually as provided in subsection B of this section, on each cigarette brought into the city and borough beginning on July 1, 2015. Cigarettes upon which the tax is imposed are not again subject to the tax when acquired by another person.

B.    The annual Consumer Price Index adjustment shall be based on the August release date of the semiannual report for the municipality of Anchorage from the United States Department of Labor Statistics and determined to be the percent change to the current year from the average of the first and second halves of the prior year, and will be effective January 1st of each year following the August release date. The first such adjustment date shall be January 1, 2016.

(Ord. 15-25 § 4 (part), 2015: Ord. 05-37 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


4.26.030 Tax on other tobacco products.

An excise tax of ninety percent of the wholesale price is levied on tobacco products other than cigarettes, including smokeless tobacco products and electronic cigarettes, brought into the city and borough. The tax was first levied effective January 1, 2006. Tobacco products upon which this tax is imposed are not again subject to this tax when acquired by another person. (Ord. 15-25 § 4 (part), 2015: Ord. 05-37 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


4.26.040 Intent and purpose of chapter.

A.    It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to collect the tax from the person who:

1.    First acquires the cigarettes or other tobacco products within the city and borough;

2.    Brings or causes cigarettes or other tobacco products to be brought into the city and borough;

3.    Makes, manufactures, or fabricates cigarettes or other tobacco products in the city and borough; or

4.    Ships or transports cigarettes or other tobacco products into the city and borough.

B.    Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this chapter, the taxpayer shall be those persons described in this section and no others.

(Ord. 05-37 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


4.26.050 Exemptions.

A.    The tax imposed under this chapter does not apply to cigarettes and other tobacco products if the United States Constitution or other federal laws prohibit the levying of this tax on such products by the city and borough.

B.    Provided all persons otherwise subject to this chapter comply with its requirements, the tax imposed under this chapter does not apply to cigarettes and other tobacco products:

1.    Brought into or acquired in the city and borough;

2.    Transported outside of the city and borough; and

3.    Which are for resale outside the city and borough by a merchant with an Alaska State business license carrying an Alaska State tobacco endorsement thereon.

(Ord. 05-37 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


4.26.060 Exemption cards.

A.    Except as otherwise provided herein, no person may acquire cigarettes or other tobacco products in the city and borough exempt of the tax unless that person has been issued an exemption card in accordance with this chapter. No licensee shall claim any exemption under this chapter unless cigarettes or other tobacco products for which an exemption is claimed have been sold or transferred to a person presenting a valid and current exemption card issued by the department in accordance with this chapter prior to such sale or transfer.

1.    Any person with an active physical business presence within the city and borough, including a licensee, may apply for an exemption card under this section as an agent for merchants whose principal places of business are located outside of the city and borough, and who acquire from an agent cigarettes or other tobacco products exempt from the tax imposed under this chapter, provided each merchant has a valid Alaska State business license with a tobacco endorsement and the line of business code or equivalent thereon.

2.    A merchant acquiring cigarettes and other tobacco products through an agent under this section shall be considered an exemption cardholder for all purposes under this chapter.

3.    A person or licensee issued an exemption card as an agent under this section shall comply with all provisions of this chapter except the agent shall not be required to maintain records to prove that cigarettes and other tobacco products for which an exemption is claimed under the agent’s exemption card have been resold outside of the city and borough by the merchant. Violation of any provision of this chapter relating to exemption cardholders by a licensee as agent for a merchant shall be grounds for revocation of the licensee’s license issued under this chapter.

4.    Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in or implied by other provisions of this chapter, the licensee shall be and remain the taxpayer liable for the payment of taxes due under this chapter.

B.    Application for an exemption card is restricted to persons with an active physical business presence within the city and borough acting as an agent for merchants whose principal places of business are located outside of the city and borough, shall be on a form provided by the finance department, and shall include the following information and such other information as the finance department may require:

1.    The applicant’s name and address;

2.    A copy of the applicant’s current Alaska State business license, including a tobacco endorsement and the line of business code or equivalent; and

3.    The merchant names and locations where cigarettes and tobacco products will be sold.

C.    All exemption card holders must maintain a valid, current business license, with a tobacco endorsement and line of business code or equivalent, issued by the state of Alaska.

D.    Each exemption card, unless suspended or revoked by the finance department, is valid from its date of issue until the end of that calendar year and may be renewed each year upon application and payment of the fee to the finance department.

E.    The department may suspend, revoke or refuse to issue an exemption card under this section for any violation of or failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter by agent or cardholder, including any act or omission by such person which withholds, misstates or provides false or misleading information required by the finance department.

(Ord. 05-37 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


4.26.070 License required for dealers in cigarettes or tobacco products— Issuance.

A.    No person may sell, purchase, possess or acquire cigarettes or tobacco products in the borough as a manufacturer, distributor, direct-buying retailer, vending machine operator or buyer without a license issued under this chapter.

B.    The department, upon application and payment of the fee, shall issue a license to each manufacturer, distributor, direct-buying retailer, vending machine operator or buyer. A copy of the applicant’s current borough business license is required and must accompany the application. The application must include the following information:

1.    The applicant’s name and address;

2.    The name under which the cigarette or tobacco products business will be conducted;

3.    The applicant’s cigarette or tobacco products business categories as a manufacturer, distributor, direct-buying retailer, vending machine operator or buyer;

4.    In the case of a vending machine operator, the number of vending machines which will be operated; and

5.    Other information required on the department’s application form.

C.    The department may refuse to issue a license if there is reasonable cause to believe that the applicant has willfully withheld information requested to determine the applicant’s eligibility to receive a license, or if there is reasonable cause to believe that information submitted in the application is false or misleading and is not made in good faith.

D.    A license required by this chapter is in addition to any other license required by law.

E.    A license issued under this chapter shall include:

1.    The name and address of the licensee;

2.    The type of business to be conducted;

3.    The address at which the business is conducted; and

4.    The years for which the license is issued.

(Ord. 05-37 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


4.26.080 License fee.

For each license issued under this chapter, and for each renewal, the fee is one hundred dollars. (Ord. 05-37 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


4.26.090 Expiration and renewal of licenses.

A license issued under this chapter expires on December 31st of each respective year. A licensee, on application to the department accompanied by the renewal fee, may, before the expiration of the license, renew the license for two years from the expiration date of the license. If the licensee moves the business to another location within the borough, the licensee shall, upon application to the department, be reissued a license for the new location for the balance of the unexpired term. A person whose license is lost, stolen or defaced shall immediately file an application with the department for reissuance of the license for the balance of the unexpired term. (Ord. 05-37 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


4.26.100 Transfer of license.

A license issued under this chapter is not assignable or transferable. However, in the case of death, bankruptcy, receivership on incompetency of the licensee, or if the business of the licensee is transferred to another person by operation of law, the department may in its discretion extend the license for a limited time to the executor, administrator, trustee or receiver, or the transferee of the licensee. (Ord. 05-37 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


4.26.110 Refund of tax or license fee.

A.    The department shall not refund the license fee paid pursuant to this chapter upon the surrender or revocation of a license after the beginning of the license year. Upon application, the department will refund a license fee that is paid or collected in error.

B.    If a remittance by a licensee exceeds the amount due, and the department, on audit of the account in question, is satisfied that this is the case, the department shall, upon written request of the licensee, refund the excess to the licensee without interest.

C.    Any claim for refund filed more than one year after the due date of the tax is forever barred.

(Ord. 05-37 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


4.26.120 Display of license—Surrender of license—Suspension or revocation of license.

A.    A license issued under this chapter must be prominently displayed at the licensee’s place of business.

B.    A licensee shall surrender a license within ten days after:

1.    A revocation of a license;

2.    A cessation of business;

3.    A change of ownership of; or

4.    A change of a place of business.

C.    The department may suspend or revoke a license issued under this chapter:

1.    For violation of this chapter or a regulation of the city and borough adopted pursuant to this chapter; or

2.    If a licensee ceases to act in the capacity for which the license was issued.

D.    No person whose license is suspended or revoked shall sell cigarettes or tobacco products or permit cigarettes or tobacco products to be sold during the period of the suspension or revocation on the premises occupied or controlled by that person. No disciplinary proceeding or action is barred or abated by the expiration, transfer, surrender, renewal or extension of a license issued under this chapter.

(Ord. 05-37 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


4.26.125 Tax returns.

A.    On or before the last day of each calendar month, a licensee shall submit to the department a tax return, upon forms provided by the department, for each license, and submit payment for the taxes due.

1.    The return shall be signed under penalty of perjury by the licensee or his agent and must include:

a.    The name and address of the licensee;

b.    The name and address of the person filing the return, if different from the licensee;

c.    The number of the license issued under this chapter;

d.    The name under which the cigarette or tobacco business is being conducted;

e.    The number of cigarettes manufactured, brought into or acquired in the city and borough during the preceding month from any source whatsoever;

f.    The wholesale price of all tobacco products brought into or acquired in the city and borough during the preceding month from any source whatsoever;

g.    The names of persons from whom cigarettes and other tobacco products were brought into or acquired in the city and borough during the preceding month from any source whatsoever;

h.    The number of cigarettes brought into or acquired in the city and borough from each person named in subsection (A)(1)(g) of this section;

i.    Deductions claimed for the number of cigarettes and the wholesale price of other tobacco products for which exemptions are claimed under this chapter;

j.    Deductions claimed for the number of cigarettes and the wholesale price of other tobacco products, specified in the return in response to subsections (A)(1)(e) and (f) of this section, for which the tax has been paid previously by another person;

k.    The amount of tax due on the nonexempt cigarettes manufactured, brought into or acquired in the city and borough during the preceding month, and the amount of tax due based on the wholesale price of nonexempt other tobacco products manufactured, brought into or acquired in the city and borough during the preceding month; and

l.    Other information and supporting documentation which may be required by the department with the return.

B.    Each licensee shall report the cigarette and other tobacco product sales for which an exemption is claimed as a deduction on its monthly tax return to the department and shall provide a copy of an invoice or other document satisfactory to the department supporting each sale to a cardholder.

C.    A tax return must be filed even if there were no cigarettes or tobacco products manufactured, brought into or acquired in the borough during the preceding month.

D.    The taxes imposed under this chapter and the return required by this section must be received by the department or postmarked on or before the last day of each calendar month following the month covered by the return.

(Ord. 05-37 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


4.26.130 Involuntary returns.

If a licensee fails to file a return as required by this chapter, or when the department finds that a return is not supported by the records to be maintained pursuant to this chapter, the department may prepare and file a return on behalf of the licensee. Involuntary returns filed under this section may be premised upon any information that is available to the department, including, among other things, comparative data for similar businesses. A licensee for whom an involuntary return is filed under this section shall be subject to liability for the tax stated in the return, as well as subject to the penalties and interest provided for in this chapter. A return prepared by the department is, prima facie, good and sufficient for all legal purposes. However, nothing prevents the licensee from presenting evidence on an appeal to rebut the presumed sufficiency of a return prepared by the department, nor does the presumption of sufficiency alter the parties’ respective burdens of proof once the licensee has presented evidence to rebut that presumption. (Ord. 05-37 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


4.26.135 Amended tax returns.

A.    Any tax return filed hereunder may be amended by the licensee within one year after the due date of the tax return being amended. No amendment by the licensee shall be allowed after this one-year period.

B.    Any tax return prepared and filed by the department on behalf of the licensee may be amended by the licensee within one year of the date filed by the department. No amendment by the licensee shall be allowed after this one-year period.

(Ord. 05-37 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


4.26.140 Application of payments.

Any payment submitted to the department for any taxes, penalties, interest or cost due under any provision of this chapter or any return or any finding or determination by the department under this chapter shall be credited to the monthly tax period for which remitted first to the payment of costs and then to penalties, interest and taxes, in that order. (Ord. 05-37 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


4.26.145 Prohibited acts and penalties.

A.    No person in violation of or without complying with the provisions of this chapter may:

1.    Import cigarettes or other tobacco products into the city and borough;

2.    Sell, transfer or acquire cigarettes or other tobacco products in the city and borough; or

3.    Participate in the importation into the city and borough or in the sale, transfer or acquisition within the city and borough of cigarettes or other tobacco products.

B.    A penalty of six percent of the taxes due shall be incurred automatically when a person fails to pay the full amount of the tax due under this chapter within seven calendar days following its due date. An additional penalty of six percent of the taxes due shall be incurred automatically when a person fails to file a tax return or report within seven calendar days following its due date under this chapter. If a person fails to pay the full amount of the tax due and/or file a tax return or report required under this chapter within sixteen calendar days after its due date, the six percent penalties incurred above shall be increased automatically to fifteen percent. The penalty shall be computed on the unpaid balance of the tax liability as determined by the department.

1.    Notice of the penalties incurred and to be incurred shall be given to the person responsible for payment of the taxes or for filing the return or report when such tax payment or return or report is delinquent for seven calendar days after its due date.

2.    The penalties provided for in this section shall be in addition to all other penalties and interest provided for under this chapter.

C.    If a properly filed amended return reduces the total tax liability or the tax required to be paid, or the department reduces the tax liability, the related penalty will be reduced accordingly.

D.    All penalties and remedies enumerated in this chapter are cumulative.

E.    Unless otherwise provided in this section, any person who violates or fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be personally liable for all costs, interest, penalties and taxes due under this chapter plus a penalty equal to thirty percent of the tax due. For good cause shown, the chief fiscal officer may waive or reduce all or part of any penalty imposed under this subsection.

(Ord. 05-37 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


4.26.150 Civil fraud.

A.    A civil fraud penalty may be assessed against a person in addition to a penalty for failure to file or failure to pay.

B.    If it is determined by the department that a tax deficiency or part of a tax deficiency is due to fraud, then a penalty will be added to the tax. The penalty is fifty percent of the deficiency due or five hundred dollars, whichever is greater. The penalty is computed on the total amount of the deficiency due.

C.    Fraud is the intentional misrepresentation of a material fact with the intent to evade payment of tax which the person is believed to owe. The person must have had knowledge of its falsity and intended that it be acted upon or accepted as the truth.

D.    To establish civil fraud, the department must prove by clear and convincing evidence that:

1.    The tax liability was understated; and

2.    The understatement was the result of an intent to evade tax.

E.    An intent to evade tax may be demonstrated by any relevant evidence, including but not limited to the following:

1.    The person has provided false explanations regarding understated or omitted acquisitions of cigarettes or tobacco products;

2.    The person has provided falsified or incomplete source documents;

3.    The person has not justified an omission or understatement of a significant amount of acquisitions of cigarettes or tobacco products; or

4.    The person has substantially overstated a deduction and has failed to justify the overstatement.

(Ord. 05-37 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


4.26.155 Tax lien.

A.    If any person who is liable to pay a tax or license fee under this chapter neglects or refuses to pay the tax or licensee fee after demand, the amount, including interest, additional amounts, or assessable penalty together with costs, is a lien in favor of the borough upon all property and rights to property, real or personal, belonging to that person.

B.    The lien imposed by this section arises upon delinquency and continues until the amount is paid or a judgment against the person arising out of the liability is satisfied.

C.    A lien arising out of a tax due under this chapter, including the penalties and interest on the tax, is, subject to AS 29.45.300, a lien prior, paramount and superior to all other liens, mortgages, hypothecation, conveyances and assignments, upon all real and personal property of the person liable for the tax and upon all the real and personal property used with the permission of the owner to carry on the business which is subject to the tax.

D.    The lien on personal and real property may be enforced as provided in AS 29.45.300 through 29.45.480 for enforcement of real and personal property tax liens.

(Ord. 05-37 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


4.26.160 Interest on unpaid tax.

In addition to any penalties imposed by this chapter, interest at the rate of twelve percent per annum shall be charged on the unpaid balance of delinquent taxes. (Ord. 05-37 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


4.26.165 Taxpayer, licensee, cardholder, or other person remedies.

A.    Any person aggrieved by any action of the department in issuing, suspending, revoking or refusing to issue any license or exemption card under this chapter or in fixing the amount of taxes, penalties, interest or costs under this chapter may apply to the department and request a hearing within thirty days from the date the department mails the notice of the department’s action. Upon timely application under this subsection for a hearing, the chief fiscal officer (the hearing officer) shall hold a hearing to determine whether a correction is warranted. Hearings before the chief fiscal officer under this subsection may, at the option of the chief fiscal officer, be conducted by an administrative hearing officer designated by the chief fiscal officer. If the chief fiscal officer elects to refer the matter to an administrative hearing officer, the hearing officer shall conduct the hearing and prepare findings and conclusions. These findings and conclusions must be forwarded to the chief fiscal officer for adoption, rejection, or modification and issuance of a final order or decision by the chief fiscal officer. An application for a hearing must notify the department of the specific action complained of and amount of tax, interest, cost or penalty contested and the reason it is contested. After receipt of a written decision by the department, a person may appeal to the superior court of the first judicial district in accordance with the Alaska Rules of Appellate Procedure. The person shall be given access to the department’s file in the matter for preparation of the appeal.

B.    A request for appeal is filed on the date it is personally delivered, or if delivered to the department by the United States Postal Service, the date of the postmark stamped on the properly addressed cover in which the request is mailed. If the due date falls on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, the due date is the next working day. A current mailing address must be provided to the department with the request for appeal, and any change in mailing address after the request for appeal is filed must be reported to the department.

C.    If the notice to the person pursuant to subsection A of this section shows an amount due the department, the uncontested portion of the amount due must be paid within thirty days after the date of the notice. If the uncontested amount is not paid within thirty days, collection action will be taken on that amount even if the person has filed a request for appeal. Payment of the total amount due may be made at any time before the hearing. If the department has reason to believe that collection of the total amount due might be jeopardized by delay, immediate payment of the total amount will be demanded and the department may pursue any collection remedies provided by law. Payment in full does not affect the person’s right to a hearing.

D.    If a person requests a hearing and fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing office may issue a decision without taking evidence from that person, unless that person shows reasonable cause for failure to appear within seven days after the date scheduled for the hearing.

E.    Taxes, license fees, penalties and interest declared to be due in the final administrative decision must be paid within thirty days after the date of the decision, or a bond must be filed with the court in accordance with Alaska Rules of Appellate Procedure. 

(Ord. 15-15 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 05-37 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


4.26.170 Reports by manufacturers.

A.    No later than the end of each calendar month, a manufacturer shall submit a report to the department stating:

1.    A list of the tobacco products, the quantity and their wholesale price and the number of cigarettes which were brought into the city and borough from the manufacturer during the preceding month;

2.    The name and address of those persons bringing cigarettes and tobacco products into the borough from the manufacturer during the preceding month; and

3.    A list of the quantity of tobacco products, the wholesale price, and the number of cigarettes brought from the manufacturer into the borough by each person named in subsection (A)(2) of this section.

(Ord. 05-37 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


4.26.175 Inspection and maintenance of documents and records.

A.    Every person subject to this chapter shall keep a complete and accurate record of all cigarettes and other tobacco products manufactured, purchased, sold, brought into, transported outside of or acquired in the city and borough by such person.

1.    Except in the case of a manufacturer, the records shall include a statement containing the name and address of the person from whom cigarettes or other tobacco products were purchased or acquired, the date of delivery, the quantity of cigarettes and other tobacco products, the trade name and brand, and the price paid for other tobacco products purchased.

2.    Each invoice or other documentation of the sale of cigarettes or other tobacco products within the city and borough shall state whether the tax imposed under this chapter has been paid.

3.    Persons subject to this chapter shall keep such other documents and records as the department prescribes.

4.    All documents and records required by this section shall be preserved by persons subject to this chapter for three years. All records and documents required by this chapter to be kept or retained are subject to inspection within the city and borough upon demand by the department.

B.    A licensee transferring or selling cigarettes or other tobacco products to a cardholder must keep a record of cigarettes and other tobacco products transferred or sold to such person, including the serial number of the exemption card.

C.    The chief fiscal officer may, during business hours, enter the business premises of a licensee or cardholder where cigarettes or other tobacco products are kept or stored, so far as it may be necessary for the purpose of examining such products and the related business records.

(Ord. 05-37 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


4.26.180 Administrative regulations.

The finance director, or his or her designee, may adopt regulations providing for the application and interpretation of this chapter and providing methods and forms for reporting and collecting the tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 05-37 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


4.26.185 Confidential and nonconfidential tax information.

A.    The following information is publicly available information:

1.    Names and addresses of business owners who filed tax returns under this chapter;

2.    Whether a business is registered to collect taxes under this chapter in the city and borough of Sitka;

3.    Whether a business is current in filing tax returns and in remitting tax due under this chapter, and the number of returns not filed; and

4.    Names and exemption numbers of those entities which have received a tax-exempt number from the city and borough of Sitka relating to taxes due under this chapter.

B.    The city and borough of Sitka may permit any authorized representative of any federal, state or other local government agency to inspect and copy any tax returns filed and reports prepared under this chapter, if the other governmental agency provides substantially similar access to the city and borough of Sitka and if the city and borough of Sitka determines that other governmental agency provides adequate safeguards for the confidentiality of the tax returns and reports.

C.    Except as otherwise provided in this section, tax forms and their contents shall be confidential and shall not be disclosed by the finance department except:

1.    In connection with efforts by the city and borough of Sitka to collect the tax;

2.    In response to a subpoena issued by a court, state agency or governmental board or commission;

3.    In connection with legislative inquiry specifically authorized by the assembly;

4.    In connection with the city and borough of Sitka audits for purposes of verifying city and borough of Sitka accounting practices;

5.    In compilation of statistics and studies by the finance department for public distribution, so long as information from individual businesses is not identifiable as to source.

(Ord. 07-04 § 4(C), 2007.)


4.26.190 Definitions.

The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

A.    “Brought into or acquired” includes all manners, ways, and modes of bringing into or obtaining cigarettes or tobacco products in the city and borough.

B.    “Buyer” means a person who brings into or acquires in the city and borough cigarettes or other tobacco products for his own consumption from any source other than a manufacturer, distributor, direct-buying retailer or retailer.

C.    “Cardholder or exemption cardholder” means a person in whose name a valid and current exemption card has been issued by the department.

D.    “Chief fiscal officer” means the finance director of the city and borough or his designee.

E.    “Cigarette” means a roll for smoking of any size or shape, made wholly or partly of tobacco, whether the tobacco is flavored, adulterated, or mixed with another ingredient, if the wrapper or cover of the roll is made of paper or a material other than tobacco.

F.    “City and borough” means the city and borough of Sitka, Alaska.

G.    “Department” means the finance department of the city and borough.

H.    “Direct-buying retailer” means a person who is engaged in the sale of the cigarettes or other tobacco products at retail in the city and borough, and who brings or causes them to be brought into the city and borough.

I.    “Distributor” means a person who brings cigarettes or other tobacco products or causes them to be brought into the city and borough, and who sells or distributes them to others for resale in the city and borough.

J.    “Exemption card” means a municipal cigarette and tobacco products exemption card issued under this chapter.

K.    “Inventory count” means the effective date and details of a count by description, including the trade name and brand, purchase price and total quantity on hand of all cigarettes and other tobacco products. Detail must be subtotaled and distinguished between cigarettes and other tobacco products which are taxable and cigarettes and other tobacco products which were acquired exempt of the city and borough excise tax under this chapter.

L.    “Licensee” means a person licensed under this chapter.

M.    “Manufacturer” means a person who makes, fashions or produces cigarettes or other tobacco products for sale to distributors or other persons within the city and borough.

N.    “Other tobacco products” means:

1.    A cigar;

2.    A cheroot;

3.    A stogie;

4.    A perique;

5.    Snuff and snuff flour;

6.    Smoking tobacco, including granulated, plug-cut, crimp-cut and ready-rubbed tobacco, and any form of tobacco suitable for smoking in a pipe or cigarette;

7.    Chewing tobacco, including cavendish, twist, plug, or scrap tobacco and tobacco suitable for chewing; or

8.    An article or product made of tobacco or a tobacco substitute, but not including a cigarette as defined in this section or a tobacco substitute prescribed by a licensed physician.

O.    “Person” includes an individual, company, partnership, joint venture, joint agreement, association (mutual or otherwise), corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver or trustee, syndicate, or political subdivision of this state, or combination acting as a unit, including individuals who are employees or officers of any of the such entities who are under a duty to perform an act concerning which a violation of this chapter could occur. It is the intent of this chapter that such persons be personally liable for unremitted taxes.

P.    “Place of business” means a place where cigarettes or other tobacco products are sold, or where they are brought or kept for the purpose of sale or consumption, including a vessel, vehicle, airplane or train.

Q.    “Purchase” means the acquisition of ownership or possession of cigarettes or other tobacco products from any source.

R.    “Record” means a group of logically related fields of information concerning events effecting an organization, which is an integral part of an accounting information system, where separate, identifiable transaction data is entered as historical data.

S.    “Retail” means a sale to a consumer or to any person for any purpose other than for resale.

T.    “Retailer” means a person in the borough who is engaged in the business of selling cigarettes or other tobacco products at retail.

U.    “Sale” includes a sale, barter, exchange and every other manner of transferring the ownership of personal property.

V.    “Tax” means the cigarette and other tobacco products excise tax assessed pursuant to this chapter.

W.    “Tax return” means the monthly report to be submitted to the department as required by this chapter.

X.    “Vending machine operator” means a person who brings or causes cigarettes or tobacco products to be brought into the city and borough and who owns or operates a vending machine that dispenses cigarettes, whether the vending machine is installed on the person’s own premises or installed elsewhere.

Y.    “Wholesale price” means the established price for which a manufacturer sells a tobacco product to a distributor or other person, after deduction of a discount or other reduction received by the distributor for quantity or cash.

(Ord. 05-37 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


Chapter 4.28 INVESTMENT POLICY

Sections:

4.28.010    Scope.

4.28.020    Standards of care.

4.28.030    Safekeeping and custody.

4.28.040    Reporting.

4.28.045    External investment management.

4.28.050    General objectives—Pooled investments.

4.28.060    Suitable and authorized investments for pooled investments.

4.28.070    Investment parameters.

4.28.100    General objectives—Permanent fund.

4.28.110    Suitable and authorized investments for the permanent fund.

4.28.120    Assets mix policy.

4.28.130    Policy considerations.


4.28.010 Scope.

A.    This chapter applies to the investment of short-term operating funds and longer-term funds, including investment of the Permanent Fund.

B.    The city and borough will consolidate cash balances from all funds to maximize investment earnings. The activity described in the previous sentence is sometimes called “pooling of funds,” and the result is sometimes called “pooled funds” or “pooled investments.” Investment income will be allocated to the various funds based on their respective participation and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.

C.    The Permanent Fund investments will be used to maximize the investment earnings and growth of the principal.

(Ord. 01-1650 § 4(B), 2001.)


4.28.020 Standards of care.

The standards of care used for the investments of the city and borough are:

A.    Prudence. The standard of prudence to be used by the Finance Director shall be the prudent person standard and shall be applied in the context of managing an overall portfolio. The finance director acting in accordance with written procedures and this investment policy and exercising due diligence shall be relieved of personal responsibility for an individual security’s credit risk or market price changes, provided deviations from expectations are reported in a timely fashion; liquidity is maintained in accordance with this chapter; and the sale of securities is carried out in accordance with the terms of this chapter. Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for speculation, but for investment, considering the probable safety of their capital as well as the probable income to be derived.

B.    Ethics and Conflicts of Interest. The finance director and employees of the city and borough involved in the investment process shall refrain from personal business activity that could conflict with the proper execution and management of the investment program, or that could impair their ability to make impartial decisions. Employees and the finance director shall disclose any material interests in financial institutions with which they conduct business. They shall further disclose any personal financial or investment positions that could be related to the performance of the investment portfolio. Employees and the finance director shall refrain from undertaking personal investment transactions with the same individual with whom business is conducted on behalf of the city and borough.

C.    Delegation of Authority. Authority to manage the investment program is granted to the finance director. Responsibility for the operation of the investment program is hereby delegated to the finance director, who shall act in accordance with established written procedures and internal controls for the operation of the investment program consistent with this investment policy. Procedures should include references to safekeeping, deliver vs. payment, investment accounting, repurchase agreements, wire transfer agreements, and collateral/depository agreements. No person may engage in an investment transaction except as provided under the terms of this policy and procedures established by the finance director. The finance director shall be responsible for all transactions undertaken and shall establish a system of controls to regulate the activities of subordinate employees.

(Ord. 01-1650 § 4(B), 2001.)


4.28.030 Safekeeping and custody.

A.    Authorized Financial Dealers and Institutions.

1.    A list will be maintained of financial institutions authorized to provide investment services. In addition, a list also will be maintained of approved security broker/ dealers selected by creditworthiness (e.g., a minimum capital requirement of ten million dollars and at least five years of operation). This may include primary dealers or regional dealers that qualify under Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) Rule 15C3-1 (uniform net capital rule).

2.    All financial institutions and broker/dealers who desire to become qualified for investment transactions must supply the following as appropriate:

a.    Audited financial statements;

b.    Proof of Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) certification;

c.    Proof of state registration;

d.    Completed broker/dealer questionnaire;

e.    Certification of having read and understood and agreeing to comply with the city and borough’s investment policy as set out in this chapter.

3.    An annual review of the financial condition and registration of qualified financial institutions and broker/dealers will be conducted by the finance director.

B.    Internal Controls.

1.    The finance director is responsible for establishing and maintaining an internal control structure designed to ensure that the assets of the city and borough are protected from physical loss, theft or misuse. The internal control structure shall be designed to provide reasonable assurance that these objectives are met. The concept of reasonable assurance recognizes that the cost of a control should not exceed the benefits likely to be derived and that the valuation of costs and benefits requires estimates and judgments by management.

2.    Accordingly, the assembly shall establish a process for an annual independent review by an external auditor to assure compliance with policies and procedures. The internal controls shall address the following points:

a.    Control of collusion;

b.    Separation of transaction authority from accounting and record keeping;

c.    Custodial safekeeping;

d.    Avoidance of physical delivery securities;

e.    Clear delegation of authority to subordinate staff members;

f.    Written confirmation of transactions for investments and wire transfers;

g.    Development of a wire transfer agreement with the lead bank and third-party custodian.

C.    Delivery vs. Payment.

1.    All trades where applicable will be executed by delivery vs. payment (DVP) to ensure that securities are deposited in an eligible financial institution prior to the release of funds. Securities will be held by a third-party custodian as evidenced by safekeeping receipts.

(Amended during 3/15 supplement; Ord. 01-1650 § 4(B), 2001.) 


4.28.040 Reporting.

A.    Methods. The finance director shall prepare an investment report at least semiannually, including a management summary that provides an analysis of the status of the current investment portfolio and transactions made over the previous six months. This management summary will be prepared in a manner which will allow the city and borough to ascertain whether investment activities during the reporting period have conformed to the investment policy set out in this chapter. The report will be provided to the administrator and the assembly. The report will include the following:

1.    Listing of individual securities held at the end of the reporting period;

2.    Realized and unrealized gains or losses resulting from appreciation or depreciation by listing the cost and market value of securities (in accordance with Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB) requirements);

3.    Average weighted yield to maturity of portfolio on investments as compared to applicable benchmarks;

4.    Listing of investment by maturity date;

5.    Percentage of the total portfolio which each type of investment represents.

B.    Performance Standards. The investment portfolio will be managed in accordance with the parameters specified within this policy. A series of appropriate benchmarks shall be established against which portfolio performance shall be compared on a regular basis.

C.    Marking to Market. The market value of the portfolio shall be calculated at least semi-annually and a statement of the market value of the portfolio shall be issued at least semi-annually. This will ensure that review of the investment portfolio, in terms of value and price volatility, has been performed consistent with the Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA) Recommended Practice on “Mark-to-Market Reporting for Public Investment Portfolios.” In defining market value, considerations should be given to the GASB Statement 31 or later pronouncements. 

(Ord. 15-15 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 01-1650 § 4(B), 2001.) 


4.28.045 External investment management.

A.    The city and borough of Sitka may, upon approval of the assembly, contract with external entities for professional investment management services.

B.     All contracts entered into pursuant to this section shall comply with Title 3, Procurement, and this chapter, as applicable.

C.    All contracts entered into pursuant to this section shall provide that (1) all trades of securities will be con ducted through third-party brokerage entities unaffiliated with and independent of the investment management service provider; (2) all trades of securities will be settled by third-party financial entities unaffiliated with and independent of the investment management service provider; and (3) all securities will be held under a separate custody agreement by a third-party custodian unaffiliated with and independent of the investment management service provider.

(Ord. 17-26 § 4, 2017.) 


4.28.050 General objectives—Pooled investments.

The primary objectives, in priority order, of investment activities shall be safety, liquidity and yield:

A.    Safety. Safety of principal is the foremost objective of the investment program. Investments shall be undertaken in a manner that seeks to ensure the preservation of capital in the overall portfolio. The objective will be to mitigate credit risk and interest rate risk:

1.    Credit Risk. The city and borough will minimize credit risk, the risk of loss due to the failure of the security issuer or backer, by:

a.    Limiting investment to the safest types of securities;

b.    Pre-qualifying the financial institutions, broker/dealers, intermediaries, or advisers with which the city and borough will do business;

c.    Diversifying the investment portfolio so that potential losses on individual securities will be minimized.

2.    Interest Rate Risk. The city and borough will minimize the risk that the market value of securities in the portfolio will fall due to changes in general interest rates, by:

a.    Structuring the investment portfolio so that securities mature to meet cash requirements for ongoing operations, thereby avoiding the need to sell securities on the open market prior to maturity;

b.    Investing operating funds primarily in shorter-term securities, money market mutual funds or similar investment pools.

B.    Liquidity. The investment portfolio shall remain sufficiently liquid to meet all operating requirements that may be reasonably anticipated. This is accomplished by structuring the portfolio so that securities mature concurrent with cash needs to meet anticipated demands (static liquidity). Furthermore, since all possible cash demands cannot be anticipated, the portfolio should consist largely of securities with active secondary or resale markets (dynamic liquidity). A portion of the portfolio also may be placed in money market mutual funds or local government investments pools which offer same-day liquidity for short-term funds.

C.    Yield. The investment portfolio shall be designed with the objective of attaining a market rate of return throughout budgetary and economic cycles, taking into account the investment risk constraints and liquidity needs. Return on investment is of secondary importance compared to the safety and liquidity objectives described above. The core of investments are limited to relatively low risk securities in anticipation of earning a fair return relative to the risk being assumed. Securities shall not be sold prior to maturity with the following exceptions:

1.    A security with declining credit may be sold early to minimize loss of principal.

2.    A security swap would improve the quality, yield or target duration in the portfolio.

3.    Liquidity needs of the portfolio require that the security be sold.

(Ord. 01-1650 § 4(B), 2001.) 


4.28.060 Suitable and authorized investments for pooled investments.

A.    As investment types consistent with the GFOA Policy Statement on State and Local Laws Concerning Investment Practices, the following investments are permitted by this chapter for pooled investments and are those defined by state and local law where applicable:

1.    United States government obligations, United States government agency obligations, and United States government instrumentality obligations, which have a liquid market with a readily determinable market value;

2.    Certificates of deposit and other evidences of deposit at financial institutions, bankers’ acceptances and commercial paper, rated in the highest tier (e.g., A-1, P-1, F-1 or D-l or higher) by a nationally recognized rating agency;

3.    Investment-grade obligations of state and local governments and public authorities;

4.    Repurchase agreements whose underlying purchased securities consist of United States Treasury securities;

5.    Money market mutual funds regulated by the Securities and Exchange Commission and whose portfolios consist only of dollar-denominated securities; and

6.    Local government investment pools, either state-administered or through joint powers statutes and other intergovernmental agreement legislation.

B.    Authorized investments are as follows:

1.    United States Treasury securities;

2.    Bankers’ acceptances;

3.    Debt securities of the city and borough;

4.    Repurchase Agreements. All investments in repurchase agreements must be fully collateralized at one hundred and two percent of the amount of the investment with United States Treasury securities held in trust under a custody and safekeeping arrangement at a third party financial institution. In addition, a master repurchase agreement must be executed for each separate co-party with whom an investment in a repurchase agreement is made;

5.    Corporate Debt Securities. Investments in short-term and long-term debt securities must be rated AA- or better by a nationally recognized rating firm;

6.    Real Estate Mortgage Investment Conduits (REMIC) securities classified as pass-through mortgage securities. Investments made in REMICs are restricted to obligations issued by the Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMA), Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA), or Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (FHLMC);

7.    Commercial Paper. Investments made in short term commercial promissory notes (commercial paper) must be rated Al/P1 or better by a nationally recognized rating firm. In addition, the long term credit rating of the issuing organization must be at A- or better.

8.    Certificates of Deposit. Investment made in certificates of deposit must be made with banks which are members of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and must be insured by the FDIC up to an aggregate of one hundred thousand dollars. Any investments made in certificates of deposit over an aggregate amount of one hundred thousand dollars with any financial institution insured by the FDIC must be collateralized at one hundred and two percent of the amount of the investment with United States Treasury securities held in trust under a custody and safekeeping arrangement at a third party financial institution;

9.    Debt Securities of State and Local Governmental Entities. Investments in debt securities must be rated AA- or better by a nationally recognized rating firm;

10.    Money Market Mutual Funds. Investments made in money market mutual funds must be made with funds which invest in securities not otherwise prohibited by this policy. Such funds must maintain a stable one dollar share price at all times;

11.    Shares of the Alaska Municipal League Investment Pool (AMLIP). An amount not to exceed ten percent of the total pooled investments may be invested in shares of the Alaska Municipal League investment pool.

C.    Investment restrictions and prohibited financial transactions. Investments of the pooled investments of the city and borough are restricted, as follows:

1.    Investments in any security with a variable or floating interest rate are prohibited.

2.    Investments may not be invested in securities which are termed “Private Placements.”

3.    If a debt security which was of an acceptable credit rating at the time of purchase has the rating subsequently downgraded at a later date, the debt security can be retained in the portfolio as long as the revised credit rating is not lower than one grade below the minimum allowable credit rating for purchase. If such a security is subsequently downgraded again, or placed on credit watch for further downgrade, it will be reviewed by the investment committee to determine the action needed to prevent further losses by said security.

4.    The finance director may not participate in any financial transactions or practices which would have the effect of leveraging the portfolio. These prohibited financial transactions and practices include purchasing on margin, borrowing money for the expressed purpose of investing, and engaging in reverse repurchase agreements.

(Amended during 3/15 supplement; Ord. 01-1650 § 4(B), 2001.) 


4.28.070 Investment parameters.

A.    Diversification. The investments shall be diversified by:

1.    Limiting investments to avoid over-concentration in securities from a specific issuer or business sector (excluding United States Treasury securities);

2.    Limiting investment in securities that have higher credit risks;

3.    Investing in securities with varying maturities;

4.    Continuously investing a portion of the portfolio in readily available funds such as local government investment pools (LGIPs), money market funds or overnight repurchase agreements to ensure that appropriate liquidity is maintained in order to meet ongoing obligations.

B.    Maximum Maturities.

1.    To the extent possible, the city and borough shall attempt to match its investments with anticipated cash flow requirements. Unless matched to a specific cash flow, the city and borough will not directly invest in securities maturing or having an average life of ten years or longer from the date of purchase or in accordance with state and local statutes and ordinances. The city and borough shall adopt weighted average maturity or life limitations of five years, consistent with the investment objectives.

2.    Reserve funds and other funds with longer-term investment horizons may be invested in securities exceeding ten years if the maturity of such investments are made to coincide as nearly as practicable with the expected use of funds. The intent to invest in securities with longer maturities shall be disclosed in writing to the assembly.

3.    Because of inherent difficulties in accurately forecasting cash flow requirements, a portion of the portfolio should be continuously invested in readily available funds such as local government investment pools (LGIPs), money market funds or overnight repurchase agreements to ensure that appropriate liquidity is maintained to meet ongoing obligations.

(Ord. 01-1650 § 4(B), 2001.)


4.28.100 General objectives—Permanent fund.

The investment objective is to grow the principal of the permanent fund to provide an ever increasing income stream to the Sitka general fund in perpetuity as outlined in Section 11.16 of the Home Rule Charter of the City and Borough of Sitka. The permanent fund investment policy embraces the total return concept. The following formula summarizes the factors involved in the permanent fund investment program: Real assets growth rate equals total investment return less inflation less transfers to general fund. The primary objectives, in priority order, of investment activities shall be growth, income and safety:

A.    Growth. The permanent fund should provide for growth of the fund through investment in assets that have the probability of appreciating in value.

B.    Income. The permanent fund should produce sufficient current and continuing income from investment returns to support the transfers to the general fund. The formula for transfers to the general fund is documented in Subsections 11.16(b) and (c) of the Home Rule Charter of the City and Borough of Sitka.

C.    Safety. The finance director shall place sufficient limitations on risks associated with the implementation of the total return objectives through the diversification across asset categories and the setting of specific quality standards.

(Ord. 01-1650 § 4(B), 2001.)


4.28.110 Suitable and authorized investments for the permanent fund.

A.    Authorized investments in the permanent fund are as follows:

1.    The authorized investments listed in Section 4.28.060(B) for pooled investments.

2.    Mutual funds which are invested in corporate equity securities. The equity securities within the mutual funds will be broadly diversified across all sectors.

3.    Exchange traded funds (ETFs).

B.    Investment Restrictions and Prohibited Financial Transactions. Investments of the permanent fund are restricted as follows:

1.    Investments in any security with a variable or floating interest rate are prohibited.

2.    Investments may not be invested in securities which are termed “Private Placements.”

3.    If a debt security which was of an acceptable credit rating at the time of purchase has the rating subsequently downgraded at later date, the debt security can be retained in the portfolio as long as the revised credit rating is not lower than one grade below the minimum allowable credit rating for purchase. If such a security is subsequently downgraded again, or placed on credit watch for further downgrade, it will be reviewed by the investment committee to determine the action needed to prevent further losses by the security.

4.    The mutual funds will be reviewed by the investment committee semiannually to assure that the funds match the benchmarks set for each category.

5.    The finance director may not participate in any financial transactions or practices which would have the effect of leveraging the portfolio. These prohibited financial transactions and practices include purchasing on margin, borrowing money for the expressed purpose of investing, and engaging in reverse repurchase agreements.

(Ord. 15-38 § 4, 2015; Ord. 01-1650 § 4(B), 2001.)


4.28.120 Assets mix policy.

The management of the Sitka Permanent Fund shall employ a total return investment strategy in its choice of investments for the permanent fund and shall have discretion to change the asset mix and composition of the portfolio to maximize return, subject to the following broad restrictions:

A.    The overall benchmark percentage of equities contained in mutual funds, or exchange traded funds, owned by the permanent fund shall be sixty-five percent of the total market value of the fund and shall fall within a range of fifty-five to seventy-five percent of the total market value of the fund.

B.    The overall benchmark percentage of debt and cash equivalent investments owned by the permanent fund shall be thirty-five percent of the total market value of the fund and shall fall within a range of twenty-five to forty-five percent of the total market value of the fund.

C.    Sub-allocations within asset classes shall be determined by the investment committee, as necessary and appropriate, and shall be recommended to the assembly for adoption by resolution.

D.    No prohibited investments as defined and set forth in Section 4.28.110 shall be made.

(Ord. 16-24 § 4, 2016: Ord. 01-1650 § 4(B), 2001.)


4.28.130 Policy considerations.

A.    Exemption. Any investment currently held that does not meet the guidelines of this policy shall be exempted from the requirement of this policy. At maturity or liquidation, such monies shall be reinvested only as provided by this policy.

B.    Amendments. The investment policy shall be reviewed on an annual basis. Any changes must be approved by the assembly of the city and borough.

C.    Transition Plan. The finance director using prudent methods will gradually move toward the target asset mix over a three-year period. The transition will be reviewed by the investment committee semi-annually.

(Ord. 01-1650 § 4(B), 2001.)


Chapter 4.32 DEBT SERVICE PRIORITY

Sections:

4.32.010    Debt service priority.


4.32.010 Debt service priority.

All municipal tax revenues, not otherwise allocated by law, shall be applied to the retirement of general obligation bonds before revenues may be appropriated to any other purpose. (Ord. 90-967 § 4, 1990.)


Chapter 4.35 DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS

Sections:

4.35.010    Interest rate.


4.35.010 Interest rate.

All delinquent accounts shall be subject to a monthly finance charge of one percent, or twelve percent per year, including, but not limited to, taxes, fees, harbor moorage and miscellaneous harbor billings, monthly and yearly leases if interest rate is not stated in lease, and all billings by the municipal billing clerk. (Ord. 07-22 § 4 (part), 2007.)


Chapter 4.40 UNCOLLECTABLE ACCOUNTS AND BAD DEBT WRITE-OFFS—MUNICIPAL CREDIT AND COLLECTIONS POLICY

Sections:

4.40.010    Definitions.

4.40.020    Municipal credit policy.

4.40.030    Municipal collections policy.

4.40.040    Write-off of uncollectable accounts.

4.40.050    Utility debts remain with real property.

4.40.060    Authority to offset.


4.40.010 Definitions.

A.    “Uncollectable accounts” refers to any account or debt owed the municipality which has become overdue by more than ninety days.

B.    “Collection” means any action taken by the municipality to attempt to collect a debt or account which is overdue.

C.    “Credit” means the extension of any services by the municipality to any person or entity for which a charge or fee is levied, and for which the charge or service is provided in advance of payment.

D.    “Cash-only basis” means that any goods or services provided to a citizen must be prepaid, either by credit card or by placing cash on accounts in advance of billing.

E.    “Debt” means any sum of money which a citizen of the city and borough, or customer of the municipality in some capacity, is legally obligated to pay to the city and borough for any purpose.

F.    “Good standing” shall mean that any citizen, business, or other entity doing business with the city and borough does not have an account which is overdue.

G.    “Overdue” refers to any debt owed to the city and borough of Sitka which has not been paid within thirty days of the date the payment was due. As an exception, debts owed for utility services consumed are considered overdue fifteen days after the date the payment was due.

H.    “Write-off” refers to any debt for which collection action is no longer pursued.

(Ord. 16-06S § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 95-1283 § 4 (part), 1995.)


4.40.020 Municipal credit policy.

A.    The city and borough of Sitka shall, as a basic policy, provide goods and services to its citizens in advance of payment, and bill citizens for amounts owed.

B.    If a citizen, business, or other entity has an unpaid bill which is more than one hundred twenty days old, and therefore has an overdue debt, the city and borough of Sitka may require all future business interactions between a citizen, business, or other entity to be henceforth conducted on a cash-only basis until credit is restored. Any determination to place a citizen, business or entity on a cash-only basis must be approved by the administrator. For purposes of municipal utilities and moorage, accounts will be required to be prepaid.

C.    Once revoked, credit may be restored by returning to good standing. Good standing would be achieved by both resolving all overdue accounts and by written application to the municipality. The municipality may, at its discretion, require a deposit as a condition of restoring credit.

(Ord. 16-06S § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 95-1283 § 4 (part), 1995.)


4.40.030 Municipal collections policy.

A.    The city and borough of Sitka shall take lawful actions to collect all debts owed to the municipality which have become overdue.

B.    The city and borough of Sitka shall employ progressive steps to attempt to collect debts owed to the municipality. These progressive steps may include the following:

1.    Mailing of a collection dunning letter to the last known valid address of the debtor;

2.    Mailing and physical posting of a utility disconnection notice for failure to resolve any debt owed the municipality;

3.    Physical disconnection of utilities for failure to resolve any debt owed the municipality;

4.    Forwarding of overdue accounts to a collection agency for further collection attempts;

5.    Publication on the municipal website and/or in a local newspaper of the names of residents, businesses and other entities who meet all of the following criteria: (a) have a debt or debts owed to the municipality which are overdue; (b) to whom a collection/dunning letter has been written; and (c) who have not entered into a payment plan with the municipality;

6.    Revocation of all credit by revoking the good standing of an individual, business or other entity and placing such an entity on a cash-only basis;

7.    Filing of a civil suit in the appropriate legal jurisdiction for both a judgment of indebtedness and a writ of execution;

8.    Employment of process servers to execute writs of judgment, taking all appropriate actions afforded by law to include till taps, bank account sweeps, and seizure of other collateral;

9.    Filing of foreclosure lawsuits against all real property against which a deed of trust is held.

C.    The city and borough of Sitka may, at its discretion, add collection costs to any overdue balance. As a matter of policy, collection costs will be added to all accounts turned over to a collection agency for further collection attempts.

D.    The administrator shall have the authority to approve payment plans for overdue balances owed the municipality. This authority may be delegated. This authority shall include the ability to establish repayment terms. The following criteria shall be applicable to all payment plans:

1.    A citizen, business, or entity may have only one active repayment plan at any time. Consolidation of multiple debts into repayment plans may occur at the discretion of the administrator.

2.    Any payment plan shall be for past due balances only and shall contain a provision that all new balances must be paid in full in addition to required payment per the plan.

3.    Unless unusual circumstances are present, no payment plan shall have a repayment term exceeding twelve months.

4.    For any payment plan exceeding five thousand dollars, the municipality shall, as a matter of course, require the debtor to agree to a lien on real property owned by the debtor as a condition; agree to a confession of judgment; and agree to having reasonable legal fees added to any judgment obtained by the municipality.

5.    Any uncured default on a payment plan shall constitute a reason for revocation of good standing and allow the municipality, at its discretion, to place the debtor on a cash-only basis.

(Ord. 16-06S § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 95-1283 § 4 (part), 1995.)


4.40.040 Write-off of uncollectable accounts.

A.    Unpaid debts for which more than one hundred twenty days has elapsed since the date of the bill or invoice, and which are under a cumulative amount of two hundred dollars per customer, may be written off immediately upon approval of the finance director, if they are deemed not to be cost efficient to attempt to collect on.

B.    Unpaid debts for which more than one hundred twenty days has elapsed since the date of the bill or invoice, and which are under a cumulative amount of one thousand dollars per customer, may be written off immediately upon approval of the administrator, if they are deemed not to be cost efficient to attempt to collect on.

C.    Unpaid debts for which more than one hundred twenty days has elapsed since the date of the bill or invoice, and which are over a cumulative amount of one thousand dollars per customer, may be written off immediately upon approval of the assembly.

D.    Any overdue debt which is not collected within ninety days shall, as a matter of accounting policy, be recorded against the allowance for uncollectable accounts when applicable under governmental accounting guidelines. Collection actions shall not cease, however, until the debt is collected, a statute of limitations is reached, or the debt is written off. Any debt recorded against the allowance for uncollectable accounts, which is subsequently recovered, shall as a matter of accounting policy be recorded as a recovery of bad debt.

(Ord. 16-06S § 4 (part), 2016.)


4.40.050 Utility debts remain with real property.

(Reserved.) (Ord. 16-06S § 4 (part), 2016.)


4.40.060 Authority to offset.

A.    If a resident, business, vendor, or other entity has an overdue balance owed to any department of the municipality (excluding Sitka Community Hospital), the municipality shall have the authority to offset such overdue balances against any payment to be made to such resident, business, vendor, or other entity unless otherwise prohibited by law.

B.    No offset of an overdue balance shall occur unless the resident, business, vendor, or other entity is notified in writing of the overdue balance and afforded a minimum period of ten business days to remit the overdue balance. During this ten-business-day period, the municipality will withhold payments otherwise due.

(Ord. 16-06S § 4 (part), 2016.)


Chapter 4.42 SMALL BUSINESS GUARANTEED LOAN PROGRAM

Sections:

4.42.010    Establishment.

4.42.020    Loan guarantee amounts available as expressed in dollars and in percentages of loans.

4.42.030    Eligibility for lenders to participate.

4.42.040    Eligibility of loans for guarantees.

4.42.050    Procedure for deciding upon applications for loan guarantees.

4.42.060    Disclosure to assembly of approved applications.

4.42.065    Disaster business loan guarantees.


4.42.010 Establishment.

There shall be established the small business guaranteed loan program. A majority of a committee composed of the administrator and two members of the long-range planning and economic development commission designated by that commission is authorized to issue on behalf of the city and borough guarantees of private-sector loans to small businesses under the conditions set out in this chapter. (Ord. 03-1719 § 4 (part), 2003.)


4.42.020 Loan guarantee amounts available as expressed in dollars and in percentages of loans.

The maximum loan eligible for participation in the program established by this chapter is seventy-five thousand dollars. The maximum amount that may be guaranteed by the city and borough under this chapter is thirty-seven thousand five hundred dollars. The maximum percentage of a loan that may be guaranteed by the city and borough under this chapter is seventy-five percent. The relationships between the loan guarantee amounts available as expressed in percentages of the loan are shown in the following table:

	Loan Amount	Guarantee Percentage	Maximum Guarantee	Disaster Loan Maximum Guarantee

	Less than $15,000	75%	$11,250	$11,250

	$15,000 – less than $35,000	70%	$24,500	$26,250

	$35,000 – less than $55,000	60%	$33,000	$41,250

	$55,000 – $75,000 	50%	$37,500	$56,250

(Ord. 05-01 § 4 (part), 2005; Ord. 03-1719 § 4 (part), 2003.)


4.42.030 Eligibility for lenders to participate.

A lender interested in making loans guaranteed under this chapter shall submit to the administrator a letter of interest describing the lender’s qualifications to make loans to businesses based within the city and borough. No loan guarantee shall be made under this chapter until the administrator has approved in writing the lender’s application to participate in the program established under this chapter. (Ord. 03-1719 § 4 (part), 2003.)


4.42.040 Eligibility of loans for guarantees.

A lender who has been approved to participate in this program under Section 4.42.030 and desires to have a loan considered for a loan guarantee under this chapter shall submit an application to the administrator describing the loan. Such application shall include a statement signed by an officer of the lender certifying that:

A.    The loan would be for a business based in the city and borough that in the lender’s judgment carries a substantial likelihood of growth and/or future success;

B.    The loan will not be used to pay off existing debt;

C.    The loan will not be used for acquiring property to be held for investment purposes;

D.    The loan will not be used for speculative purposes;

E.    The loan will not be used for lending activities;

F.    The loan will not be used for a pyramid sales plan;

G.    The loan will not be used for illegal activities; and

H.    The loan will not be used to violate the First Amendment of the United States Constitution.

(Ord. 03-1719 § 4 (part), 2003.)


4.42.050 Procedure for deciding upon applications for loan guarantees.

A majority of the committee described in Section 4.42.010 shall review the loan application submitted by the approved lender and consult with the finance director. A majority of the committee described in Section 4.42.010 shall approve the application and issue the loan guarantee under the schedule set out in Section 4.42.020 if it meets the criteria set out in Section 4.42.040 and the finance director certifies in writing that:

A.    The funds to make the loan guarantee are available as part of funding allocations previously made by the assembly and shall be accounted for in future reports to the assembly; and

B.    The business which is the subject of the loan guarantee has all necessary licenses and permits to do business with the city and borough and does not owe any delinquent sales taxes or property taxes.

(Ord. 03-1719 § 4 (part), 2003.)


4.42.060 Disclosure to assembly of approved applications.

The identity of the lender getting the loan guarantee, the business getting the loan, the amount of the loan guarantee, and the amount of the loan shall be provided to the assembly in a writing from the administrator no later than the assembly meeting immediately following the issuance of the loan guarantee. (Ord. 03-1719 § 4 (part), 2003.)


4.42.065 Disaster business loan guarantees.

Under certain circumstances involving natural or manmade disasters, the assembly may authorize the issuance of disaster business loan guarantees. The disaster business loan guarantees will be granted in accordance with this chapter, except that all loan amounts would be guaranteed at seventy-five percent, notwithstanding any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 05-01 § 4 (part), 2005.)


Chapter 4.44 SOUTHEAST ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT FUND

Sections: 

4.44.010    Establishment.

4.44.020    Participation loans and loan guarantees to private enterprise.

4.44.030    Loans and transfers to other municipal funds.

4.44.040    Repayments and interest earnings on the fund corpus.


4.44.010 Establishment.

There shall be established a southeast economic development fund (“fund”), for qualifying loans and transfers to other municipal funds, and for financial institution participation loans to private enterprises. Loans or transfers to other municipal funds shall be for purposes of promoting the efficiency and effectiveness of municipal government, or for improvements which shall lessen rate and fee burdens on citizens. Loans to private enterprises shall be for purposes of expanding the municipality’s economic base, generating commerce external to Sitka, and creating family wage jobs in Sitka. Only the assembly can authorize any loan or transfer from this fund. (Ord. 15-27 § 4 (part), 2015: Ord. 11-02 § 4 (part), 2011.)


4.44.020 Participation loans and loan guarantees to private enterprise.

A.    Any loan or loan guarantee to a private enterprise shall be a participation loan in conjunction with a financial institution. No loans shall be made by the fund directly to a private enterprise.

B.    Proposals for participation loans or loan guarantees shall be prepared by the participating financial institution and presented to the assembly for approval by the participating institution.

C.    The municipal administrator shall be responsible for developing and administrating administrative policies governing participation loans and loan guarantees to private enterprise.

(Ord. 15-27 § 4 (part), 2015.)


4.44.030 Loans and transfers to other municipal funds.

A.    Any proposed loan or transfer from the fund to another municipal fund shall be proposed to the assembly by the administrator with justification as to the benefits to be derived from the loan or transfer. The assembly shall decide whether to approve the loan or transfer, including whether to grant the full amount requested or a lesser amount, and whether to set any conditions.

B.    Any loan from the fund to another municipal fund requires interest to be charged at a rate to be determined by the assembly. 

(Ord. 15-27 § 4 (part), 2015: Ord. 11-02 § 4 (part), 2011. Formerly 4.44.050.)


4.44.040 Repayments and interest earnings on the fund corpus.

A.    All loan repayments, including both interest principal repayments, shall be redeposited into the fund.

B.    Investment earnings on the undisbursed corpus of the fund shall be transferred to the building maintenance fund.

(Ord. 15-27 § 4 (part), 2015.)


Chapter 4.44A REQUIRED LEVELS OF CASH TO BE MAINTAINED IN THE GENERAL FUND2

Sections:

4.44A.010    Required levels of cash on hand.

4.44A.020    Restriction of general fund balance.


4.44A.010 Required levels of cash on hand.

The general fund of the city and borough of Sitka shall be required to maintain a minimum level of cash and cash equivalents in order to provide for adequate cash flow management and liquidity for the municipality.

A.    The minimum level of cash and cash equivalents to be maintained shall be equal to the total of all budgeted expenditure for the general fund for the current fiscal year, divided by four. Transfers from the general fund balance shall not be considered expenditure for the purposes of this calculation.

B.    For purposes of this chapter, cash and cash equivalents shall be defined as cash held in demand deposits, repurchase agreements as defined by Section 4.28.060(A)(4), money market mutual funds as defined by Section 4.28.060(A)(5), certificates of deposit as defined by Section 4.28.060(A)(2), and local government investment pools per Section 4.28.060(A)(6).

(Ord. 15-15 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 12-30 § 4 (part), 2012.)


4.44A.020 Restriction of general fund balance.

A portion of the general fund balance equal to the total of all budgeted expenditures for the general fund for the current fiscal year, divided by four (transfers from the general fund balance shall not be considered expenditure for the purposes of this calculation), shall be restricted as to its use in order to provide for required liquidity of the municipality and not available for appropriation without a super majority of the assembly voting in approval. An additional amount of two million dollars shall be restricted as to its use in order to provide funds for responding to an emergency and not available for appropriation without a super majority of the assembly voting in approval. (Ord. 12-30 § 4 (part), 2012.)


Chapter 4.45 LONG-TERM INFRASTRUCTURE

SINKING FUND FOR THE REPAIR AND REPLACEMENT OF GENERAL FUND MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS, STREETS, SIDEWALKS, PARKING LOTS, AND PARKS

Sections:

4.45.010    Establishment of the public infrastructure sinking fund.

4.45.020    Determination of the required balance of the public infrastructure sinking fund.

4.45.030    Assembly action.

4.45.040    Use of the sinking fund.

4.45.050    Emergency transfer of the sinking fund.


4.45.010 Establishment of the public infrastructure sinking fund.

There shall hereby be created, within the fund structure of the city and borough of Sitka, a sinking fund for the repair and replacement of general fund municipal buildings, streets, sidewalks, parking lots, and parks to be hereafter called the public infrastructure sinking fund. (Ord. 12-30 § 4 (part), 2012.)


4.45.020 Determination of the required balance of the public infrastructure sinking fund.

Within ninety days after the start of each fiscal year, the administrator shall prepare an analysis of the general fund balance with an accompanying recommendation as to an amount of the general fund balance available for potential transfer to the public infrastructure sinking fund. This analysis shall first take into account any portions of the general fund restricted by Chapter 4.44A before recommending any further amounts for potential transfer to the public infrastructure sinking fund. (Ord. 12-30 § 4 (part), 2012.)


4.45.030 Assembly action.

Within sixty days after presentation of the annual analysis by the administrator, the amount determined by the administrator shall automatically be transferred to the public infrastructure sinking fund, unless a super majority of the assembly votes to change the recommended amount. (Ord. 12-30 § 4 (part), 2012.)


4.45.040 Use of the sinking fund.

The assembly shall annually appropriate an amount from the public infrastructure sinking fund to be used exclusively for the repair and replacement of general fund municipal buildings, streets, sidewalks, parking lots, and parks as recommended by the administrator in his annual budget. (Ord. 12-30 § 4 (part), 2012.)


4.45.050 Emergency transfer of the sinking fund.

The assembly shall have the authority to transfer any portion of the public infrastructure sinking fund to the general fund in the case of an emergency threatening public health, safety, or welfare which requires use of public funds. Such a transfer shall require an approval of a super majority of the assembly. (Ord. 12-30 § 4 (part), 2012.)


TITLE 4 FOOTNOTES

1    The seasonal sales tax increase will sunset three days after the administrator certifies in writing to the assembly that either (a) any and all bonds issued and matching grant monies pledged pursuant to the ratification by the voters are entirely paid off or (b) the seasonal tax increase enacted by the ordinance codified in this section has generated (or, based on historical projections, will generate in the next succeeding quarter) sufficient revenues to pay off any and all bonds and matching grant monies issued pursuant to voter ratification, whether or not such bonds or matching grant monies have been paid off.

2    Ordinance 12-30 adds these provisions as Chapter 4.44. The chapter has been editorially renumbered to prevent duplication of numbering.


Title 5 (RESERVED)


Title 6 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 

Chapters:

6.04    Nonresident Business License

6.08    Junkyards

6.12    Mobile and Manufactured Homes and Mobile and Manufactured Home Parks

6.16    Sales on Public Property

6.19    Regulation of Commercial Operators Selling Organized Excursions or Renting Equipment for Organized Excursions 

6.20    Pawnbrokers

NOTE:    Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this title.


Chapter 6.04 NONRESIDENT BUSINESS LICENSE1

Sections:

6.04.010    Purpose.

6.04.020    License required.

6.04.030    Definitions.

6.04.040    Exception.

6.04.050    Application—Nonresident or itinerant merchant.

6.04.060    Application—Persons having no permanent business location.

6.04.070    Fee.

6.04.080    Bond.

6.04.090    Denial of license—Appeal.

6.04.100    License renewal.

6.04.110    Entry without invitation.

6.04.120    Enforcement.


6.04.010 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to establish licensing procedures for all those persons conducting business in the city and borough, in one form or another without having an established location within the city and borough, to enable the proper city and borough officials to control the collection of sales tax, where applicable, and the enforcement of other city and borough ordinances. (S.C.C. § 6-3-1.)


6.04.020 License required.

It is unlawful:

A.    For any person having no permanent business location; or

B.    For any nonresident or itinerant merchant to engage in business in the city and borough, without having first applied for and received a license so to do and paid the license fee herein provided.

Any person claiming a permanent business location shall at the request of the finance director execute an affidavit to the effect that it is his bona fide intent to remain in business in the city and borough (specifying location) for at least six months. (S.C.C. § 6-3-2.)


6.04.030 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter the following terms and phrases shall be defined as follows:

A.    “Nonresident” or “itinerant merchant” includes the terms “solicitor,” “vendor,” “auctioneer,” “peddler,” “hawker,” and “transient salesman” and mean any and all persons temporarily engaging in the sale of any goods, wares, merchandise, services, stock and bonds or other articles within the city and borough, peddled from house to house; sold upon the streets or other public places, or from any room, building, structure, lot or premises temporarily leased or rented for the purpose of carrying on such business; and any persons acting either for himself or for any other person who shall not have a permanent place of residence or business location within the city and borough;

B.    “Permanent business location” means a place of business located separate and apart from a residence with bona fide intent to continue in that location.

(S.C.C. § 6-3-3.)


6.04.040 Exception.

The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

A.    Commercial travelers taking orders for goods in the usual course of business where orders are taken solely from residents of the city and borough regularly engaged in wholesale or retail mercantile business;

B.    To nonprofit organizations making casual sales;

C.    To auctioneers who may be engaged to sell a stock or goods, wares or merchandise of a regularly established mercantile business where the same is being sold through regular process of law, or upon assignment for the benefit of the creditors of the owner of the stock of goods, wares and merchandise.

(S.C.C. § 6-3-4.)


6.04.050 Application—Nonresident or itinerant merchant.

A.    Any person desiring to engage in business as a nonresident or itinerant merchant within the city and borough shall make application in writing to the finance director for a license so to do. The application shall state the name and residence of the applicant, the place where the business is to be conducted; the nature of the goods; services, wares, merchandise and articles to be sold; the length of time for which a license is desired; and such other information as the finance director may require.

B.    The chief of police shall be informed of the application and make an investigation of the applicant. Should it be found there are pending criminal charges or his past history shows complaints by customers against his practices and performance, license shall not be issued until the chief of police issues a clearance directed to the finance director.

(S.C.C. § 6-3-5.)


6.04.060 Application—Persons having no permanent business location.

Any person desiring to engage in business within the city and borough who has not a permanent business location shall make application in writing to the finance director for a license so to do. The application shall state the name and residence of the applicant, the place where the business is to be conducted; the nature of the goods, services, ware, merchandise and articles to be sold and such other information as the finance director may require.

Persons residing permanently within the city and borough who conduct business out of their homes or other temporary locations shall be required to obtain an annual license as specified herein but the amount of the license shall be refunded when the first quarterly sales tax return is filed. No bond shall be required. Persons already in business who have filed sales tax returns for the quarter prior to February 14, 1967 are exempt from the requirement to obtain such license provided sales tax returns with proper payment are filed each quarter thereafter. (S.C.C. § 6-3-6.)


6.04.070 Fee.

The fee for such license shall be two dollars per day with a six dollar minimum or twenty-five dollars per year. (S.C.C. § 6-3-7.) 


6.04.080 Bond.

The application shall be accompanied by a bond in the amount of one hundred dollars for an annual license and fifty dollars for a license of less than a year. The bond may be cash, or a bond executed by the applicant and a surety company doing business in the state of Alaska and authorized to do business therein, or by the applicant and two or more qualified sureties who are residents of the city and borough, which bond shall be conditioned that all ordinances of the city and borough have been complied with. (Ord. 15-12 § 4, 2015: S.C.C. § 6-3-8.)


6.04.090 Denial of license—Appeal.

Any person applying for a license herein provided and complying with the provisions of this chapter, who has been denied a license by the finance director, shall have the right to appeal from the order of denial, to the assembly at any regular or special meeting thereof, and the applicant shall be entitled to a hearing before the assembly at which the assembly must either ratify or disapprove the action of the finance director. (S.C.C. § 6-3-9.)


6.04.100 License renewal.

No person shall continue to do business within the city and borough as a nonresident or itinerant merchant as defined herein after the expiration of the term of the license issued to the applicant, without having first obtained a new license for such further term, if the applicant desires to continue to do business; which new license shall be obtained only upon application and deposit of bond in the manner herein provided, and the same shall be issued only upon the same terms as provided herein. (S.C.C. § 6-3-10.)


6.04.110 Entry without invitation.

Going in and upon private residences and property in the city and borough, by nonresident or itinerant merchants not having been especially invited and requested so to do by the owners and occupants thereof for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise, newspapers and magazines or for the purpose of disposing of, peddling or hawking the same, is declared to be a common and public nuisance. A violation of the provisions of this section shall cause the violator thereof to be subject to punishment as provided in Chapter 1.12. (S.C.C. § 6-3-11)


6.04.120 Enforcement.

A.    It is unlawful for any person to violate Sections 6.04.010 through 6.04.100 hereof.

B.    All license fees, fines and forfeitures collected under the provisions of this chapter, shall be deposited by the finance director into the appropriate city and borough fund; and in addition to any penalties provided therefor, any action may be instituted by the city and borough, and in its name, for the collection of license fees and amounts due under the provisions of this chapter, which action shall be instituted and prosecuted in the manner provided by law for the institution and prosecution of civil actions; and the institution and prosecution of civil actions shall not be a bar to the criminal actions and prosecution herein provided. 

(S.C.C. § 6-3-12.)


Chapter 6.08 JUNKYARDS2

Sections:

6.08.010    Definitions.

6.08.020    Regulations.

6.08.030    Chapter compliance required.

6.08.040    Storage and fencing.

6.08.050    Certificate of approval for location—Fee.


6.08.010 Definitions.

In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:

A.    “Junk” means any secondhand and used machinery, scrap iron, copper, lead, zinc, aluminum, or other metals and includes wrecked automobiles, tools, implements, rags, used building materials, rubber and paper; and

B.    “Junkyard” means a location where junk is gathered together and stored for a commercial or public purpose.

(B.C.S. § 8.04.010.)


6.08.020 Regulations.

The planning commission may make reasonable regulations concerning the establishment, operation and maintenance of junkyards. (B.C.S. § 8.04.020.)


6.08.030 Chapter compliance required.

No person may establish, operate or maintain a commercial or public junkyard without complying with the provisions of this chapter. (B.C.S. § 8.04.030.)


6.08.040 Storage and fencing.

A.    Material shall be stored in as orderly a manner as its nature permits.

B.    Each junkyard shall be fenced sufficiently to conceal from public view the material in the junkyard.

(B.C.S. § 8.04.040.)


6.08.050 Certificate of approval for location—Fee.

A.    A person using or proposing to use a location for a commercial or public junkyard must annually obtain a certificate of approval for the location from the administrator. If the administrator denies an application for a certificate of approval, or if an interested party objects to the granting of a certificate of approval, the applicant or interested party may appeal the decision of the administrator to the assembly.

B.    In determining whether to issue or deny a certificate of approval, the administrator shall consider the following:

1.    The nature and development of surrounding property;

2.    The need to protect the local economy, adjacent land owners, and the motoring public from economically depressing and unsightly roadside locations;

3.    The proximity of churches, schools, hospitals, public buildings, recreation areas, or other places of public gathering;

4.    The sufficiency in number of other similar business establishments in the vicinity;

5.    The adequacy of fences and other types of enclosures to prevent the unsightly display of any junkyard:

6.    The health, safety and general welfare of the public; and

7.    The suitability of the applicant to establish, maintain or operate the junkyard.

C.    The fee for a certificate of approval is ten dollars per year.

(B.C.S. § 8.04.050.)


Chapter 6.12 MOBILE AND MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MOBILE AND MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS3

Sections:

6.12.010    Definitions.

6.12.020    Enforcement.

6.12.030    Permits required.

6.12.040    Mobile and manufactured home park permit—Application material required.

6.12.050    Existing mobile and manufactured home parks permitted before August 1, 2010—Design requirements.

6.12.055    New mobile and manufactured home parks permitted on or after August 1, 2010—Design requirements.

6.12.058    New and existing mobile and manufactured home parks—Design requirements.

6.12.060    Recreational vehicle parks— Design requirements.

6.12.070    Granting or rejection of permits.

6.12.080    Appeals.

6.12.100    Permit—Revocation.

6.12.110    Sanitary and health regulations.

6.12.130    Mobile and manufactured home park—Register of occupants.

6.12.135    Mobile and manufactured home park—Registered owner’s agent required.

6.12.140    Mobile home/manufactured home—Uses—Permit.

6.12.160    Mobile and manufactured home park—Numbering spaces required.

6.12.180    Reserved.

6.12.190    Use as residence or sleeping quarters.

6.12.200    Construction requirements.

6.12.210    Existing structures.


6.12.010 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, unless from the particular context it clearly appears that some other meaning is intended:

A.    “Access road” means a private road which does not extend beyond the boundaries of a mobile and manufactured home park and which provides the principal means of access to abutting individual spaces and auxiliary buildings;

B.    “Manufactured home” means a structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (“HUD”) standards, transportable in one or more sections which, in the traveling mode, is eight feet (two thousand four hundred thirty-eight millimeters) or more in width or forty feet (twelve thousand one hundred ninety-two millimeters) or more in length or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty square feet (thirty square meters) or more, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes plumbing, heating and electrical systems. “Manufactured home” shall also include any structure which meets all the requirements of this definition listed above, except the size requirements, and has a manufacturer certificate required by HUD that complies with HUD standards for a manufactured home;

C.    “Mobile home” means a structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight feet (two thousand four hundred thirty-eight millimeters) or more in width or forty feet (twelve thousand one hundred ninety-two millimeters) or more in length or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty square feet (thirty square meters) or more, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes plumbing, heating, and electrical systems;

D.    “Mobile and manufactured home park” means any park, court, parcel or tract of land designed, maintained, intended or used for the purpose of supplying a location or accommodations for more than three units that includes mobile homes and/or manufactured homes, and includes all buildings used or intended for use as a part of the equipment thereof, whether or not a charge is made for the use of the park and its facilities. A mobile and manufactured home park does not include lots on which unoccupied mobile or manufactured homes are parked for the purpose of inspection and sale;

E.    “Person” includes an individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation; whether tenant, owner, lessee, or licensee, or their heir or assign;

F.    “Play yard” means an area specifically set aside for the use of children, which area shall not be included within any mobile or manufactured home spaces;

G.    “Public street” means any street, road or highway of which the general public has the right of common enjoyment or which is publicly maintained;

H.    “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle built on a single chassis that is four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck, and is designed not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use;

I.    “Recreational vehicle park” means any park, court, parcel or tract of land designed, maintained, intended or used for the purpose of supplying a location or accommodation for recreational vehicles.

J.    “Space” means a plot of ground in a mobile and manufactured home park permitted on or after August 1, 2010, of not less than three thousand square feet of space designed for the location of at least two automobiles and only one unit.   “Space” means a plot of ground of a mobile and manufactured home park permitted prior to August 1, 2010, of not less than one thousand eight hundred square feet designed for the location of at least one automobile and only one unit;

K.    “Unit” means a mobile home or a manufactured home.

(Ord. 10-10 § 4 (part), 2010: Ord. 04-63 § 4 (part), 2004: B.C.S. § 8.08.010.)


6.12.020 Enforcement.

The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the municipal building official, who shall be appointed by the municipal administrator for such term and subject to such conditions and such rates of compensation as the municipal administrator directs. No permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a mobile and manufactured home park or mobile or manufactured home unless the plans and facilities comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 10-10 § 4 (part), 2010: Ord. 04-63 § 4 (part), 2004: B.C.S. § 8.08.020.)


6.12.030 Permits required.

No land shall be used for a mobile or manufactured home park or recreational vehicle park unless a permit is issued by the municipal building official under the terms of this chapter.

It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate, manage or maintain any mobile or manufactured home park or recreational vehicle park within the city and borough without a permit authorizing the operation of such park. (Ord. 10-10 § 4 (part), 2010: Ord. 04-63 § 4 (part), 2004: B.C.S. § 8.08.030.)


6.12.040 Mobile and manufactured home park permit—Application material required.

A complete plot plan and the following supplementary material shall be submitted to the municipal building official and the planning department, as well as the planning commission, when appropriate, for review and approval prior to the issuance of a mobile and manufactured home park permit:

A.    Applicant’s name, address and legal interest in the property;

B.    Area and dimensions of the tract of land and land uses within one hundred feet;

C.    Legal description of perimeter;

D.    Engineering plans and specifications for the proposed mobile and manufactured home park. These shall include:

1.    Number, location and size of all spaces; 

2.    Location, width and surfacing of roadways, off-street parking and walkways;

3.    Location and size of any existing or proposed buildings and structures within the mobile and manufactured home park;

4.    Methods and plans of domestic and fire protection water supply, surface drainage and erosion control, sewage disposal, electrical supply and garbage disposal; 

5.    Location of the permanent monuments required in Section 6.12.050; and

6.    Location and mapping of any portion of the property located within a federal flood hazard area according to the Flood Insurance Rate Map.

(Ord. 10-10 § 4 (part), 2010: Ord. 04-63 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 82-507 § 4 (part), 1982; B.C.S. § 8.08.040.)


6.12.050 Existing mobile and manufactured home parks permitted before August 1, 2010—Design requirements.

A.    There shall be at least one permanent monument located within the boundaries of each mobile and manufactured home park, preferably at one of the property corners. Such monument shall be of the same nature as the monuments required by other sections of this code related to platting, as defined in the presently existing sections or as defined in any future sections. Such monument shall be shown on the plot plan required by Section 6.12.040.

B.    Mobile and manufactured homes shall be parked in spaces so that a fifteen-foot front yard and ten-foot rear yard setback are observed. The side yard setback shall be no less than five feet. No mobile or manufactured home shall be placed nearer than twenty-five feet to any highway or arterial street.

C.    Play yards shall be at least one hundred square feet per unit. The play yards shall be located so that no mobile or manufactured home is more than five hundred feet from a play yard.

(Ord. 10-10 § 4 (part), 2010: Ord. 04-63 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 82-520 § 4 (part), 1982; Ord. 82-507 § 4 (part), 1982; B.C.S. § 8.08.050.)


6.12.055 New mobile and manufactured home parks permitted on or after August 1, 2010—Design requirements.

A.    There shall be one permanent monument located at each of the property corners. Such monument shall be of the same nature as the monuments required by other sections of this code related to platting, as defined in the presently existing sections or as defined in any future sections. Such monument shall be shown on the plot plan required by Section 6.12.040.

B.    Units shall be parked in spaces so that an eighteen-foot front yard and ten-foot rear yard setback are observed. The side yard setback shall be no less than five feet. No unit shall be placed nearer than twenty feet to any highway or arterial street, unless the adjacent highway or arterial street is greater than eighty feet in width, in which case no unit shall be placed nearer than ten feet. The park owner or agent shall be responsible for the proper location of each unit and shall be signatory to the required permit application.

C.    A mobile and manufactured home park shall have at least one play yard that shall contain a minimum of two thousand square feet, or two hundred square feet per unit, whichever is greater. The play yards shall be located so that no unit is more than five hundred feet from a play yard.

(Ord. 10-10 § 4 (part), 2010.)


6.12.058 New and existing mobile and manufactured home parks—Design requirements.

A.    Access roads for each unit shall have a minimum width of twenty feet to which every unit shall have direct access. Such roads shall be well maintained all-weather roads. Direct access from any public street or right-of-way to any unit within a mobile and manufactured home park shall not be permitted. Not more than two driveway entrances spaced not less than one hundred feet apart shall be permitted.

B.    No major changes or alterations shall be made to any part of the mobile and manufactured home park as outlined in an approved plan without approval by the municipal building official.

C.    Mobile and manufactured homes spaces to be located within any portion of a flood hazard area shall comply with National Flood Insurance Program requirements. The fact that the space is located within a flood hazard area shall be disclosed to the occupant along with any information such as alternate access.

(Ord. 10-10 § 4 (part), 2010.)


6.12.060 Recreational vehicle parks— Design requirements.

A permit shall be issued for a recreational vehicle park upon a showing by the applicant that the design requirements established by the city administrator have been fully complied with. (Ord. 04-63 § 4 (part), 2004: B.C.S. § 8.08.060.)


6.12.070 Granting or rejection of permits.

Whenever the application shows that the proposed mobile and manufactured home park or installation is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and any applicable zoning and health regulations, the municipal building official shall issue a permit; otherwise the application shall be rejected and the municipal building official shall state in writing the reason for such rejection. (Ord. 10-10 § 4 (part), 2010: Ord. 04-63 § 4 (part), 2004: B.C.S. § 8.08.070.)


6.12.080 Appeals.

Any person feeling aggrieved by a rejection of an application for a permit or certificate of occupancy may file an appeal in the manner provided in Section 6.12.100. (Ord. 04-63 § 4 (part), 2004: B.C.S. § 8.08.080.)


6.12.100 Permit—Revocation.

Any violation of the conditions of the permit or certificate of occupancy will be grounds for revocation of the permit and/or certificate of occupancy, by administrative action of the city and borough building official. Any such revocation may be appealed to the planning commission of the city and borough, who shall hold a hearing on such appeal and make recommendations as to the disposition thereof to the city and borough assembly. The city and borough assembly shall make final disposition of any such appeal. (Ord. 04-63 § 4 (part), 2004: B.C.S. § 8.08.100.)


6.12.110 Sanitary and health regulations.

All sanitary, health, and fire regulations, state and local, shall be met, and violations thereof shall be grounds for revocation of the permit and certificate of occupancy, subject to the same appeal procedure as provided in Section 6.12.080. (Ord. 04-63 § 4 (part), 2004: B.C.S. § 8.08.110.)


6.12.130 Mobile and manufactured home park—Register of occupants.

Mobile and manufactured home park operators shall keep a register of the occupants of mobile and manufactured home park spaces. This register shall be given to the planning department. (Ord. 10-10 § 4 (part), 2010: Ord. 04-63 § 4 (part), 2004: B.C.S. § 8.08.130.)


6.12.135 Mobile and manufactured home park—Registered owner’s agent required.

Each mobile and manufactured home park owner shall designate a Sitka resident as the owner’s agent. The agent shall be empowered to act on the owner’s behalf on matters pertaining to park management and maintenance. Contact information for the designated agent shall be given to the planning department. (Ord. 10-10 § 4 (part), 2010: Ord. 04-63 § 4 (part), 2004.)


6.12.140 Mobile and manufactured home—Uses—Permit.

Except where a unit is located on a residential lot and lawfully used as a single-family dwelling, no unit shall be used as a place of business or as a place of habitation or stand in the open on any land more than thirty days without first obtaining the permit required in Section 6.12.070. (Ord. 10-10 § 4 (part), 2010: Ord. 04-63 § 4 (part), 2004: B.C.S. § 8.08.140.)


6.12.160 Mobile and manufactured home park—Numbering spaces required.

Owners of mobile and manufactured home parks shall clearly number each space serially. The space numbers shall be a minimum of six inches high and clearly visible from the access road. (Ord. 10-10 § 4 (part), 2010: Ord. 04-63 § 4 (part), 2004: B.C.S. § 8.08.160.)


6.12.180 Reserved.

Reserved. (Ord. 10-10 § 4 (part), 2010: Ord. 04-63 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 78-348 § 4, 1978.)


6.12.190 Use as residence or sleeping quarters.

A.    No mobile home, manufactured home, recreational vehicle, or other motor vehicle shall be used as a residence or sleeping quarters unless:

1.    Such unit or vehicle has a designated spot within a mobile and manufactured home park, recreational vehicle park or other area specifically designated by the chief of police; or

2.    Such vehicle has a permanent spot on other private property, its placement on such property as a residence meets all zoning requirements, and such vehicle meets the standard size requirements and sanitation requirements of a residence under the Sitka General Code.

B.    Except as provided in Section 6.12.210, a recreational vehicle may be used as a temporary but not as a permanent residence, and shall not be occupied for a period of more than one hundred eighty days within a twelve-month period on a single property.

(Ord. 10-10 § 4 (part), 2010: Ord. 04-63 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 97-1452 § 4, 1997; Ord. 80-436 § 3, 1980.)


6.12.200 Construction requirements.

The following provisions shall apply as of August 1, 2010, to all mobile or manufactured homes, regardless of whether they are located in a mobile and manufactured home park, unless otherwise provided:

A.    Prior to August 1, 2010, additions to units in mobile and manufactured home parks shall be limited to sixteen feet in height. On or after August 1, 2010, additions to any units, regardless if in a mobile and manufactured home park, shall be limited to fourteen feet and one story in height. Height shall be measured as defined in Title 22.

B.    Foundation systems shall be approved by the municipal building official. When available, the installation instructions provided by the manufacturer shall be used to determine permissible points of support for vertical loads and points of attachment for anchorage systems used to resist horizontal and uplift forces.

C.    All units shall be anchored to resist horizontal and uplift forces in an approved manner. The anchoring system shall be inspected and approved prior to connection of water and sewer utilities.

D.    Skirting shall be required around the complete perimeter of all installations. Skirting shall be of pressure-treated plywood with a minimum of three-eighths-inch thickness, rated siding, metal panels or other approved, weather-resistant material. Skirting shall be provided with an access door and foundation ventilation in accordance with the requirements of the International Residential Code. A minimum six-mil vapor retarder shall be installed on the ground within the skirted area.

E.    All additions and interior renovations shall be subject to the provisions of the International Residential Code. Additions to units within a mobile and manufactured home park shall only be permitted with the written approval of the mobile and manufactured home park owner or agent.

F.    Accessory buildings in excess of one hundred twenty square feet shall require a building permit and must be located in compliance with the setback requirements of Section 6.12.050(B).

G.    The number of required automobile parking spots shall be in compliance with Section 6.12.010(J).

(Ord. 10-10 § 4 (part), 2010: Ord. 04-63 § 4 (part), 2004.)


6.12.210 Existing structures.

A.    Any mobile and manufactured homes located in Sitka prior to August 1, 2010, shall be allowed to remain in Sitka, and any legal use or occupancy of that structure as of August 1, 2010, shall be allowed to continue, unless such continued use or occupancy is dangerous to life, health and safety.

B.    No mobile home located in Sitka prior to August 1, 2010, shall be allowed to be relocated to a mobile and manufactured home park permitted on or after August 1, 2010.

C.    The following structures shall not be allowed in Sitka on or after August 1, 2010:

1.    Any mobile home manufactured before June 15, 1976, and not located in Sitka prior to August 1, 2010; and

2.    Any structure similar to a mobile home that is not a HUD-compliant structure, and not located in Sitka prior to August 1, 2010.

(Ord. 10-10 § 4 (part), 2010.)


Chapter 6.16 SALES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY

Sections:

6.16.010    Sales—Permit, fees and regulations.

6.16.015    Retail sales of food from mobile, nonmotorized vehicles.

6.16.020    Determination of time and place of sale of raw fish for purposes of this code.

6.16.030    Sale of raw fish at the city and borough-owned hoist.


6.16.010 Sales—Permit, fees and regulations.

Except as allowed in this section, outdoor sales of goods or articles, including solicitation for certain services or activities, are prohibited outdoors on public property in the CBD district, public use zone and public boat harbors. This prohibition includes, but is not limited to, sales on public sidewalks, parking lots and streets, except as allowed below:

A.    The following sales will be allowed in areas designated on an annual permit issued by the municipality for a fee of ten dollars:

1.    Incidental sales by juveniles of items made by the juveniles, or natural items collected by the juveniles, to tourists in the Crescent Harbor area and under the O'Connell bridge,

2.    Handicrafts, artwork and jewelry made from fur and leather indigenous to southeast Alaska, sold by the artist, including traditional sales by Alaska Natives, as well as books written and sold by local authors which depict the history, sociology or everyday life of southeast Alaska,

3.    Sales of personally made arts and crafts items by senior citizens for charitable purposes,

4.    a.	Sales of items by juveniles, the proceeds from which will primarily benefit a recognized charitable organization dedicated to providing programs for youth,

b.    Sales will be limited to unique items that are not available commercially,

c.    Such permits shall be limited to no more than three groups at any one given time;

B.    Retail sales of food prepared by vendors in compliance with all applicable state, federal and/or municipal agency requirements, as well as other food items which are prepackaged by the manufacturer and do not require further processing, such as gum, candy, juice, chips and soft drinks, from a mobile, nonmotorized food cart as designated on a two-year permit issued by the municipality for a fee of fifty dollars, under the conditions set out in Section 6.16.015;

C.    Retail sales of seafood to the ultimate consumer by the actual fisherman from their vessels at public boat harbors;

D.    By prior arrangement with the administrator, sales may be authorized for special events such as the Salmon Derby, the Fourth of July and Alaska Day;

E.    Solicitation by musicians shall be allowed in areas designated on a musician permit issued by the municipality for an annual fee of ten dollars, under the following conditions:

1.    Musician may perform and will be issued a musician permit during hours designated by the harbormaster or Harrigan Centennial Hall manager, and

2.    No electrical amplification of any instrument will be allowed;

F.    On-site supervision by an adult is required for all juveniles under the age of ten who participate in permitted sales and other activities allowed under this section. The permit may be revoked for misconduct such as fraud or loud, aggressive behavior or slandering other permittees, and is subject to regulations as necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of visitors and citizens, in accordance with Section 6.19.040;

G.    Failure to follow the rules of this chapter may result in the loss of a permit.

(Ord. 13-47A § 4, 2014: Ord. 13-25 § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 06-12 § 4(A), 2006; Ord. 95-1299 § 4, 1995; Ord. 93-1134 § 4, 1993; Ord. 92-1056 § 4 (part), 1992.)


6.16.015 Retail sales of food from mobile, nonmotorized vehicles.

A.    No person shall operate or permit a mobile, nonmotorized food cart to be operated on municipality streets or sidewalks unless a valid vendor permit has been issued.

B.    Mobile, nonmotorized food cart vending permits may be issued only for the sale of food prepared by vendor in compliance with all applicable state, federal and/or municipal agency requirements, as well as other food items which are prepackaged by the manufacturer and do not require further processing, such as gum, candy, juice, chips and soft drinks.

C.    A two-year mobile, nonmotorized food cart permit shall be valid for the period from May 1st through April 30th, unless sooner revoked or terminated. A mobile, nonmotorized food cart permit, or any rights or privileges, may not be assigned or transferred.

D.    Acceptance of a two-year permit by the permittee shall constitute an agreement and acknowledgment by such permittee that the permittee has no property right in the permit. Acceptance of a permit by the permittee shall constitute an agreement and acknowledgment by such permittee that the permittee shall indemnify and hold the city and borough of Sitka, its elected and appointed officers, its employees, and its agents harmless from and against any and all loss, damage or expense for any injury to or death of any person or persons, or for damage to property, resulting from or arising out of any act or omission of such permittee, or any of the permittees’ employees, agents, representatives, customers, or contractors. The city and borough of Sitka, its elected and appointed officers, its employees, and its agents make no representations concerning and assume no responsibility for or regarding any goods sold or activities by any permittee, or any of permittee’s employees, agents, representatives, contractors, or customers.

E.    Application. A person seeking a vending permit to operate a mobile, nonmotorized food cart shall file a written application for such permit with the chief of police with such information as the chief of police may deem necessary to make a determination on the application, including but not limited to:

1.    Name, address and telephone number of applicant;

2.    Description and license number of the mobile, nonmotorized vehicle proposed to be used in the business;

3.    An acknowledgement by the applicant that applicant agrees to be bound by all of the terms, conditions and provisions set forth in this section, and such additional terms and conditions as may be set forth in the permit; and

4.    Submit a detailed listing for approval by chief of police of the routes proposed to be utilized each day for purpose of vending from the mobile, nonmotorized vehicle owned, operated or controlled by permittee and notify chief of police of any changes in route schedule.

F.    Limitations.

1.    No permittee, or any employee, agent or representative, shall operate the mobile, nonmotorized vehicle food cart unless there is displayed a current state of Alaska business license, a current state of Alaska food handling permit, if applicable, and the permittee’s operation complies with all other applicable laws, ordinances and regulations;

2.    Each permittee, and any employee, agent or representative thereof, shall ensure that persons waiting to make purchases at the mobile, nonmotorized food cart line up in single file on the side away from the traveled part of the street and in such fashion as to create the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic;

3.    Each permittee and any employee, agent or representative shall vend only from the side of the food cart away from moving traffic and as near as possible to the curb or side of the street;

4.    No permittee, or any employee, agent or representative, shall:

a.    Vend unless such permittee, employee, agent or representative has a litter receptacle available for use by patrons, nor shall permittee or any employee, agent or representative leave any location without first picking up, removing and disposing of all trash or refuse remaining from sales made by such permittee, employee, agent or representative,

b.    Vend unless food cart is fully stopped,

c.    Vend to any person standing on the roadway side of the food cart,

d.    Vend within less than fifty feet of an intersection,

e.    Must remain in compliance with sales and property tax laws in order to retain their licenses.

G.    Insurance. Each permittee shall maintain at all times during the entire term of the permit a current commercial general liability insurance policy in an amount of not less than one million dollars, combined single limit, which policy shall name the city and borough of Sitka, its officers, its employees, and its agents as additional insured. The policy shall not contain any self-insured retention, and shall include a provision requiring written notification to be given to the city and borough of Sitka by the insurance company not less than thirty days before the policy is canceled, modified, or terminated for any reason. Permittee shall submit a copy of the policy, or at the option of the city and borough of Sitka prior to beginning any setting up of operating, or operations under the permit.

(Ord. 13-25 § 4 (part), 2013.)


6.16.020 Determination of time and place of sale of raw fish for purposes of this code.

For purposes of this code, the time and place of a sale of raw fish is when and where the fish ticket for that fish is signed. (Ord. 04-33 § 4, 2004.)


6.16.030 Sale of raw fish at the city and borough-owned hoist.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, raw fish may be sold within two hundred feet of the city and borough-owned hoist if the raw fish has been or is being offloaded with the use of the hoist. (Ord. 04-48 § 4(A), 2004.)


Chapter 6.19 REGULATION OF COMMERCIAL OPERATORS SELLING ORGANIZED EXCURSIONS OR RENTING EQUIPMENT FOR ORGANIZED EXCURSIONS 

Sections:

6.19.010    Introduction.

6.19.020    Definitions.

6.19.030    Permit required for commercial operations involving organized excursions when such operations occur in certain areas. 

6.19.040    Regulation of visitor-related activities on public property located at tendering facilities and adjoining parking lots.

6.19.050    Penalties.

6.19.060    Commercial handbill, leaflet and advertisement sign permit.


6.19.010 Introduction.

Crescent Harbor is owned by the state of Alaska and the city and borough of Sitka and operated by the city and borough of Sitka. The city and borough of Sitka owns property near Crescent Harbor including the tendering facilities, Harrigan Centennial Building, the dock and shelter, and the adjoining parking lots. The city and borough of Sitka also owns the dock known as the O’Connell Bridge Tendering Facility. In adopting this chapter, the city and borough of Sitka is exercising its proprietary interests as an owner and operator on all city and borough-owned property, including future tendering facilities, as well as its police powers in the interest of public safety and order. Nothing in this chapter, however, limits the city and borough of Sitka’s ability to further exercise its proprietary powers as it deems necessary to protect its interests or those of the public. (Ord. 03-1720 § 4 (part), 2003.)


6.19.020 Definitions.

The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, have the following meanings:

A.    “Commercial operations involving organized excursions” means any business, commercial entity, or for-profit enterprise offering: tours on foot; tours or trips by a wheeled vehicle, vessel, aircraft, or watercraft propelled by animal power, human power, engines, motors, or other motive power; any trip or tour involving the taking of one or more passengers for hire for the purpose of sightseeing, fishing, hunting, visits to natural and cultural displays; any other tour as may be offered by a business operating within the city and borough of Sitka, Alaska; or the rental or sale of any equipment to be used in any trip or tour described in this sentence, whether or not that trip is guided. Methods of transportation used in commercial operations involving organized excursions include but are not limited to: buses, aircraft, vans, pedicabs, bicycles, carriages, kayaks, boats, or walking tours. The rules of conduct and the permit requirements set out in this chapter apply to taxicabs that conduct tours.

B.    “The city and borough” means the city and borough of Sitka, Alaska.

(Ord. 06-12 § 4(B) (part), 2006; Ord. 03-1720 § 4 (part), 2003.)


6.19.030 Permit required for commercial operations involving organized excursions when such operations occur in certain areas. 

A.    General. No person shall sell, offer to sell, solicit to sell, or take orders to sell commercial operations involving organized excursions on tendering facilities or adjoining parking lots owned or operated by the city and borough except as authorized by a valid permit obtained from the city and borough pursuant to this chapter. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be called a “commercial operations permit.”

B.    Terms. An annual commercial operations permit shall be valid for the period from May 1st of each calendar year through April 30th of the following calendar year, unless sooner revoked or terminated. A commercial operations permit, or any rights or privileges thereunder, may not be assigned or transferred. Acceptance of a permit by the permittee shall constitute an agreement and acknowledgment by such permittee that the permittee has no property right in the permit. Acceptance of a permit by the permittee shall constitute an agreement and acknowledgment by such permittee that the permittee shall indemnify and hold the city and borough of Sitka, its elected and appointed officers, its employees, and its agents harmless from and against any and all loss, damage or expense for any injury to or death of any person or persons, or for damage to property, resulting from or arising out of any act or omission of such permittee, or any of the permittees’ employees, agents, representatives, customers, or contractors. The city and borough of Sitka, its elected and appointed officers, its employees, and its agents make no representations concerning and assume no responsibility for or regarding any goods sold or activities by any permittee, or any of permittee’s employees, agents, representatives, contractors, or customers.

C.    Limitations.

1.    Permittees may conduct business year-round, including days on which special events may be scheduled.

2.    Any signs, vehicles and vessels used by permittees in an area regulated by this chapter must be in compliance with the law. All signs must be freestanding, portable or mobile. Freestanding, portable or mobile signs are limited to one per permittee at each location, and shall not be more than three feet wide and four feet from the ground, and shall only be posted in the “designated area.” All vehicles and vessels must be operational at all times. Unless otherwise permitted, all signs, vehicles and vessels must be removed from any area for which the city and borough is responsible at the end of each business day.

3.    Parking spaces in the Harrigan Centennial Hall/Crescent Harbor parking area may be designated and assigned to commercial operations permit holders, from May 1st through September 30th of a calendar year, to accommodate vehicles that are necessary for customer outfitting and rental of equipment to be used in a trip or tour. Contingent on a permit application being accepted and fees paid, these spaces will be assigned by the Harrigan Centennial Hall manager based on historic use, with the remaining spaces assigned, as needed, up to a six-space maximum limit. Vehicles permitted under this special use designation may remain overnight from May 1st through September 30th of a calendar year, but must be moved upon request of the city and borough for special events. Businesses permitted to occupy these spaces will not be allowed a sidewalk space at Harrigan Centennial Hall/Crescent Harbor for solicitation or freestanding, portable or mobile signs. Additional parking fees of five hundred dollars per parking space will be assessed to those businesses receiving designated space permits under this subsection.

4.    Designated space permits are available on a first come, first served basis.

D.    Fees. Each applicant for a permit issued under this chapter shall pay a nonrefundable application fee of four hundred dollars each year. In addition to the annual application fee of four hundred dollars, each applicant shall pay a ten dollar inspection fee each year for each motorized vehicle or motorized vessel used in a commercial operation involving organized excursions. Any person or company that has not obtained a required permit shall pay the four hundred dollar permit fee and any applicable inspection fee, in addition to any penalties assessed under Section 6.19.050.

E.    Application. A person or company seeking a permit shall file a written application on a form provided by the city and borough. The application shall contain the following information:

1.    Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant and all principals;

2.    Name of operations manager, emergency contact phone, and local home address;

3.    The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers;

4.    A list of vehicles and/or vessels or watercraft with current state of Alaska registration numbers, to be operated or controlled by the applicant and the location of the proposed depots and terminals, if any;

5.    The color scheme or insignia to be used to designate the vehicle or vehicles of the applicant, and license number and length of vehicle(s). Each vehicle must meet state vehicle safety codes, and each vessel or watercraft must meet U.S. Coast Guard safety codes. The state of Alaska registration sticker must be displayed in a conspicuous place according to law, or the vessel must have proper U.S. Coast Guard documentation. Each aircraft must be FAA certified;

6.    A statement that the applicant has not been convicted of any felony or the following misdemeanor offenses within the preceding five years:

a.    Prostitution or the promotion of prostitution;

b.    Sale, transportation, possession, or use of any controlled substance as defined in Sections 11.71.140 through 11.71.190 of the Alaska Statutes;

c.    Any offense which includes as an element the use or threat of force upon a person;

d.    Burglary, theft, fraud, or embezzlement;

e.    Any sexual offenses;

7.    Type of tour, trip, or excursion to be sold; and

8.    An acknowledgment by the applicant that applicant agrees to be bound by all of the terms, conditions and provisions set forth in this chapter, and such additional terms and conditions as may be set forth in the permit application process or by the city and borough staff.

F.    Insurance.

1.    General Liability Insurance. Subject to the special provision for commercial operators offering walking tours exclusively set out in the last sentence of this subsection, each permittee shall at all times during the period of operations maintain a current commercial general liability insurance policy in the amount of not less than one million dollars combined single limit, which policy shall name the city and borough of Sitka, its officers, its employees, and its agents as additional insured. The policy shall not contain any self-insured retention, and shall include a provision requiring written notification to be given to the city and borough of Sitka by the insurance company not less than thirty days before the policy is canceled, modified, or terminated for any reason. Permittees shall submit a copy of the policy, or, at the option of the city and borough of Sitka prior to beginning any setting up of operations, or operations under the permit. Commercial operators who offer walking tours exclusively shall be required to maintain a current commercial general liability insurance policy in the amount of not less than one hundred thousand dollars combined single limit.

2.    Motor Vehicle Liability Insurance. Subject to the special provision for commercial operators offering walking tours exclusively set out in the last sentence of this subsection, no permit shall be issued or continued in effect unless there is in full force and effect a motor vehicle liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state of Alaska. The limits of coverage provided shall be not less than one million dollars for each occurrence (combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage). The policy shall contain a provision for notification to the city and borough of Sitka of cancellation thirty days prior to such cancellation. No motor vehicle liability insurance shall be required under this permit if the commercial operator does not transport customers or clients in a vehicle, vessel, or watercraft.

3.    Boat Operators Watercraft Liability. No permit shall be issued or continued in effect for any permittee who uses any vessel or watercraft in conducting a trip or tour unless there is in full force and effect a watercraft liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state of Alaska. The limits of coverage provided shall be not less than one million dollars for each occurrence (combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage). Watercraft liability insurance is required for boating activities covered under permits issued pursuant to this chapter when such activities occur on waters within the city and borough. Depending on the sizes, ownership and use of the vessel or watercraft, such coverage may be provided either by a protection and indemnity (P&I) liability policy or by a comprehensive general liability policy. The determination of which policy is applicable depends on the size, ownership, and use of the watercraft. If a watercraft or vessel under twenty-six feet long is covered under a general liability policy, the insurance certificate must include a statement that “watercraft liability is included” or similar documentation. The policy shall contain a provision for notification to the city and borough of Sitka of cancellation thirty days prior to such cancellation.

4.    Aircraft Liability. No permit shall be issued or continued in effect for any permittee who uses any aircraft in conducting a trip or tour unless there is in full force and effect an aircraft liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state of Alaska. The limits of coverage provided shall be not less than one million dollars for each occurrence (combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage). Aircraft liability insurance is required for flying activities covered under permits issued pursuant to this chapter when such activities occur on waters within the city and borough. Depending on the sizes, ownership and use of the aircraft, such coverage may be provided either by a protection and indemnity (P&I) liability policy or by a comprehensive general liability policy. The determination of which policy is applicable depends on the size, ownership, and use of the aircraft. The policy shall contain a provision for notification to the city and borough of Sitka of cancellation thirty days prior to such cancellation.

G.    Issuance of Permit. After review of the application by the police chief or his/her written designee, the harbormaster, and the Harrigan Centennial Hall manager, the police department shall grant the application upon finding that the applicant for the permit is fit, willing, and able to comply with the law. The permit shall state the name and address of the applicant, the date of issuance, the class of motor vehicle to be operated, the number of vehicles, vessels, or watercraft authorized under the permit, the color scheme or insignia to be used, and such additional terms, conditions, provisions and limitations as the general health, welfare, morality and safety. No permit shall be considered to have been issued until it has been signed by the police chief or his/her written designee. In making the above-mentioned findings of public convenience and necessity, the city and borough shall take into consideration the character, experience, and responsibility of the applicant, and the public health, safety and welfare. In order to add additional vehicle(s) or motorized watercraft(s) to the original application, the permit holder must submit proof of insurance for the additional vehicle(s) or watercraft(s), show that each vehicle meets state motor vehicle codes or each watercraft satisfactorily meets U.S. Coast Guard approval, and pay ten dollars per additional vehicle or watercraft, to the city and borough of Sitka. A decision to deny an application for a permit may be appealed by the applicant to the city and borough administrator no later than seven days after such denial is delivered to the applicant. A letter sent to the applicant’s address shall constitute delivery. An appeal from the decision of the city and borough administrator may be taken to the superior court for the state of Alaska no later than thirty days after the administrator sends notice of such denial to the applicant. No refunds will be issued for vehicles or watercrafts that do not operate for the full year.

H.    Terms of Renewal. Each permit issued under this chapter shall expire on the last day of April next following its issuance. Permits once issued and approved prior to start up of operations may be renewed and reissued by the city and borough of Sitka upon application to the city and borough of Sitka. All fees must be paid at time of permit issuance. Permits will not be renewed unless the finance department certifies that all sales taxes have been paid, and the police department certifies that all motorized vehicles, motorized vessels, or aircraft listed on the permit have passed required inspections. Any operator whose permit has been revoked during the course of the year may not be granted a permit renewal.

I.    Fraud. Misrepresentation or false advertising will not be tolerated. Any person issued a permit under this section who commits any act of fraud, cheating or misrepresentation, whether through the permittee or through an employee, agent, or representative thereof, while performing an activity provided for or authorized in the permit, directly or indirectly, or who shall barter, sell, or peddle any goods, upon public property other than those specified and authorized in their permit, can face revocation as provided in subsection J of this section.

J.    Revocation. The city and borough administrator or his/her written designee may at any time revoke a permit issued under this chapter for noncompliance with any term, condition, or provision of the permit, or violation of any provision of this section or other applicable local, state, or federal law, ordinance or regulation. The city and borough administrator or his/her written designee may also revoke such a permit upon a determination that the operation of the permittee is causing a hazard, or a disruption of pedestrian, vehicular, or watercraft traffic, or that the area affected by the permit is required for another public purpose, or for other reasons. The permittee shall be given written notice of the proposed revocation of the permit. If so requested by such permittee, not later than five days after the date of the written notice of proposed revocation, the permittee may appeal the decision of the administrator or written designee to a hearing officer selected by the administrator. Appeal from a hearing officer’s decision may be made no later than thirty days after such decision to the superior court for the state of Alaska sitting in Sitka. Justifications for revocation can include but are not limited to: verified complaints from customers in which services were verbally or otherwise contracted for, but not received from the permit holder or the permit holder’s company; physical touching, grabbing, yelling, or shouting to a degree that would constitute disorderly conduct under AS 11.61.110, in an attempt to convince potential customers to purchase a tour or service; defamatory interference with competing commercial operators, Harrigan Centennial Hall staff or harbor department staff; failure to comply with reasonable directions of Harrigan Centennial Hall manager, harbormaster, or a police officer; conviction of any offense listed in subsection (E)(6) of this section.

(Ord. 18-23 § 4, 2018; Ord. 15-15 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 06-12 § 4(B) (part), 2006; Ord. 03-1720 § 4 (part), 2003.)


6.19.040 Regulation of visitor-related activities on public property located at tendering facilities and adjoining parking lots.

A.    Responsibility. The following municipal officials shall be responsible for enforcing existing regulations and setting limits and rules as necessary in the affected area. The Harrigan Centennial Hall manager will have authority over the Crescent Harbor parking lot and the Centennial Hall parking lot. The harbormaster will have authority over the Crescent Harbor dock, the lightering dock and ramps, the O’Connell Bridge Lightering dock and ramps, and other harbor parking lots. The police department shall handle violations of a criminal nature. The city and borough attorney shall receive referrals regarding any matters requiring civil action, including permit revocations.

B.    The Tendering Facilities, Ramps, and Covered Shelter.

1.    No person(s) selling organized excursions, tours, trips, or services; distributing handbills; or otherwise contacting visitors arriving from ships will be allowed within the designated security zone.

2.    The city and borough shall designate locations for activities. Any such activities within the areas regulated by this chapter must occur within those locations.

3.    In order to reduce congestion in the areas regulated by this chapter, the number of buses and vans at any given time will be limited. Buses servicing presold tours, trips and/or services shall be staged in designated areas established by the Harrigan Centennial Hall manager or the harbormaster. Drivers for each bus or van shall be present at all times.

4.    When the Harrigan Centennial Hall manager or the harbormaster has determined that demand is heavy, each commercial operations permittee offering independent tours shall have no more than one vehicle and/or carriage for independent tours in any parking lot regulated under this chapter at the same time, unless space for more than that one vehicle is available. When such space is available, additional parking shall be done on a first-come, first-served basis. A driver for each vehicle used for an independent tour shall be present at all times. As vehicles leave the area, the permittee whose vehicle leaves may replace it. Extra parking will be established when space is available.

(Ord. 06-12 § 4(B) (part), 2006; Ord. 03-1720 § 4 (part), 2003.)


6.19.050 Penalties.

A.    Conducting commercial operations involving organized excursions in violation of a permit is punishable by a one-hundred-dollar fine for a first offense and a fine of up to two hundred fifty dollars for a second or subsequent offense. Such fines are separate from any revocation imposed pursuant to Section 6.19.030(J).

B.    Conducting commercial operations involving organized excursions without a permit is punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars for a first offense. Conducting commercial operations involving organized excursions without a permit is punishable by a fine of two hundred fifty dollars for a second or subsequent offense, which shall also bring the loss of the privilege of receiving such a permit for two calendar years.

(Ord. 03-1720 § 4 (part), 2003.)


6.19.060 Commercial handbill, leaflet and advertisement sign permit.

Any person or business intending to operate in an area subject to this chapter by distributing commercial handbills and leaflets, or by placing any commercial advertisement sign, is required to first obtain a permit. The annual cost of the nonrefundable permit is four hundred dollars, except for persons or businesses who have already obtained a permit under Section 6.19.030. All commercial advertisement signs must comply with the requirements in Section 6.19.030(C). (Ord. 06-12 § 4(B) (part), 2006.)


Chapter 6.20 PAWNBROKERS

Sections:

6.20.010    Pawnbroker.

6.20.020    License required.

6.20.030    Application—Investigation.

6.20.040    Fee.

6.20.050    Records.

6.20.060    Sales tax.

6.20.070    Minors.

6.20.080    Stolen goods.

6.20.090    Penalty.


6.20.010 Pawnbroker.

A pawnbroker is any person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of lending money secured by taking possession of personal property, with the right to sell the property if it is not redeemed. A person, firm, or corporation shall be deemed to be a pawnbroker whether the transaction takes the form of a loan by the pawnbroker secured by the property, or a sale to the pawnbroker with the right to repurchase within a stated period of time. (Ord. 97-1420 § 4 (part), 1997.)


6.20.020 License required.

No person, firm, or corporation shall conduct or operate the business of pawnbroker, without having first obtained a license therefore as is herein provided, or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. Any pawnbroker’s license may be revoked by the chief of police for any violation of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 97-1420 § 4 (part), 1997.)


6.20.030 Application—Investigation.

Applications for pawnbroker’s licenses shall be made to the chief of police and shall state the name of the applicant, the place of business, and the number of employees who will participate. The chief of police or any other person designated by the chief shall investigate each applicant for such license and shall determine whether the applicant is a person of good character. No license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of theft, concealment or receiving stolen property, or any related offense. (Ord. 97-1420 § 4 (part), 1997.)


6.20.040 Fee.

The annual fee for a pawnbroker’s license shall be fifty dollars. (Ord. 97-1420 § 4 (part), 1997.)


6.20.050 Records.

Every pawnbroker doing business in the municipality shall keep a record of every article pledged or sold to such pawnbroker and this record shall be open to inspection by any police officer at any time during business hours. (Ord. 97-1420 § 4 (part), 1997.)


6.20.060 Sales tax.

The sale of pawned items to other than the person pawning the item shall be subject to the sales tax. (Ord. 97-1420 § 4 (part), 1997.)


6.20.070 Minors.

No pawnbroker shall have any business dealings as a pawnbroker with any person less than eighteen years of age, except with written consent of a parent or guardian. No pawnbroker’s license shall be issued to a person who is not eighteen years of age or over; and no pawnbroker shall allow any employee who is less than eighteen years of age to engage in that portion of the pawnbroker’s business. (Ord. 97-1420 § 4 (part), 1997.)


6.20.080 Stolen goods.

It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the police any article sold to or pledged with that pawnbroker or which is sought to be pledged or sold, if he or she has reason to believe that the article is stolen. (Ord. 97-1420 § 4 (part), 1997.)


6.20.090 Penalty.

Any person violating any portion of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of up to two hundred dollars. (Ord. 97-1420 § 4 (part), 1997.)


TITLE 6 FOOTNOTES

1    For statutory provisions regarding the Alaska Business Act, see AS Ch. 43.70.

2    For statutory provisions regarding the regulation of junkyards and junk dealers, see AS Ch. 08.60.

3    For statutory provisions regarding tourist and trailer camps, motor courts and motels, see AS Ch. 18.35.


Title 7 MARIJUANA REGULATIONS

Chapters: 

7.30    Public Consumption

7.40    Local Regulatory Authority

7.50    Licensing


Chapter 7.30 PUBLIC CONSUMPTION

Sections:

7.30.010    Public consumption.


7.30.010 Public consumption.

A.    Pursuant to AS 17.38.040, public consumption of marijuana is prohibited. A person who violates this law is guilty of a violation punishable by a fine of up to one hundred dollars.

B.    Except as otherwise provided, it is unlawful for a person to knowingly consume marijuana:

1.    Upon any public streets, alleys, sidewalks, municipally operated harbor walkways and floats, restrooms and parking lots, any municipally controlled areas open to the general public and public school grounds, whether in a motor vehicle or not;

2.    At any public park, recreation area, playground, or ball field, whether in a motor vehicle or not;

3.    In or upon those portions of any private property upon which the public has an express or implied license to enter or remain, including but not limited to eating and/or drinking establishments, places of business or amusement; and

4.    Any other public or private property, where such area is posted that consumption of marijuana is prohibited; and

5.    Upon establishment of a local regulatory authority, or similar body, exemptions may be given for special events by the assembly, upon advice by the local regulatory authority or similar body, with such conditions as the assembly may require for the public good.

C.    For purposes of this section, the definitions for words and phrases below shall apply:

1.    Marijuana. Per AS 17.38.900(6): “Marijuana” means all parts of the plant of the genus Cannabis whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or its resin, including marijuana concentrate. “Marijuana” does not include fiber produced from the stalk, oil, or cake made from the seeds of the plant, sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination, or the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other products; and

2.    “Consume” shall have the meaning, in all conjugate forms, of consumption set forth in AS 17.38.900(3): “Consumption” means the act of ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana into the human body.

D.    Pursuant to AS 12.25.195, violation of this section is a minor offense punishable as set forth in the state’s minor offense fine schedule under the Alaska Court System’s Rules of Administration bail and fine schedule, at such time as that schedule may be updated to include marijuana-related violations.

(Ord. 15-06A § 4, 2015.) 


Chapter 7.40 LOCAL REGULATORY AUTHORITY

Sections:

7.40.010    Duties and powers.


7.40.010 Duties and powers.

The assembly of the city and borough shall function as the local regulatory authority for the purpose of the regulation of marijuana with the authority to: 

A.    Consider appeals of conditional use permits.

B.    Work with the state to collect fees and administer licensing and regulations. Draft recommended laws and policies for assembly approval, regulating marijuana and related facilities within the city and borough of Sitka.

(Ord. 16-21 § 4 (part), 2016.)


Chapter 7.50 LICENSING

Sections:

7.50.010    License required.

7.50.020    Application for license.


7.50.010 License required.

AS 17.38.070 designating a classification of licenses is incorporated herein and made a part hereof, and the sale of marijuana, including any derivative thereof, by any person, firm or corporation is prohibited anywhere except under and by virtue of a license secured from the Director of the Marijuana Control Board, and the sale, barter or consumption of marijuana, including any derivative thereof, on any premises not covered by a license under the classifications in AS 17.38.070 is prohibited. (Ord. 16-21 § 4 (part), 2016.)


7.50.020 Application for license.

A.    The assembly of the city and borough of Sitka will make recommendations to the state as to support for or objections to license applications.

B.    At such time that the licensee is seeking a new license, is seeking to reestablish a license that was allowed to expire, is proposing a change in the controlling interest of the establishment license, or there is a proposed change or addition to license type, the municipal clerk shall give notice of such application as follows:

1.    Notice shall be posted on the premises ten days prior to the assembly meeting at which application will be heard. All time limitations, however, may be decreased at the discretion of the municipal clerk to meet any period specified by the Director of the Marijuana Control Board;

2.    Notice shall be published once in a local newspaper at least one week before such meeting; 

3.    The notice shall contain the time and place of assembly meeting; the type of license applied for; the name of all applying persons; and inform the public that any protest may be lodged with the assembly at that time; 

4.    Give proof to the assembly at the time of hearing of compliance with all phases of this chapter.

C.    By Persons Seeking to Renew Licenses. The individuals or groups of individuals holding existing licenses shall not be affected by subsection B of this section and shall have the right to apply for renewal of their licenses unless disqualified on grounds other than contained herein.

(Ord. 16-21 § 4 (part), 2016.)


Title 8 ANIMALS

Chapters:

8.04    Animal Protection and Control

8.08    Cruelty to Animals

NOTE:    Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this title.


Chapter 8.04 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL

Sections:

8.04.010    Definitions.

8.04.020    Licensing.

8.04.030    Tag and collar.

8.04.031    Restraint requirements.

8.04.032    Off-leash areas.

8.04.033    Off-leash area rules.

8.04.040    Impoundment procedure.

8.04.050    Redemption of impounded dogs or cats.

8.04.060    Impoundment fees.

8.04.070    Control of female dogs in season.

8.04.080    Objectionable animals.

8.04.081    Potentially dangerous and dangerous dogs.

8.04.082    Classification of dogs—Notice—Restrictions pending appeals.

8.04.083    Animal hearing board.

8.04.084    On-premises confinement.

8.04.085    Off-premises restraint.

8.04.086    Notification of change of status.

8.04.087    Signs for potentially dangerous or dangerous dogs.

8.04.088    Special license and tag for potentially dangerous or dangerous dogs.

8.04.089    Destruction of dangerous dogs.

8.04.090    Rabies control.

8.04.091    Reclassification of dogs.

8.04.092    Sanitary disposal requirements.

8.04.093    Dog parks.

8.04.100    Immunization for rabies.

8.04.110    Dead animals.

8.04.120    Exemptions.

8.04.140    Records.

8.04.150    Citations.

8.04.160    Responsibilities of keeper of a domestic animal.

8.04.170    Responsibilities of owner of public building.

8.04.180    Service dogs exempt.

8.04.190    Enforcement.

8.04.200    Disposal of animals at keeper’s request.

8.04.210    Penalties.


8.04.010 Definitions.

In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:

A.    “Abandon” means to leave an animal for a period in excess of twenty-four continuous hours without adequate provision for its physical needs.

B.    “Animal control officer” means the employee(s) of any entity to whom the function of animal control and protection has been assigned by the assembly and whose primary function is animal control and protection.

C.    “Animal shelter” means any premises designated by action of the city and borough for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals pursuant to this chapter.

D.    “At large” means that the animal is off the premises of the keeper or custodian and not under the immediate control of the keeper or custodian.

E.    “Commercial kennel owner” means any person, group of persons, or corporation engaged in the commercial buying, selling, keeping or boarding of dogs or cats.

F.    “Competent voice control” means when all the following are met: dog must be within owner’s sight and under verbal control at all times, regardless of distractions (such as wildlife, other dogs, food, or other park or trail users). If dog jumps on or acts aggressively toward people or other dogs, chases wildlife, or will not consistently come immediately upon command, dog must be leashed.

G.    “Dangerous dog” means a dog as defined in Section 8.04.081(B).

H.    “Keeper” or “custodian” means any person, group of persons, partnership, firm, trust or corporation owning, having an interest in, or having control, custody or possession of any dog or cat. “Keeper” or “custodian” does not include a person who voluntarily undertakes the temporary care of an animal that is otherwise abandoned.

I.    “Neglected” means an animal that has not received that degree of care which a person of ordinary prudence would give under the same circumstances. The care must include sufficient food, clean water, adequate shelter, protection from the weather, health care and clean living conditions in conformance with accepted veterinary practice.

J.    “Objectionable dog” means a dog as defined in Section 8.04.080.

K.    “Physical injury” means significant physical pain or an impairment of physical condition.

L.    “Potentially dangerous dog” means a dog as defined in Section 8.04.081A.

M.    “Provocation” means the teasing, tormenting, abusing or assault of a dog to incite the dog to bite or attack.

N.    “Restraint” means:

1.    Actual physical control, such as on a leash held by a person capable of physically controlling the animal, on a chain, within fenced premises, in a building, or in a cage;

2.    On the premises of the keeper or custodian or on other property with the prior permission of the owner of the property; or

3.    Properly restrained in a vehicle. “Properly restrained” means either by a tie-down in a pickup truck which is sufficiently short to protect the animal from attempting to jump out and strangling, and to prevent the animal from lunging at passers by.

O.    “Running at large” means an animal who is not under competent voice control or who is unrestrained in violation of Sections 8.04.031 and 8.04.032.

P.    “Service dog” means:

1.    A dog specifically trained and certified to assist in search and rescue operations and which is utilized in search and rescue operations; 

2.    A dog specifically trained and certified to assist persons with disabilities and which is utilized to assist a person with disabilities; or

3.    A dog specifically trained and certified to assist in law enforcement activities and which is utilized to assist in law enforcement activities, also referred to in this title as a “police dog.”

Q.    “Sitka road system” means those roads within the city and borough which are maintained by the municipality and/or the state of Alaska for purposes of general public use.

R.    “Spayed female” and “neutered male” means any animal which has been surgically or pharmacologically sterilized.

S.    “Stray” means any domestic animal which is at large and whose owner is unknown.

(Ord. 13-19 § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002: Ord. 95-1302 § 4(B), 1995; Ord. 87-784 § 4, 1987; Ord. 86-729 § 4(A), 1986; B.C.S. § 9.05.010.)


8.04.020 Licensing.

A.    No person shall own or keep any dog over six months old within one-quarter mile of the city and borough road system unless such dog is licensed. Application for such license shall be made to the animal control officer within ninety days after the arrival of the dog and shall state the name and address of the owner and the name, breed, color, age and sex of the dog. The license fee shall be paid at the time of making application, a numbered receipt given to the applicant and a numbered metallic tag for the dog shall be issued to the owner. No license or tag shall be issued unless it is shown by a veterinarian’s statement, in writing, that the dog for which the license is sought has received an immunization for rabies which shall remain effective for the licensing period. Such proof may consist of, but shall not be limited to, a statement or receipt from a veterinarian showing such immunization and the period of protection. 

B.    The license fees shall be determined by the chief of police in consultation with the animal hearing board.

C.    A commercial kennel owner may obtain a kennel license for fifty dollars yearly in lieu of individual licenses of the dogs, provided all dogs owned or kept by the kennel have been vaccinated for rabies.

D.    All licenses required by subsection A, B or C of this section shall be issued for a term to be determined by the chief of police in consultation with the animal hearing board. Licenses must be renewed during the month prior to their expiration.

E.    No person shall use any dog license receipt or license tag issued for another dog unless legal transfer of the dog has been made.

F.    The keeper of any potentially dangerous or dangerous dog must obtain a special license as required under Section 8.04.088.

(Ord. 15-16 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 11-17 § 4, 2011; Ord. 10-25 § 4 (part), 2010: 

Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002: Ord. 88-822 § 4, 1988; Ord. 87-789 § 4, 1988; Ord. 86-729 § 4(B,C,D), 1986; Ord. 79-405 § 4(1), 1979; Ord. 73-58 § 3, 1973; B.C.S. § 9.03.020.)


8.04.030 Tag and collar.

A.    Upon complying with the provisions of Section 8.04.020, there shall be issued to the owner a metallic tag stamped with the number and the year for which it is issued.

B.    Every owner is required to see that the tag is securely fastened to the dog’s collar or harness, which must be worn by the dog at all times while off the keeper’s property.

C.    In the event that a metallic license tag issued for a dog is lost, the owner may obtain a duplicate tag upon the payment of a fee determined by the chief of police in consultation with the animal hearing board.

(Ord. 10-25 § 4 (part), 2010: Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002: Ord. 95-1302 § 4(C), 1995; Ord. 86-729 § 4(3), 1986; Ord. 79-405 § 4(2), 1979; B.C.S. § 9.04.030.)


8.04.031 Restraint requirements.

A.    The keeper of any dog shall keep the dog under leash restraint at all times and shall not permit the dog to be off leash in all areas except those designated as “off-leash areas.”

B.    All dogs or other domestic animals found running at large may be impounded in the animal shelter. The keeper or custodian of the domestic animal shall be responsible should the domestic animal be in violation of this section. The city and borough shall post signs informing the public of the leash law.

C.    All dogs in the back of an open pickup truck must be restrained by a tie down which is sufficiently short to protect the animal from jumping out and is also short enough to prevent the animal from lunging at passers by.

(Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002.)


8.04.032 Off-leash areas.

All dogs may be off-leash in the following designated “off-leash areas”; provided, that the keeper and/or custodian is actively engaged with the dog and has competent voice control:

A.    Land more than one-quarter mile from the Sitka road system;

B.    Land along the Indian River Trail;

C.    Land along Green Lake Road;

D.    The area beside or beyond the Jarvis Street Animal Shelter;

E.    The area behind the Sitka High School parking lot;

F.    Land along the Sitka Cross Trail;

G.    Vilandre, Keet Gooshi Heen and Kimsham Field One during times when the sport fields are not scheduled or in use for sports or school activities or when in use by students or players; and

H.    Dog parks.

(Ord. 13-19 § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 07-23 § 4 (part), 2007: Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002)


8.04.033 Off-leash area rules.

A.    The following rules shall be followed by all keepers and/or custodians that use the off-leash areas with their dogs, and shall be posted at fenced off-leash areas:

1.    Sports fields designated for off-leash use are open during hours specified on posted signs;

2.    Sports fields designated for off-leash use are closed when players or students are present for games, sports or other activities; practice; tournaments and field preparations;

3.    Keeper and/or custodian must promptly vacate the sports field whenever unscheduled use by players or students occurs. Sports use by students or players has the priority;

4.    Objectionable and dangerous dogs, as defined under Sections 8.04.080 and 8.04.081, and female dogs in heat are prohibited;

5.    Dogs shall be leashed upon entering and leaving the fenced sports fields designated for off-leash use;

6.    Keepers and/or custodians shall keep their dogs in sight and under “competent voice control” at all times as defined under Section 8.04.010(F);

7.    Keepers and/or custodians shall remain with their dogs within the fenced off-leash area or sports field;

8.    Keepers and/or custodians shall clean up and remove any dogs’ feces left by their dog or be subject to fines or prohibitions;

9.    Holes dug by dogs must be filled by the keeper and/or custodian;

10.    Keepers and/or custodians shall be responsible for all actions of their dogs; and

11.    Aggressive or unruly dogs are not allowed.

B.    The parks and recreation committee may recommend additional rules for “off-leash areas,” which are subject to the approval of the parks and recreation manager and the administrator, without requiring assembly approval. Additional rules will be posted.

C.    If the off-leash areas are not used responsibly by dog owners, the assembly at the recommendation of the parks and recreation committee, parks and recreation manager and administrator may strike the ball fields as off-leash areas.

D.    Sports fields designated for off-leash use are closed to dog owners when players or students are present for games, sports or other activities and during practices, tournaments and field preparations or as posted at the ballfields. Hours and rules will be posted on signs at each sports field where dog “off-leash” is permitted.

E.    Any keeper and/or custodian of a dog who violates any rule in this section is subject to the penalties in Section 8.04.210 in addition to any penalties under Section 23.30.020(H), the administrator or his designee may prohibit any keeper and/or custodian and their dog from using the off-leash area who violates any of the rules of this section.

(Ord. 13-19 § 4 (part), 2013.)


8.04.040 Impoundment procedure.

A.    Dogs found running at large may be impounded at a municipality designated shelter. Dogs wearing valid license tags will be held for a minimum of five days if not claimed by the keeper. After five days, if not claimed by the keeper, they may be destroyed or adopted. Unlicensed dogs will be held for a minimum of seventy-two hours and may then be destroyed, or held for adoption for a reasonable period at the discretion of the animal control office. Before destroying an animal, the animal control officer shall make reasonable efforts to promote the adoption of the animal.

B.    When a dog is found running at large and its ownership is known to the enforcement agents, such dog need not be impounded but the agent may cite the keeper of the dog.

C.    Immediately upon impounding any domestic animal, the animal control officer shall make reasonable effort to notify the keeper or custodian and to inform the keeper or custodian of the conditions under which he may regain custody of the animal. The animal control officer may file a complaint against the keeper or custodian of any animal which has been impounded for being found running at large.

(Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002: Ord. 98-1480 § 4, 1998; Ord. 87-780 § 4, 1987; Ord. 83-555 § 4(A), 1983; Ord. 79-405 § 4(3) and (4), 1979; Ord. 72-43 § 3 (part), 1972; B.C.S. § 9.04.040.)


8.04.050 Redemption of impounded dogs or cats.

The keeper shall be entitled to resume possession of any impounded dogs or cats except as provided in this chapter, upon the keeper’s compliance with the license provisions of Section 8.04.020 and the payment of impoundment fees set forth in Section 8.04.060. (Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002: Ord. 95-1302 § 4(A) (part), 1995; Ord. 79-405 § 4(5), 1979; B.C.S. § 9.04.050.)


8.04.060 Impoundment fees.

The impoundment fee for picking up any dog shall be determined by the chief of police in consultation with the animal hearing board. The impoundment fees for cats shall be determined by the chief of police in consultation with the animal hearing board. (Ord. 10-25 § 4 (part), 2010: Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002: Ord. 95-1302 § 4(D), 1995; Ord. 86-729 § 4(F), 1986.)


8.04.070 Control of female dogs in season.

Every female dog in season shall be kept confined in a building or secure enclosure or under leash control in such manner that such female dog cannot come in contact with another dog except for planned breeding purposes. (Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002: B.C.S. § 9.04.070.)


8.04.080 Objectionable animals.

A.    The keeper of any animal shall not allow the animal to disturb a neighborhood or any number of persons by frequent or prolonged barking, howling or other noises on a repeated basis. If an animal barks, whines, howls or makes similar sounds for more than thirty minutes on at least three different days within a ten-day period or for more than fifteen minutes during at least three different nights between ten p.m. and seven a.m. within a ten-day period, this is a violation of this chapter. The fine for violating this law is twenty-five dollars. 

B.    The keeper of any animal shall not permit the animal to defecate on private property, other than that of the animal’s keeper, or on public property, without afterward cleaning up the feces as provided in Section 8.04.092. The keeper shall not permit the animal to dig upon or damage private property, other than that of the animal’s keeper, or upon public property.

C.    The keeper of any dog shall not allow it to frequently or habitually snap at, jump upon, chase vehicles or otherwise menace persons within the city and borough. This provision does not apply to persons who are trespassing or if the animal is acting in the lawful defense of its keeper.

D.    The keeper of any dog shall not permit it to chase, harass, or otherwise disturb or injure any wild animal unless on the keeper’s property.

E.    Animals, other than dogs, may be considered “objectionable” by a property owner by being on the property owner’s property. The property owner may file a complaint and/or may use live traps to capture the animal and have it impounded.

F.    The keeper of any animal shall ensure that the animal does not bite or inflict physical injury on a human being or another animal without provocation, either on public or private property.

(Ord. 15-16 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 02-1699 § 4(A), 2002; Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002: Ord. 98-1481 § 4, 1998; Ord. 95-1302 § 4(E), 1995; Ord. 89-875 § 4(B), 1989; Ord. 84-590 § 4(B), 1984; Ord. 79-405 § 4(7) and (8), 1979; B.C.S. § 9.04.080.)


8.04.081 Potentially dangerous and dangerous dogs.

A.    Definitions. Except as provided in subsection C of this section, a “potentially dangerous dog” is any dog that:

1.    Without provocation, chases or approaches a person in a threatening manner or in an apparent attitude of attack; or 

2.    Has a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack without provocation, or otherwise threaten the safety of human beings or domestic animals.

B.    Except as provided in subsection C of this section, a “dangerous dog” is any dog that:

1.    Has bitten or otherwise inflicted physical injury on a human being without provocation, on public or private property;

2.    Has, while off the premises of its keeper, killed a domestic animal without provocation; or 

3.    Has been previously classified as potentially dangerous and is found in violation of the provisions of this chapter.

C.    Exceptions to Potentially Dangerous and Dangerous Dog.

1.    No dog may be classified as potentially dangerous or dangerous if:

a.    It was acting against a trespasser who had illegally entered premises occupied by the keeper or custodian of the dog;

b.    The dog was being tormented, abused, assaulted or otherwise provoked;

c.    The dog was protecting property;

d.    The dog was protecting or defending a person within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an attack by a person or other animal, or if the dog was acting to defend itself from attack by another animal or person.

2.    No dog may be classified potentially dangerous or dangerous if the injury or damage to an animal was sustained while the dog was working as a police dog, hunting dog, service animals, herding dog, or predator control dog on the property of or under the control of its keeper and the damage or injury was to a species or type of animal appropriate to the work of the dog.

(Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002.)


8.04.082 Classification of dogs—Notice—Restrictions pending appeals.

A.    The animal control officer shall have the authority to determine, based on probable cause, that a dog is potentially dangerous or dangerous. The determination and classification of the animal shall be completed by the officer within three business days of the bite or attack report. In making the classification, the officer will consider all of the facts and circumstances of the incident, including but not limited to the following factors:

1.    The observed and reported past and present behavior of the dog;

2.    Whether the incident was accidental in nature;

3.    The extent of the injury to the person or animal attacked; and

4.    The keeper’s past history of compliance with the city and borough animal control code provisions pertaining to the dog involved in the incident.

B.    Written notice of a dog’s classification under subsection A shall be served on the keeper of the dog. The notice shall describe the dog, state the grounds for its classification, and state the restrictions and other requirements applicable to the dog by reason of its classification. The notice shall also state that if a written request for a hearing is filed with the animal control officer or police department within ten days after completion of service of the notice, a hearing will be conducted by the animal hearing board under Section 8.04.083 B to review the classification of the dog or any related written administrative orders issued by the officer. The right to a hearing shall be deemed waived if not timely requested as set forth in this subsection.

C.    The notice referred to in subsection B of this section shall be served either by personal delivery to the keeper or by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the keeper at the keeper’s last known address. Notice by personal delivery shall be complete upon delivery and notice by mail shall be deemed complete upon return of the receipt or upon return of the notice as undeliverable, refused, or unclaimed.

D.    Pending any hearing on the classification of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog, the animal control officer may require that the dog be kept securely confined on the premises of the keeper or other location acceptable to the officer, which may include quarantine at the animal shelter at the keeper’s expense.

(Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002.)


8.04.083 Animal hearing board.

A.    The animal hearing board shall be composed of five members and one alternate appointed by the assembly for three-year terms provided the initial terms shall be staggered as follows: one for a one-year term, two for two-year terms; two for three-year terms; and the alternate’s initial term shall be for three years. There shall be one member selected from each of the following groups if possible: licensed veterinarians or veterinary staff; organized animal interest groups; animal trainers, preferably experienced in handling problem animals; animal keepers from the general public; and non-animal keepers from the general public. The alternate shall also be selected from one of these groups.

B.    The animal hearing board shall:

1.    Hear appeals regarding the classification of dogs as potentially dangerous or dangerous;

2.    Review proposed written administrative orders or ordinances pertaining to this chapter;

3.    Make decisions on applications for reclassification of dogs under Section 8.04.091; and

C.    A hearing before the animal hearing board shall be held within five business days, or as soon as possible thereafter, after receipt of the request for a hearing. The hearing shall be informal, and technical rules of evidence shall not apply. In the board’s review of the classification of the dog, the board shall determine whether there is substantial evidence to uphold the animal control officer’s classification of the animal. “Substantial evidence” means such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind would accept as adequate to support a conclusion.

D.    The animal hearing board shall enter written findings of fact and conclusions of law, stating the reasons for the determination and indicating the evidence relied upon. The written decision shall be filed with the animal control officer and the city clerk and served on the keeper or custodian no later than forty-eight hours after the close of the hearing. The proceedings at the hearing shall be recorded and open to the public.

E.    If the board determines that the dog was improperly classified as dangerous, the board shall then determine if the dog is potentially dangerous. If the board determines that the dog is potentially dangerous or dangerous, the keeper shall comply with the requirements of this chapter applicable to potentially dangerous or dangerous dogs, and any associated written administrative orders by the animal hearing board. 

F.    In the event the board determines that the dog is neither potentially dangerous nor dangerous, no costs shall be charged for quarantine of the dog at the animal shelter incurred during pendency of the hearing.

G.    Any party may appeal a final decision of the animal control board to the district court for the state of Alaska sitting in Sitka no later than thirty days after the issuance of the animal control board’s decision.

(Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002.)


8.04.084 On-premises confinement.

While on the keeper’s property, a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog must be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure suitable to prevent the entry of children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. The enclosure must have minimum dimensions of five feet by ten feet and must have secure sides and a secure top. If the enclosure has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded into the ground to a depth of not less than one foot. The enclosure must also provide adequate protection from the elements and be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. (Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002.)


8.04.085 Off-premises restraint.

A potentially dangerous or dangerous dog may be off the keeper’s premises only if it is humanely muzzled and restrained by a substantial leash not exceeding six feet in length. The leash and dog shall be under the actual physical control of a person suitable to control the dog at all times. Such dogs shall not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts or buildings. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with the dog’s vision or respiration, but must prevent the dog from biting any person or animal. (Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002.)


8.04.086 Notification of change of status.

The keeper shall immediately notify the animal control officer if a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog is at large, unconfined, has attacked another animal or a human being, or has died, been sold, been given away, or is otherwise no longer in the possession of the keeper. If the dog has been sold or given away, the keeper shall provide the officer with the name, address and telephone number of the new keeper or custodian who, if located in the city and borough, shall comply with the requirements previously applied to the dog and the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002.)


8.04.087 Signs for potentially dangerous or dangerous dogs.

The keeper shall display signs in such form as required by the city and borough on the keeper’s premises warning that there is a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog on the premises. One sign must be visible from any public right-of-way abutting the premises. A sign must also be posted on the enclosure for the animal. If the animal is transported in a vehicle, a sign must be clearly visible that the animal transported is potentially dangerous or dangerous. (Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002.)


8.04.088 Special license and tag for potentially dangerous or dangerous dogs.

A.    An application for a special license shall be made to the animal control officer and shall include any other information requested by the animal control officer.

B.    Upon completion of all application requirements a special license and identification collar and tag will be issued at the owner’s expense. The keeper shall ensure that the issued tag is securely fastened to the required collar and the tag and collar must be worn by the dog at all times. The special license will be issued for a term of one year from the date of issue.

C.    If there is a change of ownership of the dog during the license year, the new keeper shall, within three business days, have the current license transferred to the new keeper’s name. (Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002.)


8.04.089 Destruction of dangerous dogs.

A.    The animal control officer may recommend to the court that any dogs classified as dangerous be humanely destroyed by the animal control officer or licensed veterinarian after being quarantined for such period as provided by law.

B.    The keeper may appeal the animal control officer’s decision to the animal hearing board. The animal hearing board may review the animal control officer’s recommendation and make its own recommendations to the court.

C.    Any dangerous dog involved in a violation of this chapter may be ordered destroyed by the court.

(Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002.)


8.04.090 Rabies control.

A.    Every animal that bites a person or a domestic animal and breaks the skin shall be promptly reported to the Sitka police department and the local health officer and shall be securely quarantined under the direction of the local health officer for the period of ten days and shall not be released from such quarantine except by permission by the health officer or a licensed veterinarian and the keeper of such animal can produce evidence of proper licensing and rabies immunizations.

B.    The keeper, upon demand by the animal control officer or health officer, shall forthwith surrender any animal which has bitten a human and which is suspected of having been exposed to rabies for supervised quarantine, the expense of such quarantine shall be borne by the keeper. Such animal may be reclaimed by the keeper if judged free of rabies upon payment of expenses of such supervised quarantine.

C.    When an animal under quarantine has been diagnosed as being rabid, or suspected by a licensed veterinarian as being rabid, the veterinarian shall immediately send the iced, intact head of such animal to the local health officer for pathological examination.

D.    When the report of the health officer gives a positive diagnosis of rabies, the health department may recommend and invoke an area-wide quarantine. During such quarantine, no animal may be taken or shipped from the city and borough without written permission of the local health officer.

E.    The keeper of any animal under quarantine, or tested for rabies, shall bear all cost of such quarantine or testing.

F.    The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall, upon demand, be surrendered to the health department.

G.    The health department shall direct the disposal of any animal found to be infected with rabies.

H.    No person may refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or destruction as required when demand is made by the animal control officer or health department.

(Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002: Ord. 89-875 § 4(C), 1989; Ord. 79-405 § 4(9), 1979; B.C.S. § 9.04.090.)


8.04.091 Reclassification of dogs.

A.    The keeper of any dog classified as potentially dangerous or dangerous may appeal for reclassification of the dog to the animal hearing board. Applications with respect to dogs classified as potentially dangerous and dangerous will be reviewed and acted upon by the animal control officer. An appeal of that decision may be taken to the animal hearing board. A request for a hearing to review a decision of the animal control officer on an application for reclassification must be filed within ten days after completion of service of the notice of decision; notice shall be served in the manner set forth in Section 8.04.082(C).

B.    In order to be eligible for reclassification, the following criteria shall be considered:

1.    The nature and circumstances of prior occurrences with the dog that resulted in its classification as potentially dangerous or dangerous; and

2.    Whether the keeper has been in compliance with all requirements concerning the dog since its classification as potentially dangerous or dangerous.

C.    A second classification of a dog as potentially dangerous or dangerous after removal of the classification pursuant to subsection A of this section shall result in the dog being permanently ineligible for removal of the classification under this section.

(Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002.)


8.04.092 Sanitary disposal requirements.

A.    No keeper may permit a dog to be in any of the leash law areas unless the keeper has immediately available a container which is intended to be used to remove any fecal matter left by the dog and a suitable container in which the fecal matter is to be stored until properly disposed of.

B.    A keeper who permits a dog to be in any of the leash law areas must immediately remove all fecal matter left by the dog on such property.

(Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002.)


8.04.093 Dog parks.

A.    Areas recommended by the parks and recreation committee, parks and recreation manager, and administrator, and subject to approval of the assembly, may be designated as dog parks. Such areas shall include the following locations: 

1.    Fenced area in the west lawn section of Turnaround Park.

B.    Keepers and custodians of dogs may use the dog park with their dogs if the dog is licensed under Section 8.04.020. Such licensing includes the requirement that the dog have a current rabies vaccination. 

C.    The following rules shall be followed by all keepers and custodians that use the dog park with their dogs, and shall be posted at the dog park: 

1.    Objectionable and dangerous dogs, as defined under Sections 8.04.080 and 8.04.081, and female dogs in heat are prohibited from using the dog park;

2.    Dogs shall be leashed upon entering and leaving the dog park;

3.    Dogs may be unleashed while in the dog park, but must be under control of the keepers and/or custodians as defined in this chapter;

4.    Keepers and/or custodians shall keep their dogs in sight and under voice control at all times that their dog is using the dog park;

5.    Keepers and/or custodians shall remain with their dogs in the dog park area;

6.    Keepers and/or custodians shall clean up and remove any dogs feces left by their dog while entering, leaving, or using the dog park;

7.    Holes dug by dogs must be filled by the keeper and/or custodian;

8.    Keepers and/or custodians shall be responsible for all actions of their dogs while their dogs are entering, leaving, or using the dog park;

9.    Aggressive or unruly dogs, including dogs that play roughly, are not allowed to enter or use the dog park; and

10.    It is recommended that any children be supervised by a parent or guardian while at any dog park.

D.    The parks and recreation committee may recommend additional rules for dog parks, which are subject to approval by the parks and recreation manager and the administrator, without requiring assembly approval. Additional approved rules shall be posted.

E.    Any keeper or custodian of a dog who violates any rule in this section is subject to the penalties in Section 8.04.210. In addition to any penalties under Section 8.04.210, the administrator may prohibit any keeper or custodian and their dog from using the dog park who violates any of the rules in this section.

(Ord. 07-23 § 4 (part), 2007.)


8.04.100 Immunization for rabies.

No person shall own, keep or harbor a dog or cat over sixteen weeks of age within the city and borough limits unless the dog or cat has received an immunization for rabies. (Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002: Ord. 95-1302 § 4(A) (part), 1995; B.C.S. § 9.04.100.)


8.04.110 Dead animals.

A.    No person shall deposit any dead or fatally sick or injured animal upon any public or private place except as provided herein or into any body of water.

B.    All persons shall immediately dispose of any dead animal, whether their own or found upon their property, either by proper burial or by incineration at an appropriate facility, or the police department shall remove the carcass upon request. If there is a tag or other form of identification on the animal, the property owner shall make a reasonable effort to locate the keeper of the animal and notify him or her of the animal’s death.

(Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002: Ord. 79-405 § 4(10), 1979; B.C.S. § 9.04.110.)


8.04.120 Exemptions.

A.    The licensing requirements of this chapter do not apply to any dog belonging to nonresidents of the city and borough and kept within the city and borough for not longer than forty-five days. However, all such dogs shall at all times while in the city and borough be subject to all other requirements of this chapter.

B.    No license fee for those animals trained to aid handicapped persons is required. Impoundment fees or other penalties mentioned in this chapter shall not apply to animals trained to aid handicapped persons, so long as the animal is being used as an aid to that person. A tag for identification purposes shall be provided to animals aiding handicapped persons upon presentation of proof of immunization to the animal control officer as provided in subsection 8.04.020A.

(Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002: Ord. 89-875 § 4(D), (E), 1989; B.C.S. § 9.04.120.)


8.04.140 Records.

A.    Accurate and detailed records shall be kept as to:

1.    Licenses issued;

2.    Dogs impounded;

3.    Disposition of all animals coming into the custody of the animal control officer;

4.    All bite cases reported to the police;

5.    All moneys received; and

6.    Name and address of the keeper and the animal’s name and license number.

B.    The animal control officer shall designate where these records are to be kept and who is responsible for their establishment and maintenance.

(Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002: Ord. 89-875 § 4(F), 1989; Ord. 79-405 § 4(11), 1979; B.C.S. § 9.04.140.)


8.04.150 Citations.

A.    A citation may be issued by a law enforcement officer for a violation of any provision of this chapter. 

B.    A properly charged and filed citation shall be deemed a lawful complaint for the purpose of prosecution under this chapter. 

(Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002: Ord. 89-875 § 4(G), 1989; Ord. 87-776 § 4, 1987; Ord. 86-729 § 4(J–M), 1986; Ord. 79-405 § 4(12) and (13), 1979; B.C.S. § 9.04.150.)


8.04.160 Responsibilities of keeper of a domestic animal.

No keeper of any domestic animal shall allow such animal to enter into any public building where food for human consumption is sold, processed, stored or consumed or to enter into any barbershops or establishments for the practice of hairdressing or beauty culture. (Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002: B.C.S. § 9.04.160.)


8.04.170 Responsibilities of owner of public building.

No owner or operator of a public building where food for human consumption is sold, processed, stored or consumed, barbershops or establishment for the practice of hairdressing or beauty culture shall allow any domestic animal to enter or to remain thereon. (Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002: B.C.S. § 9.04.170.)


8.04.180 Service dogs exempt.

None of the provisions of Sections 8.04.031, 8.04.040, 8.04.160, and 8.04.170 shall apply to a dog whose keeper is a member of the organization that is involved in service dog training and the dog in training is to be a service dog or to dogs in use as trained, certified and properly certified to use as service dogs. Any person may apply to the animal hearing board to disallow any dog from being exempt from the provisions of above mentioned sections. (Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002: Ord. 91-955 § 4, 1991: Ord. 89-875 § 4(H), 1989: G.C.S. § 9.04.180.)


8.04.190 Enforcement.

Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the city and borough from entering into a contract with a person or agency for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002: B.C.S. § 9.04.190.)


8.04.200 Disposal of animals at keeper’s request.

Upon execution of a consent including a promise to hold the city and borough harmless from any liability, a keeper may request the police to dispose of any animal free of charge. A keeper must, however, pay any accumulated impound charges. (Ord. 02-1656 § 4(A), 2002: Ord. 79-405 § 4(14), 1979; B.C.S. § 9.04.200.)


8.04.210 Penalties.

A.    The maximum penalty for violation of the provisions of this chapter is five hundred dollars. 

B.    The chief of police shall establish a fine schedule for the offenses in this chapter and include offenses and/or additional penalties as listed in Section 23.30.020.

1.    The fine schedule shall be entitled “Fine Schedule for Animal Control Offenses,” and shall include the effective date of the fine schedule.

2.    The fine schedule for animal control offenses shall list the number of the ordinance that defines the offense, the name of the offense and the amount of the fine for the offense. The fine must be a specific dollar amount. It cannot be a range of amounts.

3.    The fine schedule for animal control offenses shall be published on the Sitka police department website under the tab for “Animal Control,” and copies shall be posted at the Sitka animal shelter and Sitka police department.

4.    If a citation has been issued for an offense listed on the fine schedule for animal control offenses, a person has the option to state, in writing, on a copy of the citation or a form provided by the court system, that they want to:

a.    Dispose of the citation without court appearance by paying the fine amount plus the state surcharge as provided in AS 12.25.195 through 12.25.230, 12.55.039 and 29.25.074. The total amount of fine and state surcharge will be listed on the citation, as well as the date the payment is due; or

b.    Appear in court for a hearing or trial. 

5.    The fines under this subsection may not be judicially reduced.

C.    If a citation has been issued for an offense not listed on the fine schedule, the defendant must appear in court to answer to the charges. 

D.    The court shall have the power to review all actions under this chapter and to fashion remedies in accordance with it.

E.    For purposes of this section, prior offenses must be within the previous five years and shall be charged to the keeper and/or custodian and not a particular animal.

(Ord. 15-50 § 4, 2015: Ord. 13-19 § 4 (part), 2013: Ord. 10-25 § 4 (part), 2010: Ord. 02-1699 § 4(B), 2002.)


Chapter 8.08 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS

Sections:

8.08.010    Cruelty to animals.

8.08.020    Abandonment.

8.08.030    Striking animal, livestock, with vehicle.

8.08.040    Use of live bird for target practice.

8.08.050    Fighting or baiting of animals.

8.08.060    Poison and traps.

8.08.070    Investigation.

8.08.080    Disposition of animals.

8.08.090    Recovery of costs.


8.08.010 Cruelty to animals. 

It is unlawful for a person to:

A.    Neglect an animal by failing to give the animal that degree of care which a person of ordinary prudence would give under the same circumstances. The care must include sufficient food and clean water, adequate shelter and protection from the weather, health care and clean living conditions in accordance with accepted veterinary practice;

B.    Wound, injure, torment, poison, provoke or otherwise physically abuse an animal;

C.    Kill or injure any animal, unless such act is necessary to defend a human being or other animal from immediate attack, provided this subsection does not prohibit humane euthanasia of animals or the harvest of livestock;

D.    Abandon an animal which is owned by or in the custody of such person;

E.    Own, possess, keep or train an animal with the intent that it be engaged in an exhibition of fighting; or

F.    Instigate, promote, attend or have a pecuniary interest in an exhibition of fighting animals.

(Ord. 02-1656 § 4(B), 2002: Ord. 72-32 § 3(a), 1972.)


8.08.020 Abandonment.

No person shall intentionally abandon a domestic creature, or livestock, whether or not it is sick, maimed, infirm, or disabled, except where there is a caretaker who has assumed responsibility for proper food, water and other needs of such creature. (Ord. 72-32 § 3(b), 1972.)


8.08.030 Striking animal, livestock, with vehicle.

No person, while driving any vehicle, shall strike any domestic creature, or livestock, with the vehicle and knowingly abandon the creature at the scene of the occurrence or thereafter. (Ord. 72-32 § 3(c), 1972.)


8.08.040 Use of live bird for target practice.

No person shall use a live bird or fowl as a target, or to shoot at, or for any other inhumane purposes, either for amusement, marksmanship, or be a party to acts. This section shall not apply to the lawful shooting of game. (Ord. 72-32 § 3(d), 1972.)


8.08.050 Fighting or baiting of animals.

No person shall procure or be a party or witness to the fighting or baiting of live creatures for amusement or profit. (Ord. 72-32 § 3(e), 1972.)


8.08.060 Poison and traps.

A.    No person shall set any animal trap, nor utilize any poisonous substance (except for rodent control within his own building, house or other structure), except that this section shall not apply to federal, state or municipal officials exercising lawful functions delegated to them by statute, ordinance, rule or regulation. This section shall not apply to trapping as defined in AS Section 16.05.940 where such trapping is done in accordance with applicable fish and game regulations.

B.    Citizens may use live traps for the purpose of capturing animals. However animals captured in such traps, may not be killed but must be delivered to a veterinarian for determination of whether such animals are domestic or feral. If the animal captured is domestic it must be kept for a minimum of seventy-two hours at the animal shelter. Others may be destroyed.

C.    The police may use traps and bait to catch dogs, or any other reasonable method. If a dog, running at large, cannot be readily apprehended otherwise, it may be shot by the police.

(Ord. 89-875 § 4(J), 1989; Ord. 79-405 § 4(15), 1979; Ord. 72-32 § 3(f), 1972.)


8.08.070 Investigation.

For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this chapter and to enforce its provisions, the canine control officer may enter, upon formal complaint, the premises where any animal is kept in a reportedly cruel or inhumane manner, examine such animal, and take possession of such animal when, in his opinion, the welfare of the animal requires its removal from the premises. (Ord. 72-32 § 3(g), 1972.)


8.08.080 Disposition of animals.

A.    A person cited for cruelty to animals may:

1.    Forfeit bail and relinquish the animal to the animal control officer; or

2.    Request the animal hearing board to set a date for a hearing within fourteen days or as soon as possible thereafter so that it may issue an advisory opinion prior to the mandatory court appearance.

B.    Any person who has been convicted of any offense under this chapter shall not be entitled to the return or possession of any animal(s) seized subject to the original investigation. The chief of police or his or her designee may take possession of such animal(s) and determine the disposition of the animal.

C.    No person having been convicted of any violation under this chapter two or more times shall be allowed to own or have care, custody or control of any domestic animal or livestock. The chief of police or his or her designee may take possession of any such animal(s) and determine the disposition of the animal at any such time such animal is observed in such person’s care, custody or control.

D.    Ten years after the second conviction under subsection C of this section, the person may make application to the animal hearing board for an advisory opinion on the rehabilitation of that person and his or her suitability to own an animal. The person may then apply to the court to issue an order declaring that person rehabilitated with respect to subsection 8.08.080C and this chapter.

(Ord. 02-1656 § 4(C), 2002.)


8.08.090 Recovery of costs.

The owner and/or person who had care, custody or control of any animal described in subsection 8.08.080A or from whom such animal was seized subject to an investigation for a violation of this chapter shall be financially responsible to the city and borough for all reasonable costs incurred for providing for or caring for the needs of such animal, including but not limited to:

A.    Veterinary fees;

B.    Food;

C.    Shelter;

D.    Licensing and registration;

E.    Adoption fees; and

F.    Disposal and/or euthanasia fees.

(Ord. 02-1656 § 4(D), 2002.)


Title 9 HEALTH AND SANITATION 

Chapters:

9.08    Refuse Collection and Disposal

9.12    Litter

9.16    Ambulance Service

9.20    Smoking in Public Places and Places of Employment

9.22    Tobacco Distribution to Persons under the Age of Twenty-One 

9.24    Bear Attraction Nuisance

NOTE:    Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this title.


Chapter 9.08 REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL1

Sections:

9.08.010    Definitions.

9.08.020    Customer service policy.

9.08.025    Garbage service.

9.08.030    Disposal of refuse.

9.08.040    Applicability.


9.08.010 Definitions.

The terms and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

A.    “Disposal” includes the incineration, collection, disposal or handling of refuse;

B.    “Refuse” means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste, except body waste, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, solid market and industrial waste, and used motor oils or fuel.

(Ord. 00-1570 § 4(A), 2000; Ord. 85-672 § 4(A), 1985; Ord. 72-18 § 4, 1972.)


9.08.020 Customer service policy.

The rates for and manner of collection and disposal of refuse shall be governed by Section III of the city and borough of Sitka customer service policies which are adopted and amended by ordinance. (Ord. 95-1335 §§ 4(A) (part), (B), 1995: Ord. 72-18 § 8, 1972.)


9.08.025 Garbage service.

A.    Every residential unit and business served through an electrical meter, except vacant buildings, shall use and pay for the garbage service provided by the municipality.

B.    Every user of the municipal garbage service shall use a garbage container provided by the municipality’s solid waste contractor. Exceptions to this policy may be considered by the municipality if the solid waste customer or municipality solid waste contractor is unable to manipulate the garbage container provided by the municipality’s solid waste collection contractor.

(Ord. 13-12 § 4, 2013; Ord. 00-1570 § 4(B), 2000.)


9.08.030 Disposal of refuse.

It is unlawful to dump, burn without permit, bury, destroy or otherwise dispose of refuse within the jurisdictional limits of the city and borough, except at a disposal site approved by the public works director. All refuse shall be delivered to a site directed by the public works director based on the type of refuse, and such direction shall be announced in public notices posted at the location of each disposal site. The maximum penalty for a violation of this section is a fine of two hundred fifty dollars, with each day the violation continues constituting a separate violation. (Ord. 03-1725 § 4 (part), 2003: Ord. 01-1617 § 4, 2001: Ord. 95-1335 § 4(A) (part), 1995; Ord. 85-672 § 4(B), 1984; Ord. 72-18 § 9, 1972.)


9.08.040 Applicability.

This chapter shall apply to those areas of the municipality accessible by roads maintained either by the state or municipality. (Ord. 95-1335 § 4(A) (part), 1995; Ord. 85-672 § 4(F), 1985.)


Chapter 9.12 LITTER

Sections:

9.12.010    Unlawful acts.

9.12.015    Penalties for violation of Section 9.12.010.

9.12.020    Notice to abate—Removal by municipality.

9.12.030    Definitions.


9.12.010 Unlawful acts.

It is unlawful for any person to do any of the following:

A.    Cause or allow litter to be collected, deposited or to remain in any place under his control;

B.    Throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place except in public receptacles or containers, in authorized private receptacles or containers for collection, or in disposal areas designated by the municipality;

C.    Sweep into, or deposit in, any gutter, street or other public place the accumulation of litter from any residence, building, or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter;

D.    Drive or move any vehicle which is carelessly loaded, or not constructed to prevent its load, or litter on it, from falling upon any street, alley or public place;

E.    Distribute any handbills without either securing them to the building or vehicle to which they are being distributed, or handing them directly to a person willing to accept them;

F.    Throw or deposit litter on any private property, whether owned by the person or not;

G.    Keep, maintain, or deposit an abandoned or junked vehicle on private or public property within the public view.

1.    A vehicle shall be deemed abandoned or junked under the following circumstances:

a.    If the vehicle has obvious physical deterioration, such as broken or smashed windows, wheels and tires missing, portions of the body dented or rusted out to a large degree and any other physical evidence showing neglect; or

b.    If the vehicle lacks current vehicle registration and license, unless neatly stored and covered with a tarp or other method to clearly show the intent for storage for future use;

2.    A junked or abandoned vehicle deposited in any place in violation of this subsection is considered to have been so deposited by the last registered owner of the vehicle unless the last registered owner has filed a transfer or assignment in accordance with AS 28.10.271, in which case proof of the filing of the notice shall constitute prima facie evidence that the transferee named in the notice was the person who deposited the person who deposited the junked or abandoned vehicle in violation of this section. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, a bill of sale or other evidence could also show transfer of ownership from the last registered owner for purposes of this subsection;

H.    Deposit litter in or about a residential garbage can or container, commercial dumpster or container, or other container owned or leased by another as a receptacle for litter unless the person depositing the litter has been authorized to do so by the owner or lessee of the container;

I.    Deposit more than ten pounds of litter in or about a litter container placed by a government agency on public property unless the litter was generated while making a permitted use of the public property associated with the container. Unless otherwise posted on the containers, garbage containers placed by a government agency within highway rights-of-way, parking areas abutting a public highway, scenic pullouts or overlooks, highway rest areas and similar places serving the traveling public may be used only for the deposit of litter generated while making a lawful use of such area or while traveling upon the streets and highways;

J.    Deposit more than ten pounds of litter in or about a litter container which is on a facility or property which is a part of a municipally operated harbor facility unless the litter was generated during the use of a boat, whether it was generated while the boat was inside the harbor or was afloat or underway outside the harbor or unless the litter was generated on an island other than Baranof Island or Japonski Island.

(Ord. 04-50 § 4(A), 2004; Ord. 03-1725 § 4 (part), 2003: Ord. 89-866 § 4(A), 1989; Ord. 86-740 § 4(A), 1986: Ord. 82-521 § 4(A) (part), 1982; Ord. 73-52 § 3 (part), 1973.)


9.12.015 Penalties for violation of Section 9.12.010.

Except for a violation of Section 9.12.010(G), the maximum penalty for a violation of Section 9.12.010 is a fine of two hundred fifty dollars, with each day the violation continues constituting a separate offense. A court finding a defendant guilty of a violation of Section 9.12.010(G) shall impose a fine of three hundred dollars for each day that the vehicle remains in violation of the law after the expiration of a period prescribed by law that is set out in a notice provided by the city and borough pursuant to law.    Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, upon conviction of a violation of Section 9.12.010(G), the court shall order the defendant to make restitution to the city and borough for the actual costs incurred by the city and borough for towing, impounding, storage, and disposal of the vehicle. The penalties set out in this subsection are in addition to any penalties, fees, costs, charges, or orders that may be lawfully assessed, imposed, or sought pursuant to other civil, criminal, quasi-criminal, or administrative actions. (Ord. 04-50 § 4(B), 2004: Ord. 03-1725 § 4 (part), 2003.)


9.12.020 Notice to abate—Removal by municipality.

A.    Notice.

1.    The planning director, or other agent assigned by the municipality, is authorized to require the owner or occupier of any property and the last registered owner of any abandoned or junked vehicle to properly dispose of such vehicle located on the private or public property.

2.    Notice of such requirement shall be by certified mail, postage prepaid, and addressed to the proper person at the last known address or by personal service of such notice.

B.    Enforcement.

1.    Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any person so notified to properly dispose of litter or a junked or abandoned vehicle, or to repair and license it, within twenty days after receipt of the written notice, or within thirty days after the date of the notice in the event the same is returned to the municipality because of inability to make delivery, the planning director or other person designated by the municipality is authorized to arrange for the disposing of such litter or abandoned or junked vehicle. The property owner and, in the case of a vehicle, the registered owner, shall be jointly and severally liable for litter disposal cost with accrued interest at a rate of twelve percent per year.

2.    The above notice shall include notice of the right to an administrative hearing before the assembly to contest the determination that the vehicle is litter, abandoned or junked. The hearing must be requested within the twenty-day time frame specified in the notice. The notice shall also state that the property owner and the last registered vehicle owner shall be jointly and severally liable for all disposal costs, with accrued interest at a rate of twelve percent per year.

C.    The remedy set out in this section is in addition to any criminal charges which may be brought against the person allowing litter, or junked or abandoned vehicles, to be in an unlawful place, and this section does not, in any way, restrict a court of proper jurisdiction from imposing further penalties and remedies it deems to be proper, up to the maximum set out in the penalty provisions of this code.

D.    Any vehicle removed by the municipality under this chapter, may, after the twenty-day notice, be immediately junked. No such vehicle shall thereafter be registered for highway use.

E.    The transfer of title to any vehicle already designated by the planning director, or any agent assigned by the municipality as litter, or abandoned, or junked, shall not affect the running of the twenty-day notice period, nor affect the ability of the municipality to dispose of such vehicle or litter.

(Ord. 07-22 § 4 (part), 2007; Ord. 90-931 § 4, 1990; Ord. 89-866 § 4(B), 1989; Ord. 86-740 § 4(B), 1986.)


9.12.030 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations should have the meaning given in this section:

A.    “Litter” means garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined in this chapter and all waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.

B.    “Garbage” means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.

C.    “Refuse” means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except human body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned vehicles, solid market and industrial wastes, and used motor oils or fuel.

D.    “Rubbish” means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and incombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin and aluminum cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.

E.    “Vehicle” means boats, boat trailers, any form of motor vehicle, whether it be four-wheel, two-wheel, three-wheel, or otherwise, and any other mode of transportation which would normally come under such a definition.

(Ord. 03-1725 § 4 (part), 2003: Ord. 94-1238 § 4, 1994.)


Chapter 9.16 AMBULANCE SERVICE

Sections:

9.16.010    Authority.

9.16.020    Charges.

9.16.030    Emergency service.


9.16.010 Authority.

Until such time as a competent private commercial ambulance service is available to the general public, the police department and fire department of the municipality have the authority to use any of their vehicles for an ambulance for emergency purposes. (Ord. 73-61 § 3 (part), 1973.)


9.16.020 Charges.

The assembly shall provide from time to time for charges for such services. (Ord. 98-1479 § 4, 1998.)


9.16.030 Emergency service.

The operation of the ambulance service by the municipality is declared an emergency service to be performed by the municipality only because no private service is available. It is declared necessary for the public health and welfare that such ambulance service be available. The ambulance need not be staffed by a doctor, nurse or other medical personnel. No minimum facilities are required to be available in the ambulance. Except for gross negligence, all persons being transported ride at their own risk. (Ord. 73-61 § 3 (part), 1973.)


Chapter 9.20 SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES AND PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT

Sections:

9.20.005    Definitions.

9.20.010    Application to city and borough-owned facilities.

9.20.015    Prohibition of smoking in public places.

9.20.020    Prohibition of smoking in places of employment.

9.20.025    Reasonable distance.

9.20.030    Where smoking is not regulated.

9.20.035    Declaration of establishment as nonsmoking—Prohibition of children in places where smoking is permitted.

9.20.040    Posting of signs.

9.20.045    Mineralization.

9.20.050    Enforcement.

9.20.055    Violations and penalties.

9.20.060    Other applicable laws.

9.20.070    Popular name.


9.20.005 Definitions.

The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as defined in this section:

A.     “Business” means a sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other business entity formed for profit-making purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional services are delivered.

B.    “Employee” means a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit.

C.     “Employer” means a person, business, partnership, association, corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or nonprofit entity, that employs the services of one or more individual persons.

D.    “Enclosed area” means all space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of doorways), which extend from the floor to the ceiling.

E.    “Health care facility” means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. This definition shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within health care facilities.

F.    “Place of employment” means an area under the control of a public or private employer that employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, and vehicles. A private residence is not a “place of employment” unless it is used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility.

G.    “Public place” means an enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to, banks, educational facilities, health care facilities, laundromats, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, sports arenas, theaters, and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a “public place” unless it is used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility.

H.    “Restaurant” means an eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. 

I.    “Retail tobacco store” means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental.

J.    “Service line” means an indoor line in which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money.

K.    “Shopping mall” means an enclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to connect retail or professional establishments.

L.    “Smoking” means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted tobacco product in any form, with the exemption of religious ceremonies.

M.    “Sports arena” means sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys, and other similar enclosed places where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports or other events.

(Ord. 05-29 § 4 (part), 2005.)


9.20.010 Application to city and borough-owned facilities.

All enclosed facilities, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the city and borough of Sitka shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 05-29 § 4 (part), 2005.)


9.20.015 Prohibition of smoking in public places.

Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within the city and borough of Sitka including, but not limited to, the following places:

A.    Aquariums, fish hatcheries, galleries, libraries, and museums.

B.    Areas available to and customarily used by the general public in businesses and nonprofit entities patronized by the public, including, but not limited to, professional offices, banks, laundromats, hotels, and motels.

C.    Areas and/or buildings that host youth agencies.

D.    Bingo facilities.

E.    Convention facilities.

F.    Elevators.

G.    Facilities primarily used for exhibiting a motion picture, stage, drama, lecture, musical recital, or other similar performance.

H.    Health care facilities.

I.    Licensed child care and adult day care facilities.

J.    Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other multiple-unit residential facilities.

K.    Polling places.

L.    Public transportation facilities, including buses and taxicabs, under the authority of the city and borough of Sitka and ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transit depots.

M.    Restaurants.

N.    Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, and other common-use areas.

O.    Retail stores.

P.    Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings, under the control of an agency, board, commission, committee or council of the city and borough of Sitka or a political subdivision of the state when a public meeting is in progress, to the extent the place is subject to the jurisdiction of the city and borough of Sitka.

Q.    Service lines.

R.    Shopping malls.

S.    Sports arenas, including enclosed places in outdoor arenas.

T.    Vessels inspected by the U.S. Coast Guard which are day boats with no overnight accommodations and are larger in capacity than a “six-pack” but have a capacity of less than one hundred fifty passengers.

(Ord. 05-29 § 4 (part), 2005.)


9.20.020 Prohibition of smoking in places of employment.

A.    Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed facilities within places of employment without exception. This includes common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, vehicles, and all other enclosed facilities.

B.    This prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to all existing employees by the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and to all prospective employees upon their application for employment.

(Ord. 05-29 § 4 (part), 2005.)


9.20.025 Reasonable distance.

Smoking shall be prohibited near entrances, windows and ventilation systems of all work sites of public places where smoking is prohibited by this regulation. Any individual who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to jurisdiction under this regulation shall establish a no smoking area which extends a reasonable distance from any entrance, windows and ventilation systems to any enclosed area where smoking is prohibited; such reasonable distance shall be a distance sufficient to ensure that persons entering or leaving the building or facility shall not be subjected to breathing tobacco smoke and to ensure that tobacco smoke does not enter the building or facility through entrances, windows, ventilation systems or any other means. All smoking trash receptacles shall be placed outside the no smoking area in order to discourage smoking within the established boundaries. (Ord. 05-29 § 4 (part), 2005.)


9.20.030 Where smoking is not regulated.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, the following areas shall be exempt from the provisions of Sections 9.20.015 and 9.20.020:

A.    Private residences, except when used as a licensed child care, adult day care, or health care facility.

B.    Private vehicles.

C.    Marine vessels, except vessels inspected by the U.S. Coast Guard which are day boats with no overnight accommodations and are larger in capacity than a “six-pack” but have a capacity of less than one hundred fifty passengers.

D.    Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms; provided, however, that not more than twenty percent of rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated.

E.    Private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes and long-term care facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers and have requested in writing to be placed in a room where smoking is permitted.

F.    Outdoor areas of places of employment except those covered by the provisions of Section 9.20.025.

G.    Any bar, defined as an establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages, as long as such bar is in a “stand-alone building” and the bar shares no common entries, exits, or internal doors with any public places subject to Sections 9.20.015 and 9.20.020.

H.    Private clubs, including but not limited to the Elks, Moose, and American Legion, as long as each such private club is in a “stand-alone building” and the private club shares no common entries, exits, or internal doors with any public places subject to Sections 9.20.015 and 9.20.020.

(Ord. 05-29 § 4 (part), 2005.)


9.20.035 Declaration of establishment as nonsmoking—Prohibition of children in places where smoking is permitted.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility, or outdoor area may declare that entire establishment, facility, or outdoor area as a nonsmoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which a sign conforming to the requirements of Section 9.20.040 is posted. Children under the age of eighteen shall not be permitted in any place of employment under Section 9.20.020, or club or bar where smoking is allowed under Section 9.20.030(G) and (H). Furthermore, no cessation of smoking within the smoking facility shall render this section inapplicable unless such facility permanently deems and declares themselves to be a nonsmoking facility. Once the declaration of an establishment, facility, or outdoor area as smoking has been made under this section, it shall not be changed for temporary or special functions. (Ord. 14-02 § 4, 2014: Ord. 05-29 § 4 (part), 2005.)


9.20.040 Posting of signs.

A.    “No Smoking” signs or the international “No Smoking” symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this chapter by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of that place.

B.    Every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this chapter shall have posted at every exterior entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited.

(Ord. 05-29 § 4 (part), 2005.)


9.20.045 Nonretaliation.

No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment, or customer because that employee, applicant, or customer exercises any rights afforded by this chapter or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 05-29 § 4 (part), 2005.)


9.20.050 Enforcement.

A.    This chapter shall be enforced by the Sitka police department or by other officials so authorized by the city and borough administrator.

B.    Notice of the provisions of this chapter shall be given to all applicants for a business license in the city and borough of Sitka.

C.    Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this chapter may request/solicit enforcement from/with the Sitka police department.

D.    The public works department, fire department, or their designees shall, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, inspect for compliance with this chapter.

E.    An owner, manager, operator, or employee of an establishment regulated by this chapter shall inform persons violating this chapter of the appropriate provisions thereof.

F.    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an employee or private citizen may bring legal action to enforce this chapter.

G.    In addition to the remedies provided by the provisions of this section, the city and borough administrator or any person aggrieved by the failure of the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of a public place or a place of employment to comply with the provisions of this chapter may apply for injunctive relief to enforce those provisions in any court of competent jurisdiction.

(Ord. 05-29 § 4 (part), 2005.)


9.20.055 Violations and penalties.

A.    A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars.

B.    A person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment and who willfully fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by:

1.    A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation.

2.    A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation within one year.

3.    A fine not exceeding three hundred dollars for each additional violation within one year.

C.    Each day on which a violation of this chapter occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation.

(Ord. 05-29 § 4 (part), 2005.)


9.20.060 Other applicable laws.

This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. (Ord. 05-29 § 4 (part), 2005.)


9.20.070 Popular name.

This law shall be known as the Sitka Clean Indoor Air Law of 2005. (Ord. 05-29 § 4 (part), 2005.)


Chapter 9.22 TOBACCO DISTRIBUTION TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF TWENTY-ONE 

Sections:

9.22.010    Definitions. 

9.22.020    Prohibition and policy. 

9.22.030    Signage. 

9.22.040    Enforcement. 


9.22.010 Definitions. 

A.    “Distribute” or “distribution” or “distributing” means to furnish, give, provide, or to attempt to do so, whether gratuitously or for any type of compensation.

B.    “Distributor” means a person who distributes a tobacco product.

C.    “Electronic smoking device” means any device that can be used to deliver aerosolized or vaporized nicotine to the person inhaling from the device, including, but not limited to, an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, vape pen or e-hookah. “Electronic smoking device” includes any component, part, or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately, and includes any substance intended to be aerosolized or vaporized during the use of the device. “Electronic smoking device” does not include drugs, devices, or combination products authorized for sale by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, as those terms are defined in the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act.

D.    “Person” means any natural person, partnership, joint venture, society, club, trustee, trust, association, organization, or corporation, or any officer, agent, employee, factor, or any other personal representative thereof, in any capacity.

E.    “Recipient” means any person who obtains or attempts to obtain a tobacco product.

F.    “Tobacco product” means any product that is made from or derived from tobacco, and is intended for human consumption or is likely to be consumed, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled or ingested by any other means, including, but not limited to, a cigarette, a cigar, pipe tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff, snus, or an electronic smoking device. The term includes any component or accessory used in the consumption of a tobacco product, such as filters, rolling papers, pipes, or liquids used in electronic smoking devices. “Tobacco product” does not include drugs, devices, or combination products authorized for sale by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, as those terms are defined in the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act.

G.    “Licensed vendor/retailer” means any person, corporation, or business entity that operates a store, stand, booth, concession, or other place at which sales of cigarette or other tobacco products are made to purchase for consumption or use.

(Ord. 18-24 § 4 (part), 2018.)


9.22.020 Prohibition and policy. 

A.    The sale or distribution of any tobacco product to a person under the age of twenty-one is prohibited.

B.    Before distributing any tobacco product, the distributor shall verify that the recipient is at least twenty-one years of age, through examination of the recipient’s government-issued photographic identification.

C.    Nothing in this chapter prohibits an underage person from handling tobacco products in the course of lawful employment and in compliance with state of Alaska statutes and policies.

(Ord. 18-24 § 4 (part), 2018.)


9.22.030 Signage. 

No person shall sell or distribute or permit the sale or distribution of tobacco products in the city and borough unless a clearly visible notice is posted at the location where tobacco products are available for purchase. The notice shall state “No person under the age of 21 may purchase tobacco products,” legibly printed in letters at least one-half inch high. (Ord. 18-24 § 4 (part), 2018.)


9.22.040 Enforcement. 

A.    Any licensed vendor/retailer found to have violated the provisions of this chapter shall be charged with a minor offense. The maximum penalty for violation of the provisions of this chapter is one thousand dollars.

    In accordance with AS 29.25.070(a), citations for offenses in this chapter may be disposed of as provided in AS 12.25.175 through 12.25.230, without a court appearance, upon payment of the fine amounts stated herein plus the state surcharge required by AS 12.55.039 and 29.25.074. Fines must be paid to the city and borough. The Alaska Rules of Minor Offense Procedure in the Alaska Rules of Court apply to all offenses referenced herein. Citations charging these offenses must meet the requirements of Rule 3 of the Alaska Rules of Minor Offense Procedure. For the first offense, the fine shall be three hundred dollars. For the second offense, the fine shall be six hundred dollars. For the third offense and any subsequent offenses, the fine shall be one thousand dollars. If a person charged with one of these offenses appears in court and is found guilty, the penalty imposed for the offense may not exceed the fine amount for that offense stated herein. These fines may not be judicially reduced. For purposes of this section, prior offenses must be within the previous five years.

B.    Each and every day during any portion of which a violation or failure to comply is committed, permitted, or continued shall be treated as a separate offense, and subject the offender to separate charges and a fine as provided in subsection A of this section.

(Ord. 18-24 § 4 (part), 2018.)


Chapter 9.24  BEAR ATTRACTION NUISANCE

Sections: 

9.24.010    Definitions.

9.24.020    Unlawful acts.

9.24.030    Enforcement.

9.24.040    Defenses.

9.24.050    Penalties.


9.24.010 Definitions. 

The terms and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 

A.    “Bear attraction nuisance” means, except as otherwise provided in this section:

1.    Any amount of putrescible waste, including packaging or other surfaces to which it is adhered;

2.    Any organic material of a type which has previously attracted a bear to the property within the past five years; or

3.    Soiled disposable diapers. 

4.    “Bear attraction nuisance” does not include: 

a.    Material, that would otherwise be considered a bear attraction nuisance, in a certified landfill;

b.    Manure or sewage;

c.    Material, that would otherwise be considered a bear attraction nuisance, in a refuse container which is placed for collection no earlier than four a.m. on refuse collection day, with the material being either collected or removed from the container no later than eight p.m. that same day;

d.    Living or dead flora or fauna indigenous to the property; or

e.    Material, that would otherwise be considered a bear attraction nuisance, which is completely enclosed in a structure or container when the structure or container has all places of entry covered by a door, window, lid, or other covering which requires hands or tools to open, unless the structure, container or covering has proven ineffective to withstand entry by a bear, whether due to design or improper use, two or more times within the previous year.

B.    “Person in control” means a tenant or an agent, superintendent, or other owner’s representative. 

C.    “Putrescible waste” means organic waste, including animal and fish parts, human and animal excrement, or bodily fluids, which is capable of being decomposed by microorganisms.

(Ord. 17-10 § 4 (part), 2017: Ord. 12-41 § 4 (part), 2012; Ord. 08-09 § 4 (part), 2008.)


9.24.020 Unlawful acts. 

No owner or person in control of property shall cause or allow the creation or maintenance of a bear attraction nuisance on that property or any adjacent right-of-way. Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, the property owner and the person in control of the property may both be liable for a violation of this chapter concerning the same unlawful act. The unlawful act involves not only the creation or maintenance of a bear attraction nuisance but allowing the offense to continue. (Ord. 17-10 § 4 (part), 2017: Ord. 08-09 § 4 (part), 2008.)


9.24.030 Enforcement.

This chapter shall be enforced by the police department or by other employees authorized by the municipal administrator. Whenever putrescible waste or other material is found on property or any adjacent right-of-way in violation of this chapter, the officer or authorized employee shall issue a citation stating the nature of the offense, and: 

A.    Mail the citation to the owner’s address listed in the municipal property assessor records and to the address of the person in control of the property when known; and

B.    Conspicuously affixing a copy of the citation on the property.

(Ord. 17-10 § 4 (part), 2017: Ord. 08-09 § 4 (part), 2008.)


9.24.040 Defenses. 

A.    It shall be no defense for the owner of property issued a citation under this chapter that the property was in possession or control of another, unless the owner of the property meets the burden of proof that the property was being used without the consent of the owner when the bear attraction nuisance was created, maintained and/or permitted.

B.    It shall be a defense for the owner of property or person in possession or control of the property who is issued a citation under this chapter if the owner or person in control of the property meets the burden of proof of being unaware of the citation.

(Ord. 17-10 § 4 (part), 2017: Ord. 08-09 § 4 (part), 2008.)


9.24.050 Penalties. 

A.    Each person who owns and/or is in control of property that creates, maintains, or permits a bear attraction nuisance on the property shall be charged with a minor offense. The maximum penalty for violation of the provisions of this chapter is five hundred dollars.

    	In accordance with AS 29.25.070(a), citations for offenses in this chapter may be disposed of as provided in AS 12.25.175 through 12.25.230, without a court appearance, upon payment of the fine amounts stated herein plus the state surcharge required by AS 12.55.039 and 29.25.074. Fines must be paid to the city and borough of Sitka. The Alaska Rules of Minor Offense Procedure in the Alaska Rules of Court apply to all offenses referenced herein. Citations charging these offenses must meet the requirements of Rule 3 of the Alaska Rules of Minor Offense Procedure. For the first offense, the fine shall be fifty dollars. For the second offense, the fine shall be one hundred dollars. For the third offense, the fine shall be two hundred dollars. For any subsequent offense after three, the offender must appear in court to answer for the charges. If a person charged with one of these offenses appears in court and is found guilty, the penalty imposed for the offense may not exceed the fine amount for that offense stated herein. These fines may not be judicially reduced. For purposes of this section, prior offenses must be within the previous five years. 

B.    Each and every day during any portion of which a violation or failure to comply is committed, permitted, or continued, shall be treated as a separate offense, and subject the offender to separate charges and a fine as provided in subsection A of this section.

(Ord. 17-10 § 4 (part), 2017: Ord. 12-41 § 4 (part), 2012; Ord. 08-09 § 4 (part), 2008.)


TITLE 9 FOOTNOTES

1    For statutory provisions authorizing home rule municipalities to maintain and operate a garbage and solid waste collection and disposal system, see AS 29.35.050. 


Title 10 PUBLIC PEACE, SAFETY AND MORALS

Chapters:

I. Offenses By or Against Public Officers and Government

10.04    Corrupt Practices

10.08    City and Borough Prisoners

II. Offenses Against the Person  (Reserved)

III. Offenses Against Health and Safety

10.24    Fireworks

10.25    Cellular Phone Use While Driving

IV. Offenses Against Public Decency

10.40    Gambling

10.44    Liquor Regulations

10.48    Prostitution

10.50    Hotel Registration

V. Offenses Against the Public Peace

10.52    Disorderly Conduct

VI. Offenses Against Property

10.56    Larceny

VII. Consumer Protection  (Reserved)

VIII. Offenses By or Against Minors

10.72    Juvenile Curfew

10.76    Loitering

10.80    Detention of Minors

10.84    Liquor Regulations

IX. Weapons

10.88    Firearms

X. Alarms

10.90    False Alarms

NOTE:    Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this title.


Chapter 10.04 CORRUPT PRACTICES1

Sections:

10.04.010    Purpose.

10.04.020    Definitions.

10.04.030    Unlawful acts.


10.04.010 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to define certain corrupt practices and provide for the punishment therefor in an attempt to maintain an atmosphere of free discussion of the issues before the municipality and continue the free workings of the municipal administration. (Ord. 73-59 § 3 (part), 1973.)


10.04.020 Definitions.

The words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

A.    “Accepting a bribe” means the acceptance of any of the items stated in subsection (C) by any assemblyman, official or employee of the municipality;

B.    Blackmail. Either of the following constitutes blackmail:

1.    Threat to accuse another of a crime, or of immoral conduct which, if true, would tend to degrade and disgrace him, or to expose or publish any of his infirmities or failings; provided that the threat is made with the intent to extort pecuniary advantage or property from him or with intent to compel him to do an act or refrain therefrom against his will,

2.    Threaten to subject another to the ridicule or contempt of society; provided that the threat is made with the intent to extort pecuniary advantage or property from him or with intent to compel him to do an act or refrain therefrom against his will,

3.    That the matters threatened to be exposed in this section are true or did occur is no defense;

C.    “Bribery” means to give, offer or promise to give a gift or gratuity, or to corruptly promise to do or cause to be done an act, beneficial to an assemblyman, official, or employee of the municipality, with intent to influence the vote, opinion, decision, judgment or official conduct of the person in question concerning the municipality;

D.    Coercion. Any one of the following acts done for the purpose of influencing or attempting to influence any assemblyman or municipal employee or official to do or not to do any act shall constitute coercion:

1.    Either by verbal or written means, to make threats concerning possible physical harm, to any assemblyman, official or employee, or members of their immediate families.

2.    Either by verbal or written means to make threats concerning possible harm to the property of any assemblyman, official or employee, or to the property of his employer or to any property in which immediate family have an interest. The threat to withdraw business is deemed a threat concerning possible harm to property;

E.    “Undue influence” means the influencing, obstructing, impeding or the attempt to influence, obstruct or impede the legislative or executive administration of the municipality by corruption, force, threats or by threatening letter or communication.

(Ord. 73-59 § 3 (part), 1973.)


10.04.030 Unlawful acts.

Coercion, bribery, accepting a bribe, undue influence and blackmail, as set forth above, are declared unlawful acts and any person convicted for such acts shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable by fine of not more than three hundred dollars or by imprisonment for not more than thirty days, or by both. (Ord. 73-59 § 3 (part), 1973.)


Chapter 10.08 CITY AND BOROUGH PRISONERS

Sections:

10.08.010    Escaping from municipal jail or custody of municipal officers.

10.08.020    Definitions.

10.08.030    Unauthorized contact with prisoners.

10.08.040    Aiding escape.


10.08.010 Escaping from municipal jail or custody of municipal officers.

Whoever escapes from the municipal jail while serving a term therein, or escapes from the custody or constructive custody of any municipal officer, or who gives his word or parole that he will return to jail or to the custody or constructive custody of any municipal officer, but who fails his word, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, may be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars, or by imprisonment of not more than thirty days, or by both. (Ord. 74-130 § 3, 1974.)


10.08.020 Definitions.

The terms and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

A.    “Verbal contact” means talking, phoning or otherwise orally communicating with a prisoner in any form.

B.    “Physical contact” means touching a prisoner, handling an object or receiving an object from a prisoner by his handing it to the person in question, or leaving any object in any location for the purpose of receiving or transmitting unauthorized objects to or from prisoners.

C.    “Prisoner” means an inmate of the municipal jail.

(Ord. 73-59 § 3 (part), 1973.)


10.08.030 Unauthorized contact with prisoners.

It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to:

A.    Have any verbal or physical contact with a prisoner confined in the municipal jail;

B.    Loiter in the area of the municipal jail or in the area of the police office;

C.    Fail to leave the area of the municipal jail or police office promptly after request from a police officer unless the person has official business waiting to be transacted.

(Ord. 73-59 § 3 (part), 1973.)


10.08.040 Aiding escape.

A.    It is unlawful for any person to aid, abet or counsel the escape of a prisoner from the municipal jail, or from any municipal officer lawfully having custody of such prisoner.

B.    A violation of the provisions of this section is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or imprisonment for not more than thirty days, or by both.

(Ord. 76-229 § 3(1), 1976: Ord. 73-59 § 3 (part), 1973).


Chapter 10.24 FIREWORKS2

Sections:

10.24.010    Title.

10.24.020    Prohibition on sale.

10.24.030    Prohibition on use.

10.24.040    Exceptions for authorized displays.

10.24.050    Permissible sales and uses.

10.24.060    Fireworks defined.

10.24.070    Penalties.


10.24.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known and cited as the “fireworks control ordinance of the city and borough.” (Ord. 17-28 § 4 (part), 2017: B.C.S. § 12.04.010.)


10.24.020 Prohibition on sale.

It is unlawful for any person, business, corporation, association, club or organization to sell, expose for sale, or offer for sale any fireworks within the corporate limits of the city and borough. (Ord. 17-28 § 4 (part), 2017: B.C.S. § 12.04.020.)


10.24.030 Prohibition on use.

It is unlawful for any person, business, corporation, association, club or organization to use or explode any fireworks, except as otherwise provided by this chapter, within the municipal limits of the city and borough. (Ord. 17-28 § 4 (part), 2017: B.C.S. § 12.04.030.)


10.24.040 Exceptions for authorized displays.

A.    Fireworks may be used for public displays by municipalities, fair associations, amusement parks and other organizations or groups of individuals; provided, that:

1.    A permit is obtained from the administrator or any employee designated by him; and

2.    A bond is filed with the city and borough in the amount of at least five hundred dollars to ensure payment of all damages to persons or property caused by the display. The bond requirement will not be operative if the holder of the permit has in effect an insurance policy which accomplishes the same purpose as the bond.

B.    No permit is transferable.

(Ord. 17-28 § 4 (part), 2017: B.C.S. § 12.04.040.) 


10.24.050 Permissible sales and uses.

Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit:

A.    Any resident wholesaler, dealer, or jobber from selling at wholesale those fireworks which are not prohibited in this chapter;

B.    The sale of any kind of fireworks if the fireworks are to be shipped directly from the state in accordance with regulations 27 CFR Part 555 of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF);

C.    The use of fireworks by vessels or other transportation agencies for signal purposes or illumination;

D.    The use of flashlight composition in normal amounts by photographers or dealers in photographic supplies;

E.    The sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or a theater;

F.    Use of fireworks for signal or ceremonial purposes in athletic events or parades; and

G.    Use by military organizations.

(Ord. 17-28 § 4 (part), 2017: Ord. 15-11 § 4 (part), 2015; B.C.S. § 12.04.050.)


10.24.060 Fireworks defined.

“Fireworks” includes any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and includes blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, or toy guns in which explosives are used, balloons which require explosive propellant, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, Daygo bombs, or other fireworks of like construction, which contain any explosives or flammable compound, or any tablets or other device containing any explosive substance, except that the term “fireworks” does not include sparklers, auto flares, paper caps containing not in excess an average of twenty-five hundredths of a grain of explosive content per cap manufactured in accordance with the Interstate Commerce Commission regulations for packing and shipping, as provided therein, and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices for use of such caps, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times (AS 18.72.100). (Ord. 17-28 § 4 (part), 2017: Ord. 15-11 § 4 (part), 2015; B.C.S. § 12.04.060.)


10.24.070 Penalties.

In accordance with AS 29.25.070(a), citations for offenses in this chapter may be disposed of as provided in AS 12.25.175 through 12.25.230, without a court appearance, upon payment of the fine amounts stated herein plus the state surcharge required by AS 12.55.039 and 29.25.074. Fines must be paid to the city and borough of Sitka. The Alaska Rules of Minor Offense Procedure in the Alaska Rules of Court apply to all offenses referenced herein. Citations charging these offenses must meet the requirements of Rule 3 of the Alaska Rules of Minor Offense Procedure. For the first offense, the fine shall be fifty dollars. For the second offense, the fine shall be one hundred dollars. For the third offense, the fine shall be two hundred dollars. For any subsequent offense after three, the defendant must appear in court to answer for the charges. For any offense after three, the fine shall exceed two hundred dollars and not exceed five hundred dollars. If a person charged with one of these offenses appears in court and is found guilty, the penalty imposed for the offense may not exceed the fine amount for that offense stated herein. These fines may not be judicially reduced. For purposes of this section, prior offenses must be within the previous five years. (Ord. 17-28 § 4 (part), 2017.)


Chapter 10.25 CELLULAR PHONE USE WHILE DRIVING

Sections:

10.25.010    Definitions.

10.25.020    Prohibited use.

10.25.030    Exceptions.

10.25.040    Penalties.


10.25.010 Definitions.

A.    “Cell phone” means a hand-held cellular telephone.

B.    “Use” means employing a cell phone for any reason including, without limitation, the following activities while holding or touching the device:

1.    Dialing or deactivating a phone call;

2.    Speaking in or listening to a conversation or music;

3.    Viewing, taking or transmitting electronic images including videos;

4.    Composing, sending, viewing, accessing, browsing, retrieving or saving email messages;

5.    Entering or changing information in a global positioning or navigation system or any software or application designed for navigation;

6.    Accessing or viewing an Internet website or computer application; or

7.    Playing a game.

C.    “Authorized emergency personnel” means a person who is a law enforcement officer, firefighter, member of a governmental emergency medical services function, or member of a governmental emergency management function.

(Ord. 16-05 § 4 (part), 2016.)


10.25.020 Prohibited use.

A.    An operator of a motor vehicle may not use a cell phone when the vehicle is in motion, or while stopped at a stop sign or traffic light.

(Ord. 16-05 § 4 (part), 2016.)


10.25.030 Exceptions.

A.    It is an affirmative defense to prosecution of an offense under this chapter if:

1.    The cell phone is used in a hands-free mode of operation;

2.    Use of the cell phone is for obtaining emergency assistance to report a crime, traffic accident, medical emergency, or serious traffic hazard or to prevent a crime about to be committed;

3.    Use of a cell phone is in the reasonable belief that a person’s life or safety is in immediate danger.

B.    Section 10.25.020(A) does not apply to:

1.    Vehicle dispatching and response information for motor vehicles providing emergency road service or roadside assistance;

2.    Information for use in performing highway construction, maintenance, or repair or data acquisition by the municipality; or

3.    Information for use in performing utility construction, maintenance, repair, or data acquisition by a public utility; in this subsection, “public utility” has the meaning given in AS 42.05.990;

4.    Authorized emergency personnel using a cell phone while acting in an official capacity.

(Ord. 16-05 § 4 (part), 2016.)


10.25.040 Penalties.

A.    The maximum penalty for violation of the provisions of this chapter is five hundred dollars.

B.    In accordance with AS 29.25.070(a), citations for offenses in this chapter may be disposed of as provided in AS 12.25.175 through 12.25.230, without a court appearance, upon payment of the fine amounts stated herein plus the state surcharge required by AS 12.55.039 and 29.25.074. Fines must be paid to the city and borough of Sitka. The Alaska Rules of Minor Offense Procedure in the Alaska Rules of Court apply to all offenses referenced herein. Citations charging these offenses must meet the requirements of Rule 3 of the Alaska Rules of Minor Offense Procedure. For the first offense, the fine shall be fifty dollars. For the second offense, the fine shall be one hundred dollars. For the third offense, the fine shall be two hundred dollars. For any subsequent offense after three, the defendant must appear in court to answer for the charges. If a person charged with one of these offenses appears in court and is found guilty, the penalty imposed for the offense may not exceed the fine amount for that offense stated herein. These fines may not be judicially reduced. For purposes of this section, prior offenses must be within the previous five years.

(Ord. 16-47A § 4, 2016.)


Chapter 10.40 GAMBLING3

Sections:

10.40.010    Prohibited.

10.40.020    State games of chance permit.

10.40.030    Places where gambling or unlicensed liquor traffic conducted as nuisances.

10.40.040    Seizure and destruction of gambling devices.


10.40.010 Prohibited.

A person who engages in gambling is guilty of a misdemeanor. “Gambling” means that a person stakes or risks something of value upon the outcome of a contest of chance or a future contingent event not under the person’s control or influence, upon an agreement or understanding that that person or someone else will receive something of value in the event of a certain outcome (AS 11.66.280(2)). (Ord. 15-18 § 4 (part), 2015: Ord. 73-59 § 3 (part), 1973.)


10.40.020 State games of chance permit.

A.    It shall not be considered a violation of Section 10.40.010 when a permit is obtained by a municipality or qualified organization, as defined in AS 5.15.690(39), from the state, pursuant to state law for the purpose of conducting bingo, raffles, lotteries, ice classics, dog mushers contest, fish derbies or lawful contests of skill or chance and such games are operated by that municipality or qualified organization.

B.    Operators, as defined by AS 5.15.690(34), are prohibited from conducting activities under this chapter within the city and borough of Sitka.

(Amended during 3/15 supplement; Ord. 89-872 § 4, 1989.)


10.40.030 Places where gambling or unlicensed liquor traffic conducted as nuisances.

A place where gaming or gambling is carried on or where a banking or other game is played with cards, dice, or other device, whether played for any prize, money, checks, chips, credit representing money, or other representative of value, or where unlicensed manufacture, sale, or drinking of intoxicating liquor is allowed or where persons are permitted to resort for the purpose of gaming or gambling, and all implements or property used and kept in maintaining such places are declared to be common nuisances. A person who maintains, aids or abets or is associated in maintaining such a place is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 73-59 § 3 (part), 1973.)


10.40.040 Seizure and destruction of gambling devices.

A police officer designated by the chief of police shall seize and shall destroy a gambling implement provided no appeal has been filed within fifteen days of the seizure. (Ord. 73-59 § 3 (part), 1973.)


Chapter 10.44 LIQUOR REGULATIONS4

Sections:

10.44.010    Definitions.

10.44.020    Scope of provisions.

10.44.030    License required.

10.44.040    Application for license.

10.44.050    Limitation of number of licenses.

10.44.055    Review of application for outdoor recreation lodge liquor licenses.

10.44.060    Persons forbidden to have liquor.

10.44.070    Offers of sale and presence on licensed premises (standard operating hours).

10.44.080    Drinking in public.

10.44.085    Open containers.

10.44.090    Possession of alcoholic beverages for delivery.

10.44.110    Transport of alcoholic beverages during closed hours.


10.44.010 Definitions.

The terms and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

A.    Whenever the term “intoxicating liquor” is used, it means an alcoholic beverage that is a spirituous, vinous, malt, or other fermented or distilled liquid, whatever the origin, that is intended for human consumption as a beverage and that contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume, whether produced commercially or privately (AS 4.21.080(b)(1));

B.    “Malt beverages” means ale, wine, beer and other alcoholic beverage of less than twenty percent alcohol;

C.    “Minors” shall be defined as anyone less than twenty-one years of age;

D.    “Off-sale license” (also known as “package stores”) means a license whereby the sale, but not the consumption, of liquor contained in sealed bottle or packages as packed by the various distributors is authorized;

E.    “On-sale license” means a license whereby the consumption and sale of liquor by the drink is authorized on the premises; 

F.    “Wholesale license, liquor” means a license authorizing the sale to licensed dealers of intoxicating liquor;

G.    “Wholesale license, malt beverage” means a license authorizing the sale to licensed dealers of malt beverages.

(Ord. 15-19 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 85-665 § 4(A), 1985; Ord. 73-59 § 3 (part), 1973.)


10.44.020 Scope of provisions.

The provisions contained herein shall apply to all places where liquor of any description as herein defined is manufactured, offered for sale, sold, vended, bartered or furnished. (Ord. 15-19 § 4 (part), 2015: Ord. 73-59 § 3 (part), 1973.)


10.44.030 License required.

AS 4.11.010 designating a classification of licenses is incorporated herein and made a part hereof, and the sale of hard or distilled liquor, including wine and beer, by any person, firm or corporation is prohibited anywhere except under and by virtue of a license secured from the Director of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board, and the sale, barter or consumption of intoxicating liquor, including wine and beer, on any premises not covered by a license under the classifications in Section 10.44.010 is prohibited. (Ord. 15-19 § 4 (part), 2015: Ord. 73-59 § 3 (part), 1973.)


10.44.040 Application for license.

A.    By Persons Not Previously Holding Current Licenses. At such time as a license is applied for by one not a previous license holder, the municipal clerk shall give notice of such application as follows:

1.    Notice shall be posted on the premises ten days prior to the assembly meeting at which application will be heard. All time limitations, however, may be decreased at the discretion of the municipal clerk to meet any period specified by the Director of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board;

2.    Notice shall be published once in a local newspaper at least one week before such meeting;

3.    The notice shall contain the time and place of assembly meeting; the type of license applied for; the name of all applying persons; and inform the public that any protest may be lodged with the assembly at that time;

4.    Give proof to the assembly at the time of hearing of compliance with all phases of this chapter, as well as complete listing of any police record and past experience in the liquor business.

B.    By Persons Previously Holding Current Licenses. The individuals or groups of individuals holding existing licenses shall not be affected by subsection (A) and shall have the right to apply for renewal of their licenses unless disqualified on grounds other than contained herein. (Ord. 73-59 § 3 (part), 1973.)


10.44.050 Limitation of number of licenses.

A.    There shall be no more than one liquor license of each type authorized in the municipality for each one thousand five hundred residents or part thereof according to the most recent census should the assembly deem that accurate at the time in question, or by such reasonable estimate of the population as the assembly may set from time to time.

B.    Notwithstanding subsection (A), the assembly may in its discretion approve the issuance of a license without regard to the quota provisions of this section where it appears that such issuance or transfer will encourage the construction or substantial improvement of a hotel, motel, resort, or similar business related to the tourist trade where the construction or substantial improvement of such hotel, motel, resort or similar business related to the tourist trade results in a minimum accommodation of thirty rooms, or where it appears that the issuance of such a license meets all of the following qualifications:

1.    The serving of alcoholic beverages is supplemental to the serving of food;

2.    That the assembly finds the issuance of such a license is advantageous and of benefit to the municipality and public.

C.    Should a holder of a license issued under subsection (B) fail to continue to meet the qualifications under which the license was issued, the annual approval of the license may be withheld by the assembly.

(Ord. 73-59 § 3 (part), 1973.) 


10.44.055 Review of application for outdoor recreation lodge liquor licenses.

A.    Consistent with the assembly’s prerogative to comment on new liquor license applications and renew applications, criteria are established in this section to guide the assembly in its deliberations on applications for outdoor recreation lodge liquor license referrals by the Alaska Alcoholic Beverage Control Board. 

B.    Definitions. The terms and phrases used in this section shall have the following meanings:

1.     “Lodge” means a premises that provides lodging (room and board) accommodations for use by visitors engaging in recreational activities and includes a variety of related services. Lodges on islands may include satellite small cabins along with the main structure;

2.     “Outdoor recreation lodge liquor license” means a licensed business that provides overnight accommodations and meals, is primarily involved in offering opportunities for persons to engage in outdoor recreation activities, and has a minimum of two guest rooms. An outdoor recreation lodge liquor license may not be transferred. An outdoor recreation lodge liquor license authorizes the holder to sell alcoholic beverages to a registered overnight guest or off-duty staff of the lodge for consumption on the licensed premises or in conjunction with purchased outdoor recreation activities provided by the licensee, as provided in Alaska Statute 04.11.225; 

3.     “Sitka road system” includes the developed road area along and extending from Halibut Point Road, Sawmill Creek Road, Harbor Drive, and the airport access road on Baranof Island, Japonski Island, and Alice Island;

4.    “Subdivided island” includes all islands that have been divided into two or more lots or which are connected with an adjacent island at mean low tide;

5.     “Zoned area of Sitka Sound” means the area currently zoned in Sitka Sound between Dog Point and Cape Burunof.

C.    Use of Review Criteria. The assembly shall refer to the criteria below in the review of an application for an outdoor recreation lodge liquor license. These criteria are a guide that should be followed in determining whether or not to object to the license application. The criteria shall be referenced in any official position on a new license or a renewal application. In the event the assembly determines that it is in the public interest to take a position that is contrary to the criteria below, the assembly shall issue a specific finding that states why the specific criteria should not be applied to the specific license application.

D.     Applicant’s Burden. It is the responsibility of the applicant for the license or renewal license to document that the applicant has complied with the criteria in the relevant section or sections below.

E.     Outdoor recreation lodge liquor licenses on islands in Sitka Sound, or lodges located at least one mile beyond the Sitka road system in Sitka Sound, are considered appropriate when all of the criteria below are met:

1.    Lodge is located on unsubdivided islands in or at least one mile from the Sitka road system, and is wholly owned by an individual, corporation, or partnership;

2.    Lodge operation is the sole or primary use of the parcel and the lodge is not operated in conjunction with another lodge, bed and breakfast, short-term rental, or series of short-term rentals;

3.    Lodge is on an island that is not immediately adjacent to islands that are primarily used for permanent ongoing residential uses, or the lodge is at least one mile from the Sitka road system and the adjacent parcels within one-half mile of the lodge are not primarily used for permanent ongoing residential uses;

4.    Lodge is owned by an individual, partnership, or corporation that has a long and established history of successful recreation lodge operations;

5.    The lodge routinely serves evening meals to guests; and

6.    It can be confirmed that the lodge is in full compliance with building codes, zoning codes, and sales tax regulations.

F.     Outdoor recreation lodge liquor licenses on islands in Sitka Sound are considered inappropriate when any of the circumstances exist:

1.    Another lodge, bed and breakfast, or series short-term rental exists on the same parcel;

2.    Lodge is not the primary use of the parcel;

3.    It cannot be confirmed that the lodge is in full compliance with building codes, zoning codes, or sales tax regulations;

4.    Adequate dock and loading structures do not exist to provide adequate access to and from the lodge; or

5.    Access to the lodge property is through an easement that crosses another privately owned parcel.

G.     Outdoor recreation lodge liquor licenses on subdivided islands in Sitka Sound may be considered appropriate if they do not meet the criteria in subsection F of this section and it can be found by the assembly that the issuance of the liquor license will not adversely affect the other property or properties on the subdivided island where it is located. In these cases, the lodge must routinely serve evening meals to guests and be in compliance with all sales tax regulations.

H.     Outdoor recreation lodge liquor licenses in outlying areas in the city and borough of Sitka outside of Sitka Sound are considered appropriate in most circumstances when the lodge routinely serves evening meals to guests and is in compliance with all sales tax regulations.

I.     No outdoor recreation lodge liquor license along the Sitka road system is appropriate. (Ord. 06-19 (A-1) § 4(A), 2006.)


10.44.060 Persons forbidden to have liquor.

It is unlawful to give, barter or sell any intoxicating liquors including beer and wine to any person under the age of twenty-one years or to any intoxicated person; and it is unlawful for any licensee to permit giving, bartering, selling or drinking of any intoxicating liquor within the premises covered by any license to or by any of the forbidden classes nor shall such licensee permit the drinking of hard or distilled liquors by such person or persons upon the premises covered by his license. 

The drinking of intoxicating liquors on the premises covered by any license by any of the forbidden classes, or the presence of any intoxicated person or persons on such premises shall be prima facie evidence that the liquor being drunk or causing intoxication was furnished by the licensee. The burden of first determining the age of any person to whom any intoxicating liquor is to be given, bartered, or sold shall be on the licensee. (Ord. 15-19 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 85-665 § 4(B), 1985; Ord. 73-59 § 3 (part), 1973.)


10.44.070 Offers of sale and presence on licensed premises (standard operating hours).

A.    A person may not sell, offer for sale, give, furnish, deliver, or consume any alcoholic beverage on premises licensed under Title 4 of the Alaska Statutes between the hours of two a.m. and eight a.m. each day.

B.    A licensee, his agent, or employee may not permit a person to consume alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises between the hours of two a.m. and eight a.m. of each day.

C.    A licensee, his agent, or employee may not permit a person to enter, and a person may not enter, premises licensed under Title 4 of the Alaska Statutes between the hours of two a.m. and eight a.m. of each day. This subsection shall not apply to common carriers as defined in AS 4.16.125(c)(1) or to an employee of the licensee who is on the premises to prepare for the next day’s business. A person may enter or remain on the premises of a bona fide restaurant or eating place licensed under this title to consume food or nonalcoholic beverages.

D.    The assembly may allow additional hours of opening for catered events, as long as those hours do not conflict with the provisions of Alaska Statute 4.16.010.

E.    The provisions of Alaska Statute 4.16.070(a) do not apply within the city and borough of Sitka.

(Ord. 15-11 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 10-03 § 4, 2010: Ord. 92-1089 § 4, 1992; Ord. 86-723 § 4, 1986: Ord. 82-513 § 3(B), 1982; Ord. 73-59 § 3(part), 1973.)


10.44.080 Drinking in public.

Except as otherwise provided, no person may consume intoxicating liquor:

A.    Outside of a building in the areas zoned central commercial district unless (1) the alcohol is only beer or wine and is provided by an establishment with a license to serve alcoholic beverages in an area that is fenced with a fence no lower than sixty inches in height immediately adjacent to a building in which the establishment is licensed to serve such beverages, and (2) the alcohol is consumed within such fenced area no later than eleven p.m.;

B.    Upon any public street, alley sidewalk, municipally operated harbor walkways and floats and municipally owned parking lots, and public school grounds;

C.    At any public park, recreation area, ball field, any municipally controlled area open to the general public, or any other public or private property, where such area is posted that possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited;

D.    Exemptions may be given for special events by the assembly, upon the advise of the chief of police, with such conditions as the assembly may require for the public good;

E.    All public parking lots and all private business parking lots.

(Ord. 05-24 § 4, 2005; Ord. 93-1144 § 4, 1993; Ord. 84-632 § 4(A), 1985.)


10.44.085 Open containers.

Except as otherwise provided, no persons may have in their possession in the places set out in Section 10.44.080, any intoxicating liquor or beer unless the liquor or beer is in its original retail unopened container and the tax seal remains unbroken. (Ord. 84-632 § 4(B), 1985.)


10.44.090 Possession of alcoholic beverages for delivery.

A.    It is unlawful for any person owning, operating, or being in charge of any public vehicle or delivery service to transport any alcoholic beverage from a licensed premises to a customer or other person located off the licensed premises. 

B.    This section does not apply to the wholesale delivery of beverages by a licensed wholesaler or transportation by a licensed carrier.

(Ord. 83-552 § 4(c), 1983.) 


10.44.110 Transport of alcoholic beverages during closed hours.

It is unlawful for the owner or person in charge of any taxicab, taxicab stand or place of business, or any person, messenger or messenger service, to accept, receive or have for delivery, or to carry, transport, or deliver, or cause to be carried, transported or delivered, or aid or assist in carrying, transporting or delivering, in person or by means of any taxicab or other vehicle, any alcoholic beverage, during the time or within one-half hour thereof, fixed by Section 10.44.070 herein for closure of liquor stores or liquor establishments. (Ord. 73-59 § 3 (part), 1973.)


Chapter 10.48 PROSTITUTION5 

Sections:

10.48.010    Definitions.

10.48.020    Unlawful acts.


10.48.010 Definitions.

The terms and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

A.    “Assignation” means the making of any appointment or engagement for the purpose of prostitution, or any act in furtherance of such appointment;

B.    “House of prostitution” means the place, structure, building, house, room, boat, trailer, automobile or any other vehicle or established location which is customarily used for the purposes of prostitution;

C.    “Prostitution” includes the giving or receiving of a person’s body for hire for the purpose of sexual intercourse or other lewd purposes.

(Ord. 73-59 § 3 (part), 1973.) 


10.48.020 Unlawful acts.

It is unlawful to:

A.    Engage in prostitution;

B.    Engage in assignation;

C.    Knowingly lease, sell, set up, operate, carry on, maintain, facilitate the operation of, or work in a house of prostitution;

D.    Knowingly assist in the leasing, selling, setting up, operating, carrying on, maintaining or facilitating operation of a house of prostitution;

E.    Offer, or offer to secure for the purposes of prostitution, or solicit another for the purposes of prostitution;

F.    Knowingly receive or to offer or agree to receive any person into any place, structure, building, house, room, boat, automobile, trailer or any other vehicle for the purpose of prostitution or for the person owning or having control over such place or premises to knowingly permit any person to remain for such purposes.

(Ord. 73-59 § 3 (part), 1973.)


Chapter 10.50 HOTEL REGISTRATION

Sections:

10.50.010    Required of guests.

10.50.020    Responsibility of hotel clerk.

10.50.030    Contents of register.

10.50.040    Penalty for violation.


10.50.010 Required of guests.

It is unlawful for any person to occupy any hotel room for the night without registering in a registration book provided by the management, or otherwise checking with the management. (S.C.C. § 4-2-24 (part).)


10.50.020 Responsibility of hotel clerk.

It is unlawful for any clerk or person in charge of a hotel to rent a hotel room without causing the renter or guest to register prior to occupancy. (S.C.C. § 4-2-24 (part).)


10.50.030 Contents of register.

The register shall contain the name, home address and occupation of the person so registering, and shall be open to the inspection of the police department at any time. (S.C.C. § 4-2-24 (part).) 


10.50.040 Penalty for violation.

Violators of this chapter shall be subject to punishment according to Chapter 1.12. (S.C.C. § 4-2-24 (part).)


Chapter 10.52 DISORDERLY CONDUCT6 

Sections:

10.52.010    Unlawful acts.

10.52.030    Serious misdemeanor.

10.52.040    Loitering.

10.52.050    Criminal trespass.

10.52.060    Urinating in public.


10.52.010 Unlawful acts.

It is unlawful for any person to:

A.    Threaten another in a menacing manner;

B.    Challenge another to fight;

C.    Address another with “fighting words” or profanity, the face-to-face utterance of which ordinarily provokes in the average reasonable person so addressed an immediate and violent response;

D.    Exhort another to violence by words or actions which create a clear and present danger that such violence will occur;

E.    Address or confront another in a manner which presents a clear and present danger of causing an immediate and physically violent reaction from such other person;

F.    Use, in a public place, profanity of the type which in and of itself creates a public nuisance;

G.    Engage in window peeking;

H.    Deposit litter in any public place other than in designated receptacles identified for the receipt of litter;

I.    Spit upon or otherwise mar or litter any sidewalk in the central business district (See Title 22) or any floor, hallway, stairway, sidewalk or steps of any public or municipal building or place of worship;

J.    Interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, conceal or tear down any municipal notice, placard, sign or signaling device;

K.    Deface or destroy any private building or property without the owner’s consent;

L.    Engage in any illegal business, trade, or occupation;

M.    Knowingly attend or frequent any place in which an illegal business, trade or occupation is conducted;

N.    Solicit another for the purpose of committing an illegal act;

O.    Harbor, keep or maintain a vicious animal, except as provided in various sections of Chapter 8.04. 

(Ord. 15-16 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 98-1509 § 4, 1998; Ord. 73-59 § 3 (part), 1973.) 


10.52.030 Serious misdemeanor.

It is unlawful for any person to:

A.    Assault another by threatening, through words or actions, to batter him;

B.    Batter another by striking, wounding or otherwise physically abusing him;

C.    Challenge to fight a policeman in the performance of his duties;

D.    Assault or batter a policeman in the performance of his duties;

E.    Engage in deliberate and continued baiting of a policeman by verbal excess or abuse which has no apparent purpose other than to provoke a violent reaction from the policeman;

F.    Resist arrest by a police officer or assist another in resisting such arrest;

G.    Assist a person in lawful custody of a police or other municipal officer to escape;

H.    Impersonate a police officer or, without authority, exercise or attempt to exercise his powers;

I.    Take, drive or operate any motor vehicle without the owner’s consent;

J.    Deface or destroy any municipal building or property;

K.    Annoy or molest a child under the age of eighteen.

Violation of the provisions of this section is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or imprisonment for not more than thirty days, or by both. (Ord. 76-229 § 3(2), 1976; Ord. 73-59 § 3 (part), 1973.)


10.52.040 Loitering.

It is unlawful for any person to loiter. For purposes of this section, loitering is defined as wandering, loafing, standing or remaining idle either alone or in a group in a public place in such manner as to:

A.    Cause danger of breach of peace, which will clearly cause an immediate, actual, physically violent reaction from any person; or

B.    Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public place.

(Ord. 74-59 § 3 (part), 1973.)


10.52.050 Criminal trespass.

A.    A person is guilty of criminal trespass if he enters or remains unlawfully in or upon premises or in a propelled vehicle.

B.    “Enter or remain unlawfully” means that at the time of entry or remaining, the premises or vehicle is not open to the public and the defendant is not otherwise privileged to do so, or that the person failed to leave premises or a vehicle that was open to the public after being lawfully directed to do so personally by the person in charge or a police officer.

C.    Violation of this section is a violation with a penalty of a fine of no more than two hundred dollars.

(Ord. 81-471 § 4, 1981.)


10.52.060 Urinating in public.

It is unlawful for a person to urinate in public. A person commits the offense of urinating in public when that person urinates on or in any public place or portion of a public place not existing for the purpose of receiving urine. (Ord. 94-1267 § 4, 1994.)


Chapter 10.56 LARCENY7

Sections:

10.56.010    Generally.

10.56.030    Larceny by trick.

10.56.040    Shoplifting.


10.56.010 Generally.

A.    A person who steals money, goods, or chattels, or a government note, bank note, promissory note, bill of exchange, bond or other thing in action, or a book of accounts, order or certificate concerning money or goods due or to become due or to be delivered, or writing containing a conveyance of real or personal property, or any other valuable contract in force, or a receipt, release or defeasance, or a writ, process, or public record which is the property of another is guilty of larceny.

B.    A violation of the provisions of this section is a misdemeanor, punishable by fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for not more than thirty days, or by both.

(Ord. 76-229 § 3(3), 1976; Ord. 73-59 § 3 (part), 1973.)


10.56.030 Larceny by trick.

No person shall obtain possession of or title to anything of value from another person with his consent when such consent was induced by false pretenses. (Ord. 73-59 § 3 (part), 1973.)


10.56.040 Shoplifting.

It is unlawful for any person to take or carry away from any commercial establishment, without paying for the same or making arrangements for such payment, any goods, wares, or merchandise having value not exceeding one hundred dollars. (Ord. 73-59 § 3 (part), 1973.)

. (Reserved)


Chapter 10.72 JUVENILE CURFEW8

Sections:

10.72.010    Definitions.

10.72.020    Curfew for juveniles.

10.72.030    Exceptions.

10.72.040    Parental responsibility.

10.72.050    Operator responsibility.

10.72.060    Enforcement procedures.

10.72.070    Penalties.

10.72.080    Notice.


10.72.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular, and words in the singular number include the plural. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.

A.    “City” means the city and borough of Sitka, Alaska, with administrative offices at 100 Lincoln Street.

B.    “Emergency” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.

C.    “Establishment” means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment.

D.    “Juvenile” or “minor” means any unemancipated person under the age of eighteen.

E.    “Operator” means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation.

F.    “Parent” means any person having legal custody of a juvenile (i) as a natural or adoptive parent, (ii) as a legal guardian, (iii) as a person who stands in loco parentis, or (iv) as a person to whom legal custody has been given by court order.

G.    “Public place” means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, common areas of schools, shopping centers, parking lots, parks, playgrounds, transportation facilities, theaters, restaurants, shops, bowling alleys, taverns, cafes, arcades, and similar areas that are open to the use of the public. As a type of public place, a street is a way or place, of whatever nature, open to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel or in the case of a sidewalk thereof for pedestrian travel. “Street” includes that legal right-of-way, including but not limited to the cartway of traffic lanes, the curb, the sidewalks whether paved or unpaved, and any grass plots or other grounds found within the legal right of way of a street.

H.    “Remain” means to stay behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily in a public place including the congregating of groups (or of interacting minors) totaling four or more persons in which any juvenile involved would not be using the streets for ordinary or serious purposes such as mere passage or going home, or to fail to leave the premises of an establishment when requested to do so by a police officer or the operator of an establishment. To implement this provision with additional precision and precaution, numerous exceptions are expressly defined in this chapter. More and more exceptions become available with a juvenile’s increasing years and advancing maturity as appropriate in the interest of reasonable regulation.

I.    “Time of night” referred to herein is based upon the prevailing standard of time, whether Alaska standard time or Alaska daylight savings time, generally observed at that hour by the public in the city; prima facie the time then observed in the city administrative offices and police station.

J.    “Years of age” continues from one birthday, such as the seventeenth to (but not including the day of) the next, such as the eighteenth birthday, making it clear that seventeen or less years of age is treated as equivalent to the phrase “under eighteen years of age,” the latter phrase in practice, unfortunately, having confused a number of persons into the mistaken thought that eighteen-year-olds might be involved. Similarly, for example, eleven or less years of age means “under twelve years of age.”

(Ord. 97-1467 § 4 (part), 1997.)


10.72.020 Curfew for juveniles.

It is unlawful for any person seventeen or less of age (under eighteen) to be or remain in or upon a public place within the city and borough of Sitka during the period ending at five a.m. and beginning:

A.    At eleven fifty-nine p.m. on Friday and Saturday nights; and

B.    Eleven p.m. on all other nights.

(Ord. 97-1467 § 4 (part), 1997.)


10.72.030 Exceptions.

The following shall constitute valid exceptions to the operation of this chapter:

A.    When a juvenile is accompanied by a parent or guardian of such juvenile;

B.    When a juvenile is accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent or guardian of such juvenile to take such parent’s place in accompanying such juvenile for a designated period of time and purpose within a specified area;

C.    When the juvenile is on an errand as directed by his or her parent or guardian;

D.    When a juvenile is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly, and has in their possession a written communication, signed and dated by a parent or guardian of the juvenile with their home address and telephone number, specifying when, where and in what manner the juvenile will be in a public place during hours when this chapter is applicable to such written communication;

E.    When a juvenile is on the sidewalk or property where the juvenile resides, or on either side of or across the street from the place where the juvenile resides, and the adult owner or resident of that property has given permission for the juvenile to be there;

F.    When a juvenile is returning home by a direct route (without any unnecessary detour or stop) from and within one hour of the termination of a school activity or an activity of a religious or other voluntary association, or a place of public entertainment, such as a movie, play or sporting event;

G.    When the juvenile is legally employed and carries a certified card of employment, renewable each calendar month when the current fact so warrant, dated or re-issued not more than forty-five days previously, signed by the chief of police and briefly identifying the juvenile, the addresses of the juvenile’s home and of the juvenile’s place of employment, and the juvenile’s hours of employment;

H.    When the juvenile is, with parental or guardian consent, engaged in normal interstate travel through the city or originating or terminating in the city;

I.    When the juvenile is married or has been married pursuant to state law;

J.    If the juvenile is involved in an emergency;

K.    In the case of an operator of an establishment, when the operator has notified the police that a juvenile was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave;

L.    Each of the foregoing exceptions and their several limitations, such as provisions for notification, is severable, as hereinafter provided but here reemphasized, and will be considered by the assembly, when warranted by future experience illuminated by the views of student government associations, school personnel, citizens, associations, parents, officers and persons in authority concerned positively with juveniles as well as with juvenile delinquency.

(Ord. 02-1670 § 4, 2002: Ord. 97-1467 § 4 (part), 1997.)


10.72.040 Parental responsibility.

It is unlawful for a parent having legal custody of a juvenile knowingly to permit or by inefficient control to allow the juvenile to remain in any city public place under circumstances not constituting an exception to, or otherwise beyond the scope of, this chapter. The term “knowingly” includes knowledge that a parent should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a juvenile in that parent’s legal custody. This requirement is intended to hold a neglectful or careless parent up to a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through an objective test. It shall, therefore, be no defense that a parent was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such juvenile. (Ord. 97-1467 § 4 (part), 1997.)


10.72.050 Operator responsibility.

It is unlawful for any operator of an establishment to knowingly permit a juvenile to remain at the establishment under circumstances not constituting an exception to, or otherwise beyond the scope of, this chapter. The term “knowingly” includes knowledge that an operator should reasonably be expected to have concerning the patrons of the establishment. The standard for “knowingly” shall be applied through an objective test: whether a reasonable person in the operator’s position should have known that the patron was a juvenile in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 97-1467 § 4 (part), 1997.)


10.72.060 Enforcement procedures.

A.    If a police officer reasonably believes that a juvenile is in a public place in violation of this chapter, the officer shall notify the juvenile that he or she is in violation of this chapter and shall require the juvenile to provide his or her name, address, and telephone number and how to contact his or her parent or guardian. In determining the age of the juvenile and in the absence of convincing evidence such as a birth certificate, a police officer shall, in the first instance of violation of this chapter, use his or her best judgment in determining age.

B.    Police procedures shall constantly be refined in the light of experience and may provide that the police officer may deliver to a parent or guardian thereof a juvenile under appropriate circumstances; for example, a juvenile of tender age, near home, whose identity and address may readily be ascertained or are known.

C.    When a police officer has reasonable grounds to believe that the juvenile has engaged in delinquent conduct, the procedure shall then be to take the juvenile to the police station where a parent or guardian shall immediately be notified to come for the juvenile whereupon the parent or guardian and the juvenile shall be questioned. This is intended to permit ascertainment, under constitutional safeguards, of relevant facts, and to centralize responsibility in the person designated there and then on duty for accurate, effective, fair, impartial and uniform enforcement, and recording, thus, making available experienced personnel and access to information and records.

D.    When a parent or guardian, immediately called, has come to the location of the contact to take charge of the juvenile, and the appropriate information has been recorded, the juvenile shall be released to the custody of such parent. If the parent cannot be located or fails to take charge of the juvenile, then the juvenile shall be released to the juvenile authorities, the juvenile will be cited and released except in the case of juveniles under the age of twelve who will remain in custody until appropriate placement can be made.

E.    In the case of a first violation of this chapter by a juvenile, the chief of police shall send to a parent or guardian written notice of the violation with a warning that any subsequent offense will result in enforcement of parental responsibility and of applicable penalties.

F.    For the first violation of this chapter by an operator of an establishment who permits a juvenile to remain on the premises, a police officer shall issue a written notice of the violation with a warning that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of this chapter, including enforcement of operator responsibility and of applicable penalties.

G.    In any event the police officer shall, within twenty-four hours, file a written report with the chief of police or shall participate to the extent of the information for which he or she is responsible in the preparation of a report on the curfew violation. It is not the intention of this section to require extensive reports that will prevent police officers from performing their primary police duties. The reports shall be as simple as is reasonably possible and may be completed by police departmental personnel other than sworn police officers.

(Ord. 98-1488 § 4, 1998; Ord. 97-1467 § 4 (part), 1997.)


10.72.070 Penalties.

A.    If, after the warning notice pursuant to Section 10.72.060 of a first violation by a juvenile, a parent violates Section 10.72.040 (in connection with a second violation by the juvenile), this shall be treated as a first offense by the parent. For the first offense by a parent, the fine shall be fifty dollars, and for each subsequent offense by a parent the fine shall be increased by an additional fifty dollars, e.g., one hundred dollars for the second offense, one hundred fifty dollars for the third offense. The district court, upon finding a parent guilty, shall sentence the parent to pay this fine.

B.    The parent or legal guardian having custody of a juvenile subject to this section shall be liable for all costs incurred by the city for providing personnel to remain in the company of a juvenile who has been detained as a curfew violator if the parent or guardian does not pick up the juvenile within one hour after receiving notice from the city that the city is detaining the juvenile for a curfew violation. The amount to be paid by the parent or guardian shall be based on the hourly wage of the city employee who is assigned to remain with the juvenile plus the cost of benefits for that employee.

C.    The parent or legal guardian having custody of a juvenile subject to this section shall be liable for any fine or condition of restitution or reparation imposed by a court upon a curfew violator, provided that the curfew violator has not paid the fine or made restitution of reparation within the time ordered by the court, and further provided that the parent or legal guardian has been made a party defendant in all enforcement proceedings against the curfew violator and shall be served with all citations, summons, complaints, notices, and other documents required to be served on the curfew violator defendant.

D.    Any juvenile who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be cited for such violations, for the first citation the fine shall be fifty dollars with the fine increasing by fifty dollars for each subsequent violation.

E.    If, after the warning notice pursuant to Section 10.72.060 of a violation of this chapter, an operator of an establishment violates Section 10.72.050 a second time, this shall be treated as a first offense by the operator. For the first offense by an operator, the fine shall be fifty dollars, and for each subsequent offense by an operator the fine shall be increased by an additional fifty dollars, e.g., one hundred dollars for the second offense, one hundred fifty dollars for the third offense.

F.    The maximum penalty for violation of this chapter shall be three hundred dollars, except for curfew violation, which shall carry a maximum penalty of not more than two hundred fifty dollars (AS 29.35.085(b)).

(Ord. 15-11 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 97-1467 § 4 (part), 1997.)


10.72.080 Notice.

Notice of the existence of this chapter and of the curfew regulations established by it shall be posted in, or about such public or quasi-public places as may be determined by the chief of the police department in order that the public may be constantly informed of the existence of this chapter and its regulations. (Ord. 97-1467 § 4 (part), 1997.) 


Chapter 10.76 LOITERING

Sections:

10.76.040    Sale and display of narcotic and other paraphernalia.

10.76.050    Prohibiting contraband substances to minors.

10.76.060    Definition.

10.76.070    Student protection and school property.


10.76.040 Sale and display of narcotic and other paraphernalia.

A.    Minors. No owner, manager, proprietor or other person in charge of any place of business selling or displaying for the purpose of sale, any device, contrivance, instrument or paraphernalia for smoking or injection, or consuming marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance, as defined by the laws of the state (other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs), as well as roach clips, and cigarette papers and rollers designed for the smoking of the foregoing, shall allow or permit any person under the age of eighteen years to be, remain in, enter or visit such salesroom unless such minor person is accompanied by one of his or her parents, or by his or her legal guardian.

B.    Minors – Excluded. A person under the age of eighteen years shall not be, remain in, enter or visit any room in any place used for the sale, or displaying for sale, devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substances, other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs, including roach clips, and cigarette papers and rollers designed and used for smoking the foregoing, or any item described in Section 10.76.050, unless such person is accompanied by one of his or her parents, or his or her legal guardian.

C.    Sale and Display Rooms. A person shall not maintain in any place of business to which the public is invited, the display for sale, or the offering to sell, of devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substances (other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs), including roach clips, and cigarette papers and rollers designed and used for smoking the foregoing, unless within a separate room or enclosure to which minors not accompanied by a parent or legal guardian are excluded. Each entrance to such room shall be signposted in reasonably visible and legible words to the effect that minors, unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, are excluded. The above-named items may not be visible outside the room, as through display windows.

D.    Nuisance. The distribution or possession for the purpose of sale, exhibition, or display in any place of business from which minors are not excluded as set forth in this section, and where devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substances, (other than prescription drugs or devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs), including roach clips, and cigarette papers and rollers designed and used for smoking the foregoing, is a public nuisance, and any building, structure, premises, or room or rooms therein constituting a nuisance as defined in this section and Sections 10.76.050 and 10.76.060 may be abated in a civil action in the manner provided by A.S. 09.45.230. Such abatement shall be effected by closing and securely locking the place abated and excluding all persons therefrom, for a period of one year after the date of such abatement, unless a surety bond, to be approved by the court making the order of abatement, in the penal sum of one thousand dollars, payable to the city, conditioned that such building, structure or premises, or room or rooms therein will not thereafter be used in violation of this section or Sections 10.76.050 and 10.76.060, and further conditioned upon payment of all fines, costs and damages assessed for any violation of this chapter, and in case of the violation of any of the conditions of such bond, the whole amount may be recovered as a penalty to the city. This remedy is in addition to any other remedy provided by la.

Upon a finding that a building has been used as a nuisance, the court may also impose a civil fine of up to one thousand dollars.

E.    Affirmative Defense. It shall be an affirmative defense to any legal action brought under this section that the person had no knowledge of the drug-related nature of the items.

(Ord. 80-425 § 4 (part), 1980.)


10.76.050 Prohibiting contraband substances to minors.

A.    It is unlawful to sell, transfer, or give to any person under the age of eighteen years, and it is unlawful for any person under eighteen years of age to possess any marijuana, hashish, PCP or any other controlled substance (except by prescription) or any device, contrivance, instrument or paraphernalia described in subsection A of Section 10.76.040, or any circular multi-bladed throwing knives.

B.    Any of the above-mentioned substances and items found in the possession of a minor under the age of eighteen years shall be confiscated and destroyed as contraband.

C.    Any person convicted of selling, transferring, trading or giving any of the above-mentioned substances or items to a minor under the age of eighteen years shall be subject to a penalty of not more than thirty days in jail or a fine of up to five hundred dollars, or both.

(Ord. 84-630 § 4, 1984; Ord. 80-425 § 4 (part), 1980.)


10.76.060 Definition.

“Drug paraphernalia” means and includes, but is not limited to, any item advertised or marketed for the primary use of storing, aiding in the a smoking or ingesting of cannabis, PCP, or any controlled substances as defined by state law.

In any legal proceeding, the fact that an item is advertised for sale in trade journals or catalogues or periodic publications as being useful in the storing, or aiding in the smoking, or ingesting of the above-named substances shall be admissible as evidence of the knowledge of the possessor of the drug-related use. (Ord. 80-425 § 4 (part), 1980.)


10.76.070 Student protection and school property.

A.    The public schools are primarily for the education of the students who attend them and it is declared policy of the city and borough of Sitka to consider the school grounds and buildings closed to the general public from seven a.m. to four-thirty p.m. during the school term. The school district may extend these hours to up to twenty-four hours per day, for cause. Access will be limited to students attending the particular school and persons having a valid need to be on the premises. This is the purpose of limiting distractions and for the safety of the students.

B.    Any person on public school property during the times set out in subsection A of this section shall answer questions concerning their reason for being on the property, if so requested by school personnel or police officers.

C.    Any person on public school property during the time set out in subsection A of this section shall immediately depart if so requested by school personnel or police officers.

D.    Entering or remaining on school property for the purpose of meeting with a student shall not be deemed a satisfactory reason, unless the person is specifically authorized to do so by the student’s parent or guardian.

E.    Refusal to answer questions or to depart upon request or to remain off school property after being so requested shall be criminal trespass which shall be a Class B misdemeanor subject to a fine of up to one thousand dollars and/or ninety days in jail. Nothing in this section shall prevent a person from being removed from school property under the provisions of any other applicable ordinance or statute.

(Ord. 96-1359 § 4, 1996; Ord. 81-489 § 4, 1981).


Chapter 10.80 DETENTION OF MINORS

Sections:

10.80.010    Conditions governing detention of minors.

10.80.020    Powers of police.


10.80.010 Conditions governing detention of minors.

Whenever any police officer takes a child into custody, he shall, unless it is impracticable or has been otherwise ordered by the court having jurisdiction, accept the written promise of the parent, legal guardian or custodian of such child to be responsible for the presence of such child in the court at the time fixed. Thereupon such child may be released in the custody of the parent, legal guardian or custodian, or in the custody of the Alaska Department of Health and Social Services or other person designated by the court. If not so released, such child shall be taken immediately to the place of detention designated by the court, and any child so detained shall be brought before the court at the earliest practicable time, but not later than twenty-four hours after such detention. (Amended during 3/15 supplement; Ord. 73-59 § 3 (part), 1973.) 


10.80.020 Powers of police.

Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as forbidding any police officer from immediately taking into custody any child who is found violating any law or ordinance, or who is reasonably believed to be a fugitive from his parents or his legal guardian, or from justice, or whose surroundings are such as to endanger his health, morals, or welfare, unless immediate action is taken. When any child under eighteen years of age is taken into custody with or without warrant and charged with the violation of any law or municipal ordinance, such child shall within twenty-four hours be taken before a court having jurisdiction; or, if the court is not in session, the child shall be placed in a juvenile detention facility, if such is available, and the Alaska Department of Health and Social Services and the municipal judge shall be notified immediately. (Amended during 3/15 supplement; Ord. 73-59 § 3 (part), 1973.)


Chapter 10.84 LIQUOR REGULATIONS

Sections:

10.84.010    Definitions.

10.84.049    Access of persons under the age of twenty-one to licensed premises.

10.84.050    Possession or consumption by persons under the age of twenty-one.

10.84.051    Furnishing of alcoholic beverages to persons under the age of twenty-one.

10.84.052    Furnishing of alcoholic beverages to persons under the age of twenty-one by licensees.

10.84.060    Purchase by persons under the age of twenty-one.

10.84.070    Penalty.


10.84.010 Definitions.

The terms “intoxicating liquor” and “alcoholic beverages” as used hereafter are interchangeable and are defined as a spirituous, vinous, malt, or other fermented or distilled liquid, whatever the origin, that is intended for human consumption as a beverage and that contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume, whether produced commercially or privately. (Ord. 15-19 § 4 (part), 2015: Ord. 73-59 § 3 (part), 1973.)


10.84.049 Access of persons under the age of twenty-one to licensed premises.

A.    A person under the age of twenty-one years may not knowingly enter or remain in premises licensed under Title 4 of the Alaska Statutes unless:

1.    Accompanied by a parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the age of twenty-one years;

2.    The person is at least sixteen years of age, the premises are designated by the Alcohol Beverage Control Board as a restaurant for the purposes of this section, and the person enters and remains only for dining; or

3.    The person is under the age of sixteen years, is accompanied by a person over the age of twenty-one years, the parent or guardian of the underaged person consents, the premises are designated by the Alcohol Beverage Control Board as a restaurant for the purposes of this section, and the person enters and remains only for dining.

B.    Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a licensee or an agent or employee of the licensee may refuse entry to a person under the age of twenty-one years to that part of licensed premises in which alcoholic beverages are sold, served, or consumed, may refuse service to a person under the age of twenty-one years, or may require a person under the age of twenty-one years to leave the portion of the licensed premises in which alcoholic beverages are sold, served, or consumed.

C.    Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a person between sixteen and nineteen years of age may enter and remain within the licensed premises of a hotel, restaurant, or eating place in the course of employment if:

1.    The employment does not involve the serving, mixing, delivering, or dispensing of alcoholic beverages;

2.    The person has the written consent of a parent or guardian; and

3.    An exemption from the prohibition of AS 23.10.355 is granted by the Alaska Department of Labor and Workforce Development. The Alcohol Beverage Control Board, with the approval of the Sitka Assembly and at the licensee’s request, shall designate which premises are hotels, restaurants, or eating places for the purposes of this subsection.

D.    Notwithstanding any other provision in this section, a person nineteen or twenty years of age may be employed within the licensed premises of a hotel, restaurant or eating place, may enter and remain within those premises for the purpose of employment, but may not in the course of employment, sell, serve, deliver or dispense alcoholic beverages.

(Amended during 3/15 supplement; Ord. 84-600 § 4 (part), 1984.)


10.84.050 Possession or consumption by persons under the age of twenty-one.

A.    A person under twenty-one years of age may not knowingly consume, possess or control alcoholic beverages except those furnished persons under Section 10.84.051.

B.    A person who violates subsection A of this section and who has not been previously convicted or received a suspended imposition of sentence under subsection (B)(1) of this section is guilty of minor consuming or in possession or control. Upon conviction in the district court, the court may:

1.    Grant a suspended imposition of sentence under AS 12.55.085 and place the person on probation for one year or until the person is twenty-one years of age, whichever is later, if the person has not been convicted of a violation of this section previously; among the conditions of probation, the court shall, with the consent of a community diversion panel, refer the person to the panel, and require the person to comply with the conditions set by the panel, including counseling, education, treatment, community work, and payment of fees; in this section, “community diversion panel” means a youth court or other group selected by the court to serve as a sentencing option for a person convicted under this section; or

2.    Shall impose a fine of at least two hundred dollars but not more than six hundred dollars, shall require the person to attend alcohol information school if the school is available, and shall place the person on probation under subsection E of this section; the court may suspend a portion of the fine imposed under this section that exceeds two hundred dollars if the person is required to pay for education or treatment required under subsection E of this section.

C.    A person is guilty of repeat minor consuming or in possession or control if the person was placed on probation under subsection B of this section or has been previously convicted, and the person violates subsection A of this section. Upon conviction in the district court, the court shall: 

1.    Impose a fine of one thousand dollars and require at least forty-eight hours of community work;

2.    Revoke the person’s driver’s license for three months;

3.    Take possession of the person’s driver’s license; and

4.    Suspend up to five hundred dollars of the fine and place the person on probation under subsection E of this section.

D.    A person is guilty of habitual minor consuming or in possession or control if the person was placed on probation under subsection C of this section, or has been previously convicted twice, and the person violates subsection A of this section. Habitual minor consuming or possession or control is a class B misdemeanor. Upon conviction, the court may impose an appropriate period of imprisonment and fine and place the person on probation under subsection E of this section and shall:

1.    Impose at least ninety-six hours of community work;

2.    Revoke the person’s driver’s license for six months;

3.    Within five working days, notify the agency responsible for the administration of motor vehicles laws of the revocation; and

4.    Take possession of the person’s driver’s license.

E.    The court shall place a person sentenced under subsection B, C or D of this section on probation for one year, or until the person is twenty-one years of age, whichever is later. The person may not refuse probation. The court may require the person to pay for and enroll in a juvenile alcohol safety program, if one is available. The court shall impose the following conditions of probation:

1.    The person shall pay for and successfully complete any education or treatment recommended;

2.    The person may not consume inhalants or possess or consume controlled substances, or alcoholic beverages, except as provided in Section 10.84.051;

3.    The person shall timely complete any community work ordered, as provided in subsection F of this section; and

4.    Other conditions the court considers appropriate.

F.    A person ordered to perform community work under this section shall perform the work within one hundred twenty days of the entry of judgment for a conviction. The court may expand the time period for up to thirty days upon a showing of good cause. The person shall submit verification of completion of community work to the clerk of court on a form provided by the court. If the verification is not provided within the time period required in this subsection, the court shall, within thirty days, schedule further proceedings in the case to determine whether a violation of probation has occurred.

G.    The treatment recommended by a juvenile alcohol safety action program for a person placed on probation under subsection E of this section may include a period of inpatient treatment if the judgment specifies the maximum period of inpatient treatment authorized. A person who has been recommended for inpatient treatment may make a written request to the sentencing court for review of the referral. A person shall make a request for review within seven days after the recommendation and shall specifically set out the grounds upon which the request for review is based. The court may order a hearing on the request for review.

H.    The juvenile alcohol safety action program to which a person is referred under this section shall inform the court or a minor’s juvenile probation officer if the person fails to submit to evaluation or fails to complete successfully an education or treatment recommended. If the court finds that the person has failed to perform community work as ordered, to submit to an evaluation, or fails to complete successfully the education or treatment recommended, the court may impose the suspended fine, and may impose any period of suspended incarceration. If the person was convicted under subsection C or D of this section, the court shall revoke the person’s driver’s license for an additional period of six months beyond the imposed under subsection C or D of this section. A court revoking a person’s driver’s license under this subsection shall notify the agency responsible for the administration of motor vehicle laws of the revocation within five working days.

I.    When considering the financial resources of a minor for the purpose of determining eligibility for court-appointed counsel under this section, the court shall consider the resources of both the defendant and the defendant’s parent or guardian, unless the court finds good cause to treat the defendant’s or the defendant’s parent’s or guardian’s resources as being unavailable to the defendant.

J.    A driver’s license revocation under this section is consecutive to a revocation imposed under another provision of law, but is concurrent with a revocation under another provision of law based on a prior conviction, adjudication of delinquency, or informal adjustment under AS 47.12.060.

K.    In this section:

1.    “Driver’s license” has the meaning given in AS 28.90.990.

2.    “Juvenile alcohol safety action program” means:

a.    A juvenile safety action program developed and implemented by the Department of Health and Social Services under AS 47.37;

b.    Any other alcohol education or treatment program approved by the Department of Health and Social Services under AS 47.37 if a program described in subsection (K)(2)(a) of this section is not available in the community in which the person resides; or

c.    A program or counseling approved by the court if the program or treatment described in subsection (K)(2)(a) of this section is not available in the community where the person resides; “previously convicted” means a conviction or an adjudication as a delinquent for a violation of AS 11.71, 28.35.030, 28.35.032, 28.35.280 through 28.35.290, or a law or ordinance in another jurisdiction with substantially similar elements.

(Amended during 3/15 supplement; Ord. 05-05 § 4(A), 2005.) 


10.84.051 Furnishing of alcoholic beverages to persons under the age of twenty-one.

A.    A person may not furnish an alcoholic beverage to a person under the age of twenty-one years.

B.    This section does not prohibit the furnishing of an alcoholic beverage:

1.    By a parent to his child, by a guardian to his ward, or by a spouse to his or her legal spouse if the furnishing occurs off licensed premises; or

2.    By a licensed physician or nurse to a patient in the course of administering medical treatment.

(Ord. 84-600 § 4 (part), 1984.)


10.84.052 Furnishing of alcoholic beverages to persons under the age of twenty-one by licensees.

A licensee or an agent or employee of the licensee may not with criminal negligence:

A.    Allow another person to sell, barter, or give an alcoholic beverage to a person under the age of twenty-one years within licensed premises;

B.    Allow a person under the age of twenty-one years to enter and remain within licensed premises except as provided in Section 10.84.049;

C.    Allow a person under the age of twenty-one to consume an alcoholic beverage within licensed premises;

D.    Allow a person under the age of twenty-one years to sell or serve alcoholic beverages.

(Ord. 84-600 § 4 (part), 1984.)


10.84.060 Purchase by persons under the age of twenty-one.

A.    A person under the age of twenty-one years may not purchase alcoholic beverages or solicit another to purchase alcoholic beverages for the person under the age of twenty-one.

B.    A person may not influence the sale, gift, or service of an alcoholic beverage to a person under the age of twenty-one years, by misrepresenting the age of that person.

C.    A person may not order or receive an alcoholic beverage from a licensee, an agent or employee of the licensee, or another person, for the purpose of selling, giving, or serving it to a person under the age of twenty-one years.

D.    A person under the age of twenty-one years may not enter licensed premises where alcoholic beverages are sold and offer or present to a licensee or an agent or employee of the licensee a birth certificate or other written evidence of age, that is fraudulent or false or that is not actually the person’s own, or otherwise misrepresent the person’s age, for the purpose of inducing the licensee or an agent or employee of the licensee to sell, give, serve, or furnish alcoholic beverages contrary to law.

B.    A person under the age of twenty-one who is seeking to enter and remain in a licensed premises under Section 10.84.049(A)(2) or (3) may not misrepresent the person’s age or having obtained the consent of the parent or guardian required by that section.

(Ord. 84-600 § 4 (part), 1984.)


10.84.070 Penalty.

Except for Section 10.84.050, violations of any section of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than three hundred dollars. (Ord. 05-05 § 4(B), 2005: Ord. 84-600 § 4 (part), 1984.) 


Chapter 10.88 FIREARMS

Sections:

10.88.010    Definitions.

10.88.020    Prohibitions.


10.88.010 Definitions.

The terms and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

A.    “Firearms” means and includes all guns using gunpowder, high powered air rifles and pistols, guns operated by CO2 or other gases, paint “splat” guns or other items which mechanically impel projectiles of equal danger.

B.    A “concealed firearm” means and includes any firearm not readily visible.

(Ord. 96-1358 § 4 (part), 1996.) 


10.88.020 Prohibitions.

A.    It is unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm within the boundaries of the central business district, waterfront district, hospitals, any public school premises, including adjacent parking lots, in or around a child care facility, in a courthouse, court room, or office of the court system or justice related agencies, in domestic violence or sexual assault shelters and the City Hall and Harrigan Centennial Building and their parking lots;

B.    It is unlawful for any person to intentionally point or aim any firearm, loaded or otherwise, at any person;

C.    The municipality may not restrict the carrying of a concealed handgun by permit under AS 18.65.700 through 18.65.790. There is no prohibition against carrying a concealed weapon so long as the prohibited behaviors regarding the carry are respected:

1.    The person is twenty-one years or older.

2.    The person is eligible to own or possess a handgun under state and federal laws.

3.    The firearm is legal.

4.    Upon contact with a peace officer, the person immediately informs the officer about the weapon, and allows the officer to secure the weapon for the duration of the contact.

5.    The person does not carry the weapon if they are intoxicated or impaired by alcohol or controlled substances.

6.    The person does not carry the concealed weapon in certain places:

a.    In someone else’s home without their specific knowledge and permission.

b.    In any place where intoxicating liquor is sold for on-site consumption, except a restaurant and the person does not consume alcoholic beverages.

c.    In or around any public or private K-12 school or on a school bus without the knowledge and consent of the school’s administrator (weapons may be unloaded and locked in the trunk of a car or secured in a locked container).

d.    In or around a child care facility (weapons may be unloaded and locked in the trunk of a car or secured in a locked container).

e.    In a courthouse, court room, or office of the court system or justice related agencies.

f.    In domestic violence or sexual assault shelters.

Alaska’s laws do not apply to federal property, offices, installations, or places under federal jurisdiction. Such places can include national parks, military bases, federal court buildings, space rented by federal offices, airports, or airport terminal areas. Please consult with the appropriate federal agency before deciding if weapon carry or concealed carry is permitted.

The owners or management of facilities, including such places as hospitals, universities, gymnasiums, or private property, may restrict or deny concealed carry on their premises. Failure to comply while on their property could violate trespass statutes.

D.    The prohibitions stated in this section shall not apply to sworn peace officers or a person in premises owned or leased by that person and applicable defenses such as self-defense or defense of others should apply. 

(Ord. 15-14 § 4 (part), 2015: amended during 3/15 supplement; Ord. 96-1358 § 4 (part), 1996.) 


Chapter 10.90 FALSE ALARMS

Sections:

10.90.010    False alarms.

10.90.020    Definitions.

10.90.030    Excusable false alarms.


10.90.010 False alarms.

Signals from an alarm system which are false alarms are declared to be a public nuisance. A user may have an allowance of four false alarms occurring within any calendar year. The fifth false alarm within that period shall be subject to a fee of fifty dollars charged to the user of the alarm system. Subsequent false alarms shall be charged and be subject to additional penalties accelerating at an additional fifty dollars for each false alarm, i.e., fifty dollars first, one hundred dollars second, one hundred fifty dollars third and so on. (Ord. 90-954 § 4 (part), 1990.)


10.90.020 Definitions.

A.    “Alarm system” means a device or system of interconnected devices, including hardware and related appurtenances, designed to give warning of activities indicative of fire, criminal conduct, or unauthorized entry upon the protected premises.

B.    “False alarm” means any activation of an alarm system not resulting from fire, criminal activity, or unauthorized entry, upon or following which, communication is made to the responding agency that an alarm has been triggered. If the alarm, when communicated, is clearly identified to the receiver as resulting from authorized entry, authorized system test, or other nonemergency cause, it shall not be considered a false alarm. If police or fire units, as applicable, respond to an alarm, check the protected premises according to standard operating procedures, and are unable to discover any evidence of fire, unauthorized entry or criminal activity, the alarm shall be deemed false, absent a preponderance of evidence to the contrary. (Ord. 90-954 § 4 (part), 1990.) 


10.90.030 Excusable false alarms.

A false alarm may be excused in the discretion of the responding agency or investigator upon being satisfied that:

A.    The alarm has been responsibly and regularly inspected by experienced and well-trained technicians familiar with its design, operations, and the environment in which it is installed;

B.    All repairs, replacements or preventive maintenance recommended by service personnel who inspected the system have been performed;

C.    The cause of the particular false alarm has been either positively identified and corrected or has not been determined to be the result of neglect, misuse or maintenance of the system, and cannot be more precisely identified despite thorough inspection, testing and analysis by technicians described in subsection A of this section;

D.    Technicians, as described in subsection A of this section, have provided a written opinion that the system is unlikely to produce another false alarm from the same cause;

E.    The false alarm was not the result of user error or neglect. “User” includes owners, employees, residents, family members and guests of the protected premises;

F.    The premises is a premises open to the public with manually operated alarms which were obviously activated wrongfully by persons other than the users as defined above.

(Ord. 90-954 § 4 (part), 1990.)


TITLE 10 FOOTNOTES

1    For statutory provisions regarding bribery, see AS Sections 11.56.100 – 11.56.130; for the statutory provisions regarding blackmail, see AS Section 11.41.520.

2    For statutory provisions regarding state regulation of fireworks, see AS Ch. 18.72.

3    For statutory provisions regarding gambling, see AS Sections 11.66.200 – 11.66.280.

4    For statutory provisions regarding alcoholic beverages, see AS Title 4.

5    For statutory provisions regarding prostitution, see AS Sections 11.66.100 – 11.66.150.

6    For statutory provisions regarding disorderly conduct, see AS Section 11.61.110.

7    For statutory provisions regarding larceny, see AS Sections 11.46.100 – 11.46.295.

8    For statutory provisions regarding curfew, see AS Section 29.35.085. 


Title 11 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC

Chapters:

11.04    Definitions

11.08    Enforcement

11.12    Administration

11.16    Obedience to Regulations

11.17    Vehicle Weight and Load Limitations

11.24    Traffic-Control Devices

11.28    State Traffic Laws Adopted

11.32    Turning Movements

11.36    One-Way Streets and Alleys

11.40    Stopping, Standing and Parking

11.44    Miscellaneous Driving Rules

11.52    Vehicle Safety and Accessory Equipment

11.54    Truck Routes

11.56    Taxicabs

11.60    Impounding Vehicles

11.64    Pedestrians

11.68    Bicycles

11.70    Helmet Requirements for Young Persons Riding Certain Vehicles

NOTE:    Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this title.


Chapter 11.04 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

11.04.010    Generally.

11.04.020    Authorized emergency vehicles.

11.04.030    Business district.

11.04.040    Curb loading zones.

11.04.050    Drivers.

11.04.060    Municipality.

11.04.070    Parking area.

11.04.080    Passenger loading zones.

11.04.090    Person.

11.04.100    Police officer.

11.04.110    Public holidays.

11.04.120    State.

11.04.130    Traffic division.

11.04.140    Vehicle.


11.04.010 Generally.

The following words and phrases in Sections 11.04.020 through 11.04.130, when used in this title, shall, for the purpose of this title, have the meaning respectively ascribed them in this chapter. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.04.020 Authorized emergency vehicles.

“Authorized emergency vehicles” means vehicles of the fire department, police vehicles and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the municipality or official having jurisdiction. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.04.030 Business district.

“Business district” means the territory contiguous to and including the public street or highway when fifty percent or more of the frontage thereon on either side thereof or a continuous distance of three hundred feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.) 


11.04.040 Curb loading zones.

“Curb loading zones” means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B)(part), 1984; Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.04.050 Drivers.

“Drivers” means a rider or leader of any animal or a person who pushes, drives or propels, operates or is in physical control of any vehicle. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.04.060 Municipality.

“Municipality” means the city and borough of Sitka, Alaska. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.04.070 Parking area.

“Parking area” means property used for public parking of vehicles. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.04.080 Passenger loading zones.

“Passenger loading zones” means a place adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.04.090 Person.

“Person” means a natural person, firm, co-partnership, association or corporation. (Ord. 84-597    § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.04.100 Police officer.

“Police officer” means every officer of the municipal police department, or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.04.110 Public holidays.

“Public holidays” means New Year’s Day, Presidents Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Alaska Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. When a holiday falls on Sunday, the following Monday will be observed as the holiday. When a holiday falls on Saturday, the preceding Friday will be observed as the holiday. (Ord. 15-11 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.04.120 State.

“State” means the state of Alaska. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.04.130 Traffic division.

“Traffic division” means the traffic division of the police department of the municipality, or in the event a traffic division is not established, then the term whenever used herein shall be deemed to refer to the police department of this municipality. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.04.140 Vehicle.

“Vehicle” means a device in, upon, or by which a person or property may be transported or drawn upon or immediately over a highway or vehicular way or area except devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 89-916 § 4(A), 1990.) 


Chapter 11.08 ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

11.08.010    Duty of police department.

11.08.020    Board of traffic violations.

11.08.030    Police department to investigate accidents.

11.08.040    Authority of police and fire department officials.

11.08.050    Obedience to police and fire department officials.


11.08.010 Duty of police department.

It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce street and highway traffic ordinances and regulations of this municipality and all of the state motor vehicle laws applicable to street and highway traffic in this municipality, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to carry out those duties especially imposed upon the department by this title. (Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.08.020 Board of traffic violations.

A.    The police department, or the traffic division thereof, shall keep a record of all moving violations of these traffic ordinances or the state motor vehicle laws of which any person has been charged. Such records shall be so maintained as to show all such types of moving violations and the total of each. The records shall accumulate during at least a five-year period and from that time on the records shall be maintained for at least the most recent five-year period.

B.    All forms for records of the abovementioned violations and notices of the violations shall be serially numbered. For each month and year a written record shall be kept available to the public, showing the disposal of all such forms.

(Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.08.030 Police department to investigate accidents.

It shall be the duty of the police officers of the department, to investigate traffic accidents and to arrest or cite and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents. (Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.08.040 Authority of police and fire department officials.

A.    It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department and such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all municipal traffic regulations and ordinances and all of the state motor vehicle laws applicable to street and highway traffic in this municipality.

B.    Officers of the police department and such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided that, in the event of fire or other emergency, or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.

C.    Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity.

(Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.08.050 Obedience to police and fire department officials.

No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police or fire department officer. (Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


Chapter 11.12 ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

11.12.010    Traffic accident reports.

11.12.020    Traffic accident studies.

11.12.030    Police department annual report.

11.12.040    Method of identifying funeral processions.

11.12.050    Experimental regulations and tests.

11.12.060    Traffic advisory committee.

11.12.070    Registered owner responsible for illegal parking and nonmoving violations.


11.12.010 Traffic accident reports.

The police department shall receive and properly record all traffic accident reports made under any municipal ordinance. (Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.12.020 Traffic accident studies.

Whenever the accidents in any particular location become numerous, the police department shall cooperate with the municipal engineer in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures. (Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.12.030 Police department annual report.

The police department shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the municipal administrator. Such report shall contain information on municipal traffic matters as follows:

A.    The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data;

B.    The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police department;

C.    The plans and recommendations of the police department for future traffic safety activities.

(Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.12.040 Method of identifying funeral processions.

The police chief shall designate a type of pennant or other identifying insignia to be displayed upon, or other methods to be employed to identify vehicles in funeral processions. (Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.12.050 Experimental regulations and tests.

A.    The chief of police is empowered to make emergency and experimental regulations, with approval of the municipal administrator; such regulations not to remain in effect more than ninety days.

B.    The chief of police may test traffic control devices under actual conditions of traffic, with cooperation of the municipal engineer. (Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.12.060 Traffic advisory committee.

The municipal administrator may appoint special traffic advisory committees to study and make recommendations on special traffic problems of wide public interest. The members of traffic advisory committees shall serve without compensation as such. The mayor, municipal administrator, chief of police, chairman of the public safety commission, and the municipal engineer shall be ex-officio members of all such committees. (Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.12.070 Registered owner responsible for illegal parking and nonmoving violations.

Every person in whose name a vehicle is registered (licensed) shall be responsible for any parking or angle parking of the vehicles and for all offenses other than moving violations. It shall be no defense to a charge that the vehicle was used by another, unless it is shown that at such time such vehicle was being used without the consent of the registered (licensed) owner thereof. (Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


Chapter 11.16 OBEDIENCE TO REGULATIONS

Sections:

11.16.010    Public employees to obey traffic regulations.


11.16.010 Public employees to obey traffic regulations.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, the state of Alaska, or the municipality. It is unlawful for any driver to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or by state statute. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-57 § 3(part), 1973.)


Chapter 11.17 VEHICLE WEIGHT AND LOAD LIMITATIONS

Sections:

11.17.25.010    Prohibited vehicles and loads.

11.17.25.020    Width of vehicles.

11.17.25.030    Height and length of vehicles and loads.

11.17.25.040    Confinement of loads.

11.17.25.050    Trailers and towed vehicles.

11.17.25.060    Allowable gross weights. 

11.17.25.065    Excess weight penalties.

11.17.25.110    Definitions.


11.17.25.010 Prohibited vehicles and loads.

A.    No person may drive or move, nor may an owner or lessee cause to knowingly permit to be driven or moved on a highway, a vehicle or vehicles of a size or weight or having a load exceeding the limitations stated in this chapter.

B.    The provisions of this chapter governing size, weight, and load do not apply to a vehicle or vehicles with a load operated under the terms of a permit issued under 17 AAC 25.011.

(Ord. 15-20 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 84-605 § 4(A, B) (part), 1984.)


11.17.25.020 Width of vehicles.

A.    The total outside width of any vehicle or load on a vehicle may not exceed ninety-six inches, except by permit as provided in 17 AAC 25.011. Balloon or duplex tires on trucks may extend three inches beyond the limit on either side. Vehicles used in public transportation may have a total outside width, including load, of one hundred two inches when operating on roadways with a lane width of twelve feet. Safety devices and load binders may extend three inches beyond the limit on either side if they are situated more than four feet above the roadway. Load binders must be located on the right-hand side of the vehicle if possible.

B.    No passenger vehicle may be operated on any highway with a load which extends beyond the line of the fenders on the left side, nor which extends more than six inches beyond the line of the fenders on the right side.

(Ord. 15-20 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 84-605 § 4(A, B) (part), 1984.)


11.17.25.030 Height and length of vehicles and loads.

A.    No vehicle including any load thereon, shall exceed a height of thirteen feet six inches.

B.    No single vehicle, including any load thereon, may exceed a length of forty feet inclusive of front and rear bumpers, except as provided in subsection C of this section.

C.    No semi-trailer may exceed an overall length of forty-five feet. No combination of truck-tractor and semi-trailer, including any load, may exceed a length of seventy feet, including front and rear bumpers.

D.    No combination of truck-tractor and trailer or trailers, or other combination of vehicles, including any load, may have an overall length in excess of seventy-five feet, including front and rear bumpers.

E.    Subject to the foregoing provisions of this chapter limiting the length of vehicles and loads, the load on any vehicle or combination of vehicles may not extend more than three feet beyond the front bumper or more than four feet beyond the rear of the bed or body of the vehicle or trailer.

(Ord. 84-605 § 4(A, B) (part), 1984.)


11.17.25.040 Confinement of loads.

A.    No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless it is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of the load from dropping, shifting, leaking, or escaping, except that sand may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, and water or other substance may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining it.

B.    No person may operate on any highway any vehicle with a load unless the load and any covering, on it is securely fastened so as to prevent the covering or load from coming loose, detached or in any manner a hazard to other users of the highway.

(Ord. 84-605 § 4(A, B) (part), 1984.)


11.17.25.050 Trailers and towed vehicles.

When one vehicle is towing another, the drawbar or other connections shall be of such strength, design and configuration to control the towed vehicle. (Ord. 84-605 § 4(A, B) (part), 1984).


11.17.25.060 Allowable gross weights. 

The city and borough adopts 17 Alaska Administrative Code 25.013. (Ord. 02-1709 § 4, 2003; Ord. 84-605 § 4(A, B) (part), 1984.)


11.17.25.065 Excess weight penalties.

Violation of Section 11.17.25.060 shall be an infraction with a maximum penalty of five cents per pound overweight. (Ord. 85-605 § 4 (C), 1984.)


11.17.25.110 Definitions.

Unless the context indicates otherwise, in this chapter:

A.    “Axle” means the common axis of rotation of two or more wheels, whether power driven or freely rotating, attached to the vehicle or trailer for the purpose of carrying a portion of the vehicle or trailer weight.

B.    “Gross weight” means the total weight of a vehicle including the load and any accumulated snow, ice, or mud.

C.    “Height” means the total vertical dimension of any vehicle above the roadway surface, including any load and load-holding device thereon.

D.    “Highway” includes a highway, road, street, bridge, tunnel, drainage structure and other similar or related structure or facility, and right-of-way.

E.    “Semi-trailer” means a vehicle without motive power designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and the weight of its load rests on or is carried by another vehicle.

F.    “Single axle weight” means the total weight transmitted to the roadway by the wheels of a single axle.

G.    “Tandem axle” means an assembly of two or more axles which are attached to the vehicle by a connecting mechanism designed to distribute the vehicle weight evenly to all axles of the tandem group.

H.    “Tandem axle weight” means the total weight transmitted to the roadway by a tandem axle.

I.    “Trailer” means a towed vehicle with one or more axles, one of which may be a steering axle, configured so that no significant portion of its total weight rests upon the towing vehicle.

J.    “Vehicle” means every device capable of being moved upon a public highway and in, upon, or by which a person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway.

K.    “Load” means anything that is carried on or in a vehicle but which is not permanently attached to it.

L.    “Emergency” means a condition that is either hazardous to life or property or that prevents a damaged roadway from being used by the public.

M.    “Public transportation” means a system of vehicles operated by or for a municipality to carry persons to or from locations within that municipality.

N.    “Truck” means a motor vehicle of more than ten thousand pounds unladen gross vehicle weight designed, used, or maintained primarily for the movement of a load.

O.    “Truck-tractor” means a self-propelled motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing a semi-trailer, full trailer, or trailers.

P.    “Safety devices” means equipment designed to enhance a driver’s view to the front, rear, and side of a vehicle, a driver’s access to a vehicle and load, and equipment designed to provide protection to other vehicles such as rear view mirrors, rubber fenders, mud flaps, rock guards, anti-spray devices, tires (due to expansion), clearance lights, rub rails, binder chains, pin pockets, door handles, turning signal brackets, steps, bumpers, and backup lights and tire chain hangers mounted on headache racks.

(Ord. 84-605 § 4 (A, B) (part), 1984.)


Chapter 11.24 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES

Sections:

11.24.010    Authority to install.

11.24.020    Specifications.

11.24.030    Interference with official traffic control devices or signs.

11.24.040    Crosswalks and safety zones.

11.24.050    Traffic lanes.

11.24.060    Street closed to traffic.

11.24.070    Types of parking zones.

11.24.080    Arterial streets, highways.

11.24.090    Intersections where stop required.

11.24.100    Specifications for stop signs.


11.24.010 Authority to install.

The municipal engineer shall place and maintain traffic control signs, signals and devices when required under the traffic ordinances of the municipality to make effective the provisions of the ordinances, and may place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the municipality’s traffic ordinances or under state law, or to guide and warn traffic.

The municipal engineer may determine those intersections at which it would facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and would be reasonable and safe to permit vehicles to turn right after stopping and shall place proper signs at such intersections. Vehicular traffic facing such red signal and sign permitting a right turn shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection and, after stopping, may proceed with caution to make a right turn but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within the crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.

(Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.24.020 Specifications.

All traffic control signs, signals, and devices shall so far as practicable conform to the “Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.” All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the municipality. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or municipal ordinances shall be official traffic control devices. (Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.24.030 Interference with official traffic control devices or signs.

No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any official traffic control device or sign, or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.24.040 Crosswalks and safety zones.

The municipal engineer is empowered:

A.    To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadways, and at such other place as he may deem necessary.

B.    To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians.

(Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.24.050 Traffic lanes.

A.    The municipal engineer may mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary.

B.    Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lanes except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.

(Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.24.060 Street closed to traffic.

A.    The municipal engineer may be authorized by the municipal administrator to close streets to traffic.

B.    Whenever any street is closed to the use of traffic and so indicated by authorized signs or barriers, no vehicle shall proceed into the street or any portion thereof except as directed by the signs. Whenever a street is closed, notice shall immediately be given to the fire chief by the municipal engineer.

(Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.24.070 Types of parking zones.

All curbing painted yellow means no parking at any time. Other parking restrictions shall be shown by standard parking signs indicating the type of restriction. No signs or other markings shall be necessary in the case of yellow-painted curbs which prohibit parking at any time. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.24.080 Arterial streets, highways.

The municipal engineer may designate and describe arterial streets or highways. When so designated, it shall be the duty of the municipal engineer to place and maintain a “STOP” sign on each and every street or highway intersecting such arterial street or highway or intersecting that portion thereof described and designated as such unless traffic signals control; provided, however, that at the intersection of two such arterial streets or highways, or at the intersection of an arterial street and a heavy traffic street, such “STOP” signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of the streets as may be determined by the municipal engineer on the basis of a traffic study. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.24.090 Intersections where stop required.

The municipal engineer is authorized to determine and designate intersections where particular hazard exists upon other than arterial streets or highways and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such intersection, and shall erect a “STOP” sign at every such place where a stop is required. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.24.100 Specifications for stop signs.

Every sign erected pursuant to this chapter shall be in conformance with the manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and shall bear the word “STOP” in letters not less than eight inches in height. Such sign shall at nighttime be rendered luminous by efficient reflecting elements on the face of the sign. Every stop sign shall be located as near as practicable at the nearest line of the crosswalk on the rear side of the intersection or, if none, at the nearest line of the roadway and shall be placed on the right side of such street. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


Chapter 11.28 STATE TRAFFIC LAWS ADOPTED

Sections:

11.28.010    Traffic code—Adoption of state traffic laws.

11.28.020    Adoption of state penalties.

11.28.030    Violation—Infraction.


11.28.010 Traffic code—Adoption of state traffic laws. 

City and borough of Sitka adopts all state traffic statutes and regulations of the state of Alaska, as they presently exist and as they may be revised in the future as the traffic code for the city and borough of Sitka. (Ord. 15-20 § 4 (part), 2015: Ord. 13-40 § 4 (part), 2013.)


11.28.020 Adoption of state penalties.

City and borough of Sitka adopts as its traffic fine schedule the “Traffic Bail Forfeiture Schedule” and the “Oversize Vehicle Bail Forfeiture Schedule” in Administrative Rules 43.1 and 43.6 of the Alaska Rules of Court and any other bail forfeiture schedules relating to vehicles adopted by the Alaska Supreme Court. In addition, city and borough adopts all amendments of those schedules that become effective after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Citations for offenses listed on these schedules may be disposed of as provided in AS 12.25.195 through 12.25.230, without a court appearance, upon payment of the amounts listed plus the state surcharge required by AS 12.55.039 and 29.25.074. If a person charged with one of these offenses appears in court and is found guilty, the penalty imposed for the offense may not exceed the amount listed for that offense on the schedule. Citations charging these offenses must meet the requirements of Minor Offense Rule 3 of the Alaska Rules of Court. If an offense is not listed on the fine schedule, the defendant must appear in court to answer to the charges. (Ord. 13-40 § 4 (part), 2013.)


11.28.030 Violation—Infraction. 

A violation of the traffic code of the city and borough of Sitka is an infraction within the terms of AS 28.90.010 and is punishable by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars. (Ord. 13-40 § 4 (part), 2013.)


Chapter 11.32 TURNING MOVEMENTS

Sections:

11.32.010    Authority to place and obedience to turning markers.

11.32.020    Authority to place restricted turn signs.


11.32.010 Authority to place and obedience to turning markers.

A.    The municipal engineer is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections. Such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance.

B.    When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the direction of such indications.

(Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.32.020 Authority to place restricted turn signs.

A.    The chief of police is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right or left turn and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted.

B.    Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left turn is permitted, no driver of any vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such signs.

(Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


Chapter 11.36 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS

Sections:

11.36.010    Authority to designate.


11.36.010 Authority to designate.

A.    The municipal engineer may designate any one-way street or alley and when so designated the municipal engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof. Ordinances or regulations pertaining thereto shall not be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of Traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.

B.    Upon those streets or highways, or parts thereof, and in those alleys designated as one-way, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction.

C.    The municipal engineer is authorized to determine and designate streets, parts of streets, or specific lanes thereon upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period and the opposite direction during another period of the day or night, and shall place and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other devices to give notice thereof. The municipal engineer may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the roadway.

D.    No person shall operate any vehicle in violation of markings, signs, barriers or other devices placed in accordance with this chapter.

(Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


Chapter 11.40 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING

Sections:

11.40.010    Permit for loading or unloading at angle to curb.

11.40.020    Parking in alleys.

11.40.030    Parking adjacent to schools.

11.40.040    Parking prohibited on narrow streets or highways.

11.40.050    Standing or parking on one-way streets or highways.

11.40.060    Standing or parking on one-way roadways.

11.40.070    Stopping, standing or parking near hazardous or congested places.

11.40.080    Parking prohibited during certain hours.

11.40.090    Parking time limited.

11.40.100    Parking prohibited for extended time period.

11.40.110    Parking of trailers restricted.

11.40.120    Application of Sections 11.40.020 through 11.40.110.

11.40.130    Public carrier stops and stands.

11.40.140    Stopping, standing and parking of buses and taxicabs.

11.40.150    Parking on private property prohibited.

11.40.160    Blocking ingress or egress to private property prohibited.

11.40.165    Parking vehicles with suspended, revoked, or expired registration on streets, highways, or roadways, or in public parking lots.

11.40.170    Violation civil fines.

11.40.175    Violation—Responsibility and penalty.

11.40.176    Violations hearing officer.

11.40.177    Administrative appeal.

11.40.180    Penalties for illegal parking.

11.40.190    Permits for oversize or overweight vehicles.

11.40.200    Application for permits.

11.40.210    Fees for permits.

11.40.220    Disabled parking.

11.40.230    Parking method.

11.40.240    Long-term parking areas designated.


11.40.010 Permit for loading or unloading at angle to curb.

A.    The chief of police is authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit and may grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein.

B.    It is unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit.

(Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.40.020 Parking in alleys.

No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in the central business traffic district or any business district except for the expeditious loading or unloading of freight or materials and then the vehicle shall be parked in such manner, or under such conditions, as to leave available not less than ten feet of the width of the alley for free movement of vehicular traffic. Exceptions: Compliance with this section is waived whenever it is impossible to fully comply with its provisions by reason of limitations in the width of the alley. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.40.030 Parking adjacent to schools.

The chief of police is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any street or highway adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.40.040 Parking prohibited on narrow streets or highways.

If, after study, the traffic advisory committee makes such a recommendation, the chief of police is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any street or highway when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty-six feet, or upon one side of a street or highway as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty-five feet. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.40.050 Standing or parking on one-way streets or highways.

The chief of police is authorized to erect signs upon the left-hand side of any one-way street or highway to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles, and when such signs are in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon such left-hand side in violation of any such sign. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.40.060 Standing or parking on one-way roadways.

In the event a street or highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The chief of police is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect signs giving notice thereof. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.40.070 Stopping, standing or parking near hazardous or congested places.

A.    The chief of police is authorized to determine and designate by proper signs places in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic.

B.    When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places, as authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any such designated place.

(Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.40.080 Parking prohibited during certain hours.

A.    The chief of police is authorized to determine and designate by proper signs places in which stopping, standing or parking of vehicles during certain hours of the day would create a hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic.

B.    When official signs prohibiting parking during certain hours of the day are erected as authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place.

(Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.40.090 Parking time limited.

A.    The chief of police is authorized to determine places in which there is public demand or necessity for short-time parking and to designate such places by proper signs indicating the time limit for parking.

B.    When official signs are erected indicating time limit parking in places as authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in such designated place for a time longer than indicated on such signs.

C.    When there is public demand or necessity for short-term parking in designated disability zones, the chief of police is authorized to designate locations for such short-term parking and cause proper signs indicating the time limit for parking to be displayed. This time zone shall be no less than two hours. Exceeding this time limit shall be a violation subject to a citation carrying a twenty-five-dollar fine. Any owner of a disability placard or license plate shall abide by all other posted time zones and regulations.

(Ord. 08-46 § 4 (part), 2008; Ord. 04-17 § 4, 2004; Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.40.100 Parking prohibited for extended time period.

A.    No person shall park a vehicle on any street, highway or roadway or on any municipally owned property for a period of time longer than seventy-two hours except in the extended parking areas authorized below.

B.    The assembly may designate certain areas of municipally owned property as extended parking areas. Parking in these areas for longer than seventy-two hours may be allowed under permit issued by the chief of police for such times and under such conditions as may be set through resolution passed by the assembly.

C.    No operator, registered owner, or other person, may park, or allow or cause to be parked in any public street or other public property, any disabled or inoperable motor vehicle for a period to exceed twenty-four hours.

    A violation of this subsection will incur a minimum of a twenty-five-dollar fine for each twenty-four-hour period from time of ticketing until the vehicle is permanently removed from public property.

D.    No commercial vehicle or mobile commercial equipment shall be parked upon any street or public property overnight for two consecutive nights within the central business district, Crescent Harbor parking lot, and the Centennial Building parking lot.

E.    No construction vehicle factory-rated above an eight thousand pound gross vehicle weight, or any mobile construction equipment, shall be parked overnight upon any street or public property unless otherwise legally parked in close proximity to a construction or other temporary commercial enterprise on which the equipment is in current use and the daily removal to legal off-street parking would be unfeasible.

(Ord. 08-46 § 4 (part), 2008: Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 75-208 § 3, 1975; Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.40.110 Parking of trailers restricted.

A.    No trailer shall be parked on any street, highway or roadway for a longer period than one hour at any time.

B.    The chief of police may designate streets in the central business traffic district on which no trailer shall be stopped, parked or allowed to stand between the hours of six a.m. and six p.m.

(Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.40.120 Application of Sections 11.40.020 through 11.40.110.

The provisions of Sections 11.40.020 through 11.40.110 prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times, or at those times herein specified or as indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. Any vehicle illegally parked shall be subject to the impounding provisions of Chapter 11.60. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.40.130 Public carrier stops and stands.

It shall be the duty of the chief of police to recommend the establishment of bus stops to the assembly, as well as stands for other passenger common carrier motor vehicles on such streets, highways, or roadways, in such places and in such number as he determines to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and every such bus stop, taxicab stand and other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.40.140 Stopping, standing and parking of buses and taxicabs.

A.    It is unlawful for any person to park or stop any bus upon any part of Lincoln Street between the intersection of Lincoln Street with Lake Street and Harbor Drive and the Standard Oil fuel dock, except as follows:

1.    When a cruise ship or ferry is in port, buses may park on the seaward side of Lincoln Street while actively loading or unloading passengers only;

2.    As specified and posted by the chief of police of the city and borough of Sitka.

B.    The driver of a bus shall enter a bus stop or passenger loading zone on a street, highway, or roadway, in such a manner that the bus, when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than eighteen inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic.

C.    No taxicab or for-hire vehicle shall be parked on any street or public parking lot in the central business district and public use zones in excess of two hours. Otherwise, the driver of a taxicab may temporarily stop or park in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers. Outside the central business district and the public use zones, taxicabs shall be subject to the same parking regulations as private vehicles except that nowhere in the municipality may more than one taxicab be parked on the same side of the street in any one block. (Meaning from street corner to street corner). 

(Ord. 92-1104 § 4, 1993; Ord. 93-1176 § 4, 1993; Ord. 86-710 § 4 (part), 1986; Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-92 § 3, 1973; Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.40.150 Parking on private property prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked any motor vehicle in a private parking place of any other firm, person, or corporation, without the express permission of such person, firm or corporation. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.40.160 Blocking ingress or egress to private property prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to park, or cause to be parked, any motor vehicle at such place, or in such position, as would block the way of ingress or egress of a motor vehicle to any private parking place owned by any person, firm or corporation. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.40.165 Parking vehicles with suspended, revoked, or expired registration on streets, highways, or roadways, or in public parking lots.

No vehicle shall be parked on any street, highway, or roadway or in any public parking lot while displaying a suspended, revoked, or expired registration. (Ord. 04-46 § 4(A), 2004.)


11.40.170 Violation civil fines.

A.    Notwithstanding any provision of the SGC, all parking offenses shall be considered violations subject to civil fine not to exceed the amount set forth below, payment of the civil fine shall be accepted in satisfaction of the violation, and the violation shall be subject to the procedure set forth in Section 11.40.175.

B.    Unless otherwise provided in this section, the state bail schedule adopted by the Alaska Supreme Court for similar state offenses covered by this chapter shall apply.

C.    The fine schedule for all offenses under this chapter not covered by the state bail schedule or otherwise provided for within this chapter shall be determined by the chief of police in consultation with the police and fire commission.

D.    The fine schedule for parking violations is as follows:

1.    The fine schedule for parking in areas restricted during the hours four a.m. to seven a.m. shall be twenty-five dollars.

2.    The fine schedule for parking over the seventy-two-hour limit in posted areas shall be twenty-five dollars.

3.    The fine schedule for overtime parking violations for less than seventy-two hours, other than those listed in subsection (D)(4) of this section, shall be twenty-five dollars, with a limit of four tickets in any twenty-four-hour period.

4.    The fine schedule for parking violations at the airport and in harbor areas shall be based on the following number of violations within a one-year period:

	a.	First violation	$ 25.00

	b.	Second violation	$ 50.00

	c.	Third violation	$100.00

	d.	Fourth violation	$200.00

	e.	Fifth violation	$300.00

5.    The fine schedule for violation of Section 11.40.140(A) regarding parking or stopping of buses on certain sections of Lincoln Street shall be fifty dollars.

6.    The fine schedule for violation of Section 11.40.165 for parking vehicles with suspended, revoked, or expired registration on streets, highways, or roadways, or in public parking lots, shall be fifty dollars.

E.    In addition to the civil fines described above, the violator or presumed violator shall pay all collection and legal costs incurred for the collection of a civil fine exclusive of the costs of the administrative appeal described in Section 11.40.177 and the costs of mailing the notice described.

F.    Collection of Civil Fines and Costs. Anyone violating any of the provisions in this chapter who has failed to pay all applicable fines, late payment fees, and costs described in this section shall, upon the expiration of any time for appeal, be indebted to the city and borough in the amount of such fines, late payment fees, and costs. In addition to or in lieu of any other provision for collection of such fines, late payment fees, and costs, the city and borough may collect these amounts as a debt and may use collection services as determined by the finance director.

(Ord. 13-31A § 4 (part), 2013: Ord. 08-46 § 4 (part), 2008: Ord. 04-46 § 4(B), 2004; Ord. 95-1315 § 4, 1995; Ord. 86-710 § 4 (part), 1986; Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 83-536 § 4, 1983; Ord. 82-497 § 4, 1982.)


11.40.175 Violation—Responsibility and penalty.

A.    Penalty for Violation. Concurrent with Section 11.12.070, any person, firm, or corporation who violates this chapter shall be guilty of a violation, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a civil fine as listed.

B.    Notices of Violation. Code enforcement officers are authorized to give notice to persons accused of violating this chapter by delivering notice of violation to such persons or, in cases where vehicles without drivers are parked or stopped in violation of SGC, by affixing a notice of violation to the vehicles, usually on the windshield or some other conspicuous place on the vehicle, or delivering the notice by certified mail. The notices of violation shall include at least the following:

1.    A brief description of the violation;

2.    The registration number and/or other identification of the vehicle, if available;

3.    The approximate time and place of the violation;

4.    The civil fine for the violation;

5.    The city and borough of Sitka office and address where the civil fine must be paid;

6.    A statement that unless an appeal is filed or the civil fine is paid within thirty days of the notice of the violation, an additional fee of fifteen dollars will be imposed;

7.    A brief description of the procedure for appealing the notice of violation, the office where such appeal must be filed and the time for filing an appeal;

8.    A notice that failure to timely and properly file an appeal or pay the civil fine will be deemed an admission of the violation, will waive all rights to appeal or contest the notice of violation or civil fine, will cause the civil fine and late payment fee to become immediately due and payable, and will subject the person to additional collection costs if the civil fine and fee are not paid; and

9.    Such other information as the hearing officer may require.

C.    Timely payment of the civil fine will waive all rights to appeal or contest the notice of violation or civil fine. Failure to timely pay the civil fine, or failure to timely and properly appeal the notice of violation, shall constitute a waiver of all right to appeal the notice of violation, shall be deemed an admission of the violation and shall cause the civil fine and late payment fee to become immediately due and payable.

D.    Additional Notice. If the civil fines set forth in Section 11.40.170 have not been paid within at least thirty days from the date the notice of violation was issued and if an appeal has not been filed, an additional notice shall be sent to the person alleged to have been in violation. The notice shall contain:

1.    A brief description of the violation;

2.    The registration number and/or other identification of the vehicle if available;

3.    The approximate time and place of the violation;

4.    A statement that the civil fine and additional fee of fifteen dollars are due;

5.    A statement that the time for appeal has passed; and

6.    The city and borough of Sitka office and address where the civil fine and fees may be paid.

(Ord. 13-31A § 4 (part), 2013.)


11.40.176 Violations hearing officer.

The function of violations hearing officer (“hearing officer”) is hereby created. The hearing officer shall be the police and fire commission. In the event that the police and fire commission are unable to fulfill the duty, the municipal administrator, or a neutral party as determined by the municipal administrator, may be designated as the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall have authority and jurisdiction to dispose of cases arising out of violations of Section 11.40.170.

(Ord. 13-31A § 4 (part), 2013.)


11.40.177 Administrative appeal.

A.    Right to Appeal Notice of Violation. Any person to whom a notice of violation has been issued, and/or any person who is the registered owner of a vehicle to which a notice of violation was affixed, may appeal the notice of violation in the manner set forth below:

1.    Time for Appeal. An appeal shall be filed within thirty days of receipt of notification of violation. Notification will be deemed given at the time of affixing a citation on a vehicle, or if notice is given by certified mail, at time of receipt. Any appeal shall be in writing and delivered to the address provided in the notice. Misdelivered appeals may be considered untimely. Failure to file a written appeal within the time limits shall waive any right to appeal or contest the violation, notice, penalties, costs and fees.

2.    Contents of Written Appeal. The written appeal shall state:

a.    The name, mailing address, email address (if one available) and telephone number of the appellant; the citation number located in the upper right portion of the citation or other sufficient identification on the notice of violation;

b.    A description of the vehicle;

c.    Any facts, documents, photographs, witness statements or other evidence supporting the appeal;

d.    A statement of the reasons for the appeal;

e.    A statement as to whether the appellant requests a hearing before a hearing officer or desires to have the hearing officer decide the matter without a hearing;

f.    The signature of the appellant and the date of signing; and

g.    Such other information as the hearing officer may require. The hearing officer shall prepare appeal forms which appellant may use, and will be made available at the municipal clerk’s office or police department.

3.    Hearing Procedures.

a.    Date. Unless otherwise agreed by the appellant and the hearing officer, for good cause shown by either party, any hearing requested pursuant to this section shall take place no later than thirty days from the date the written notice of appeal is filed with the hearing officer. No party shall be allowed more than one continuance.

b.    Procedure. The hearing shall be conducted informally and may be governed by such rules and procedures as the hearing officer may choose to establish, except that:

i.    Unless a hearing is requested, the appellant’s rights to a hearing, to be represented by counsel at appellant’s cost, and the opportunity to present evidence and to examine and cross-examine witnesses will be waived. If the appellant waives the hearing, the hearing officer may determine the case based upon the written statements of the appellant, the issuing officer and any witnesses and upon the hearing officer’s own observations;

ii.    Parties, if they so choose to appear at the hearing, may appear in person or through counsel (at their own expense);

iii.    Parties may present witnesses and evidence on their own behalf;

iv.    Parties or their counsel may cross-examine opposing witnesses on matters relevant to the issues, impeach witnesses regardless of which party first called the witness to testify, and rebut evidence against them;

v.    Relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Hearsay evidence may be considered provided there are guarantees of its trustworthiness and that it is more probative on the point for which it is offered than any other evidence the proponent can procure by reasonable efforts;

vi.    All parties shall have the right to subpoena witnesses and documents using a form provided by the municipal clerk and submitted to the clerk for issuance at least five working days before the date of the hearing;

vii.    The hearing shall be memorialized by an electronic recording or a stenographic record; and

viii.    Failure of an appellant to appear at a hearing, absent good cause, when such hearing has been requested by appellant, shall waive all right to a hearing and shall render the amount of the fines, penalties and costs due and owing.

4.    Scope of Review. The hearing officer’s decisions shall be based solely upon the law and the facts applicable to the case. If a violation is legally determined to have occurred, the hearing officer shall not substitute his or her judgment for that of the enforcement officer or parking enforcement officer as to whether a notice of violation should have been issued. If a violation is legally determined to have occurred, the hearing officer shall not substitute his or her judgment for the assembly, police and fire commission, municipal attorney or other parking authority which enacted the regulation or ordinance and shall not reduce the civil fine below that provided for under Section 11.40.170(D).

5.    Decision. No later than fifteen days following the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision based on findings and conclusions adopted by the hearing officer. Such findings must be in writing and must be reasonably specific so as to provide interested persons, and, where appropriate, reviewing authorities, a clear and precise understanding of the reasons for the decision entered. The decision, findings of fact and conclusions of law shall be forwarded to all parties to the appeal.

6.    Payment. If the hearing officer upholds the notice of violation, the appellant shall pay the civil fine, any applicable late fees that were not previously waived, and costs of collection, if applicable.

7.    Reconsideration and Rehearing. The decision of the hearing officer reached at the conclusion of a quasi-judicial proceeding or administrative hearing may be reconsidered or reheard only if:

a.    There was substantial procedural error in the original proceedings;

b.    The hearing officer acted without jurisdiction; or

c.    The original decision was based on fraud or misrepresentation.

Any person seeking reconsideration or rehearing must file a request with the municipal clerk together with the materials supporting one or more of the grounds stated above within fifteen days of the decision for which reconsideration or rehearing is requested. A rehearing, if granted, shall be conducted in the same manner as the original proceeding including any requests for continuances by either party.

8.    The decision of the hearing officer may be appealed to the superior court pursuant to AS 22.10.020(d), and Alaska Rules of Court, Appellate Rule 602(b)(2), which require such appeal to be filed within thirty days of the issuance of the decision.

(Ord. 13-31A § 4 (part), 2013.)


11.40.180 Penalties for illegal parking.

In the event of any violation of Sections 11.40.150 through 11.40.160 and upon the written request of the rightful owner or lessee of the off-street private parking place, any vehicle parked in off-street parking facilities without permission of the owner, or any vehicle blocking the ingress and egress of motor vehicles to and from private parking spaces, shall be impounded by the municipality and the vehicle towed to an approved storage facility where it shall be retained until the owner pays the towing charges. Any vehicle not reclaimed within thirty days shall be deemed abandoned and notice of sale shall be given as required by Section 11.60.020(A).

If the vehicle is worthless, or the proceeds of the sale are insufficient to cover costs of sale or removal, the person who gave written request to remove the vehicle shall be responsible for paying the difference. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 75-213 § 3, 1975.)


11.40.190 Permits for oversize or overweight vehicles.

The municipal engineer may, upon application, as provided in Section 11.40.200, issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size, weight, or load, exceeding the maximum size or gross weight specified in Sections 11.40.190 through 11.40.210 on any street, highway or roadway in this municipality upon the following terms and conditions:

A.    Such vehicles may not be operated on any arterial street between six a.m. and nine a.m. and between three p.m. and six p.m., or in the central business traffic district between six a.m. and eleven p.m. between twelve noon Saturday and eight a.m. on Mondays and holidays between six a.m. and eight a.m. to the following day;

B.    Such vehicles may be operated only on streets, highways or roadways where the pavement is capable of carrying the weight and equipment without injury to such pavement, and along such routes as will least interfere with or endanger other users of the streets, highways or roadways;

C.    Vehicles, including load, that are over-width shall have displayed across the rear, red flags during the day and red lights during the hours of darkness, at the extreme limits of the width of vehicle or load, and vehicles not over that length shall have displayed during the hours of darkness red lights along the sides not over eight feet apart and shall not exceed fifteen miles per hour;

D.    Pilot cars shall be provided with all vehicles or loads over eight feet in width. The front car must have a sign reading “Wide Load Following,” and the rear car must have a sign reading “Wide Load Ahead.” Both signs shall be on a white background with red letters at least six inches high. No car shall display either of these signs when not actually engaged in escorting a wide load;

E.    Police escort may be required for all vehicles or loads of twelve feet or more in width.

(Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.40.200 Application for permits.

A.    The permits referred to in Section 11.40.190 may be obtained from the municipal engineer upon written application therefor, setting forth a description of the object to be transported or the vehicle or vehicles to be driven the route desired to be traversed, the hours within which it is desired to perform the work, the means of locomotion to be used, and such other information as may be required. The applicant shall, as a condition to the issuance of the permit, execute and deliver to this municipality a good and sufficient surety or cash bond in the sum of one thousand dollars conditioned to save the municipality harmless from all injuries which may be occasioned by reason of granting such permit, or the use of any street, highway or roadway thereunder, or of any act or omission; provided, the issuance of such permit shall not be construed as a waiver of the right of the municipality to recover for any injury to any street, highway or roadway or other property of the municipality resulting from transportation pursuant thereto.

B.    The applicant will be charged for all costs incurred by the moving of power lines, traffic signals and other municipal obstructions within the right-of-way. A cash deposit may be required to assure payment for these services.

C.    The municipal engineer, with the cooperation of the chief of police and the fire chief is authorized to determine and to specify in such permits the routes to be traversed, the hours of operation and such other limitations which in his opinion are required for the public convenience and safety.

(Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.40.210 Fees for permits.

No fee for permits as provided in Sections 11.40.190 through 11.40.200 shall be required, except in those cases where escort vehicles must be provided by the municipality or additional inspections are required, and then in that event, the municipal engineer is authorized to set a fee, which in his discretion, shall be sufficient to reimburse this municipality for its expenses. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.40.220 Disabled parking.

A.    The chief of police is authorized to designate disabled parking zones indicating those zones on either or both sides of any street or highway, in public parking lots, and in private parking lots only with permission of the owner. It is unlawful for any person to park, stop or leave standing any vehicle in an area so designated without a proper permit. The standard penalty for violation of this section shall be a one-hundred-dollar fine. 

B.    Any person who has been given a citation for violation of the offense described in subsection A of this section may have the offense reduced to the lesser offense of failure to display a valid disability placard while possessing such a placard and parking in a disabled parking zone, which shall carry a twenty-five-dollar fine. The chief of police, his or her designee, the city and borough attorney, or the court may make the reduction of offense upon receiving proof that the person had a valid disability placard as of the time of the offense.

(Ord. 08-46 § 4 (part), 2008: Ord. 04-01 § 4, 2004: Ord. 94-1236 § 4, 1994; Ord. 93-1179 § 4, 1993: Ord. 88-804 § 4, 1988.)


11.40.230 Parking method.

A.    Except where angle or vertical parking is designated, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels parallel to and within twelve inches of the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.

B.    On those roadways and parking lots signed or marked for angle or vertical parking, no person shall park or stop a vehicle other than as indicated by the signs or markings and vehicles shall not be parked or stopped so as to straddle space dividing lines or encroach into the adjacent parking space.

C.    No person may obstruct or block traffic on a roadway, except as specifically allowed by statutes, regulations or ordinances.

D.    In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon the roadway, no person may stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of the one-way roadway unless posted signs permit standing or parking in that location.

E.    No person may park a vehicle upon a street, roadway, alley, or vehicular way or area, for the purpose of:

1.    Washing of the vehicle if the person parking the vehicle is a dealer, or agent or employee of a garage, filling station, or car wash;

2.    Repairing, or performing maintenance work on the vehicle, except repairs or maintenance necessitated by an emergency;

3.    Displaying the vehicle for sale or hire in the regular course of the person’s business as a dealer for sale or hire of vehicles, except that a motor bus, sightseeing vehicle, airline service vehicle, or taxicab may park in accordance with the provisions of Section 11.40.140;

4.    Storing or parking, without being attended by a driver, a vehicle to be used for hire to another person; or

5.    Commercial advertising.

F.    No person may park a vehicle on a street or highway, or a vehicular way or area for a period of time longer than twenty-four hours if prohibited by an official traffic-control device.

(Ord. 15-11 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 93-1221 § 4, 1993; Ord. 93-1215 § 4, 1993.)


11.40.240 Long-term parking areas designated.

A.    The following areas are designated for long-term parking: The gravel area at Thomsen Harbor; the gravel area between the Marine Services Center and Sitka Fuels; and along Airport Way in the Sealing Harbor parking lot.

1.    Ten-day parking permits in those areas shall be free of charge and shall be reusable.

2.    Parking in excess of ten days shall require permits in blocks of thirty days at fifty cents per day, including the first ten days.

3.    In no event shall a vehicle be allowed to remain longer than sixty days.

B.    The chief of police is directed to designate the first double row parking spaces in the Crescent Harbor parking lot as “No Overnight Parking.” 

(Res. 99-737, 1999.) 


Chapter 11.44 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES

Sections:

11.44.010    When permits required for parades or processions.

11.44.020    Noise and smoke.

11.44.030    Obstruction to driver’s view or driving mechanism.


11.44.010 When permits required for parades or processions.

No procession or parade, excepting the armed forces of the United States or the state of Alaska and the forces of the police and fire departments, shall occupy, march, or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the chief of police and such other municipal regulations as may apply. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.44.020 Noise and smoke.

A.    No person driving or in charge of a vehicle or in control of any device connected therewith shall allow such vehicle to cause any noise so excessive as to annoy the public, or unnecessarily race his motor while running idle, or open the muffler of any vehicle, or permit such vehicle or any device connected therewith to emit an unreasonable quantity of smoke, or noxious gases or vapor.

B.    No person shall use any sound amplifying device, recorded music or radio in or from any vehicle on any street or highway for the purpose of attracting the attention of persons to the sounds issued therefrom (excluding factory horn) unless first having received a permit from the chief of police.

(Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.44.030 Obstruction to driver’s view or driving mechanism.

A.    No person shall drive or operate a vehicle when such vehicle is so loaded as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides or to interfere with the driver’s control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.

B.    No person shall drive or operate a vehicle with more than three persons including the operator occupying the front seat.

C.    The windshield in front of the driver shall be kept clear of dirt, snow and ice or open so that the driver’s view is unobstructed. No person shall drive or operate any vehicle with any sign, poster or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield of such motor vehicle other than a certificate or other paper required to be displayed by law, and the windshield shall be free from chips, cracks or other damage so as not to hinder the driver’s view.

(Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-57 § 3 (part), 1973.)


Chapter 11.52 VEHICLE SAFETY AND ACCESSORY EQUIPMENT

Sections:

11.52.010    Load restrictions on certain streets and highways.

11.52.020    Commercial vehicles prohibited.

11.52.030    Restrictions upon certain vehicles.

11.52.040    License plate attached to vehicle.

11.52.050    Chief of police to make rules.

11.52.060    General operating standards.


11.52.010 Load restrictions on certain streets and highways.

A.    The municipal engineer is authorized to determine and designate those streets, highways or roadways, upon which vehicles of a gross weight permitted in this title would create a hazard or cause undue damage to the roadway and shall erect appropriate signs stating the reduced gross weight permitted on such designated streets. When signs are so erected giving notice thereof, no person shall disobey the restriction stated on such signs.

B.    The municipal engineer may post certain streets, highways or roadways for less than the specified maximum when construction of the road in question or weather conditions necessitate the reduction of maximum loads.

(Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.52.020 Commercial vehicles prohibited.

A.    The municipal engineer is authorized to determine and designate various residential streets, highways or roadways upon which the operation of commercial vehicles would create exceptional hazardous conditions or cause undue public inconvenience and shall erect appropriate signs stating that commercial vehicles are prohibited from such designated streets, highways or roadways.

B.    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any commercial vehicle at any time upon any of the streets, highways or roadways, or parts thereof so designated, except that such vehicles may be operated thereon for the purpose of delivering or picking up materials or merchandise and then only by entering such street, highway or roadway at the intersection nearest the destination of the vehicle and proceeding thereon no further than the nearest intersection thereafter.

(Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.52.030 Restrictions upon certain vehicles.

A.    The municipal engineer is authorized to determine and designate those heavily traveled streets, highways or roadways upon which shall be prohibited use by motorcycles, bicycles, horse-drawn vehicles or other nonmotorized traffic and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof.

B.    When signs are so erected giving notice thereof, no person shall disobey the restrictions stated on such signs.

(Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.52.040 License plate attached to vehicle.

No vehicle shall be driven unless its state license plates for the current year are attached to the vehicle in the manner provided by the state law, and in addition thereto, the license plates are clean and legible. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.52.050 Chief of police to make rules.

The chief of police is empowered to make such rules and regulations pertaining to the matters regulated by Sections 11.56.010 through 11.64.090 as may be necessary to implement the foregoing general regulations and specific standards. No person shall fail to comply with any such rule or regulation. (Ord. 84-497 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.52.060 General operating standards.

All persons to whom Sections 11.56.010 through 11.64.090 apply shall so operate and maintain the vehicles herein regulated as to reasonably protect and safeguard the lives and property, comfort and safety of persons in the municipality. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


Chapter 11.54 TRUCK ROUTES

Sections:

11.54.010    Purpose.

11.54.020    Use restrictions.

11.54.030    Permit issuance.

11.54.040    Violation—Penalty.


11.54.010 Purpose.

In order to prevent destruction of the new pavement on road sections built upon unstable foundation soil, it is necessary to limit the weight of vehicles and frequency of heavy vehicle usage. (Ord. 02-1710 § 4 (part), 2003; Ord. 76-256 § 2, 1976.)


11.54.020 Use restrictions.

The municipal engineer is authorized to limit weights of dump trucks as necessary to prevent roadway damage. (Ord. 02-1710 § 4 (part), 2003; Ord. 76-256 § 3(A), 1976.)


11.54.030 Permit issuance.

When the municipal engineer has imposed weights on dump trucks under Section 11.54.020, the municipal engineer is authorized to issue dump truck permits if he or she finds:

A.    There is no reasonable alternative route available;

B.    The vehicle weight and frequency of travel will not unduly harm the roadway.

(Ord. 02-1710 § 4 (part), 2003; Ord. 76-256 § 3(C), 1976.)


11.54.040 Violation—Penalty.

Any person or business allowing a load-carrying dump truck to pass over the sections of road identified by the municipal engineer pursuant to Section 11.54.020, without first receiving a permit from the municipal engineer, shall be responsible for paying a fine of no more than one hundred dollars for each violation. (Ord. 02-1710 § 4, 2003; Ord. 76-256 § 3(B), 1976.)


Chapter 11.56 TAXICABS

Sections:

11.56.010    Definitions.

11.56.020    Operator’s license.

11.56.030    Application for operator’s license.

11.56.040    Police investigation of applicant.

11.56.050    Eligibility for operator license.

11.56.060    Consideration of application.

11.56.070    Insurance.

11.56.080    Suspension or revocation of license.

11.56.090    Taxi driver’s permit required.

11.56.100    Application for driver’s permit.

11.56.110    Police investigation of applicant for driver’s permit.

11.56.120    Eligibility for driver’s permit.

11.56.130    Consideration of application for driver’s permit.

11.56.140    Permit to be posted.

11.56.150    Suspension and revocation of driver’s permit.

11.56.160    Initial license/permit—Duration.

11.56.170    License/permit renewal and late penalty.

11.56.180    Fees.

11.56.190    Transfer of license or permit.

11.56.200    Licenses and permits property of the municipality.

11.56.210    Notice of suspension or revocation.

11.56.220    Hearing.

11.56.230    Rates.

11.56.240    Receipts.

11.56.250    Acceptance and discharge of passengers.

11.56.260    Vehicles.

11.56.270    Reports and records.

11.56.280    Preexisting licenses and permits.

11.56.290    Violation—Penalty.


11.56.010 Definitions.

Unless expressly stated, wherever used in this chapter, the following words shall mean:

A.    “Municipality” means the city and borough of Sitka.

B.    “Police chief” means the chief of police of the city and borough of Sitka, or his/her authorized representative.

C.    “Person” means any natural person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association.

D.    “Street” means every road, highway, thoroughfare, alley and place, including bridges, viaducts and other structures within the boundaries of this municipality used or intended for the use of the public for vehicles.

E.    “Taxicab” means every motor vehicle, except cars for rent without drivers, used for the transportation of passengers for hire within the corporate limits of the municipality, not operated exclusively over a fixed and defined route, but used for transportation of passengers where the destination and route are controlled by the passengers, for which a charge is made.

F.    “Taxicab driver” means person who carries on the vocation of driving a taxicab.

G.    “Taxicab operator” means any person engaged in the business of providing services of a taxicab.

(Ord. 85-679 § 4 (part), 1986.)


11.56.020 Operator’s license.

No person shall operate or permit a taxicab owned or controlled by them to be operated as a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the city and borough of Sitka without having first obtained an operator’s license from the chief of police. (Ord. 85-679 § 4 (part), 1986.)


11.56.030 Application for operator’s license.

A.    An application for an operator’s license shall be filed with the police chief upon forms provided by the municipality. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee to be determined by the police chief per person named as owner or co-owner. Such application shall be verified under oath and shall include the following information:

1.    The name and residence address of the applicant;

2.    The business name and business address of the taxicab operation;

3.    The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers;

4.    The number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the applicant and the location of proposed depots or terminals;

5.    The color scheme or insignia to be used to designate the vehicle or vehicles of the applicant is to be approved by the police chief;

6.    Information regarding any criminal convictions; and

7.    Information as the police chief may require.

B.    The application shall be signed by the applicant; such signature shall constitute the applicant’s consent to an investigation conducted by the municipality of the applicant’s qualifications.

(Ord. 09-59 § 4 (part), 2009; Ord. 85-679 § 4 (part), 1986.)


11.56.040 Police investigation of applicant.

The police department shall conduct an investigation of each applicant for an operator’s license, and a report of such investigation shall be maintained.

Applicants shall provide proof of their residence or residences for the ten years previous to their application and shall provide fingerprints and F.B.I. and state police record printouts as necessary. (Ord. 09-59 § 4 (part), 2009: Ord. 97-1463 § 4 (part), 1997; Ord. 97-1408 § 4 (part), 1997; Ord. 85-679 § 4 (part), 1986.)


11.56.050 Eligibility for operator license.

Except as provided for in Section 11.56.060, no operator license shall be issued to:

A.    A person who has been convicted of murder in the first degree or murder in the second degree or any other unclassified felony, or their counterparts in another jurisdiction; or 

B.    A person who has been convicted of any other crime included in the Alaska Statutes or its counterpart in another jurisdiction, within the time period specified as follows:

 

	Years Immediately Preceding Application for License	Crime(s)

	10	Class A or B felony

	5	Class C felony or Class A misdemeanor or other felony or misdemeanor not specifically classified as unclassified, A, B or C

	2	Class B misdemeanor

C.    An applicant who fails to supply information so required or submits false or misleading information.

(Ord. 00-1574 § 4(A), 2000: Ord. 85-679 § 4 (part), 1986.)


11.56.060 Consideration of application.

A.    The police chief, after considering the application, the reports required to be attached thereto, and the results of the police investigation, shall approve or deny the application for an operator’s license. The chief of police shall issue a statement of reasons in writing for a denial. If the application is denied, the applicant may request a hearing, pursuant to Section 11.56.220, before the police chief, to offer evidence why the denial should be reconsidered. An adverse decision may be appealed to the municipal administrator and ultimately to the municipal assembly.

B.    The purpose of these regulations is to promote the safety of taxicab passengers and of the public generally. In considering an appeal or application, the police chief, the administrator and the assembly shall consider the nature of the disqualifying offense or other justification for permit denial, the time which has passed, as well as the applicant’s driving record and the applicant’s completion of any condition or requirement of any probation imposed, in determining if public safety will be protected if the appeal is granted.

C.    No right of appeal should be afforded to persons convicted of a class A felony.

(Ord. 00-1574 § 4(B), 2000: Ord. 96-1353 § 4 (part), 1996; Ord. 85-679 § 4 (part), 1986.)


11.56.070 Insurance.

A.    Before a license is issued to any operator, the operator shall deposit with the police chief a policy or policies of an insurance company or companies duly licensed to transact business in the state, insuring the operator of any taxicab against loss and liability imposed by law for damages on account of bodily injuries or death, or for damages to property resulting from the ownership, maintenance, or use of any taxicab to be owned or operated under such license and naming the city as an additional insured. The policy or policies shall be approved by the municipal attorney as to form and compliance with this chapter. The limit in any such insurance policy shall be not less than fifty thousand dollars for damage to or destruction of property arising out of a single accident or occurrence, one hundred thousand dollars for bodily injuries to or death of one person, and two hundred thousand dollars for any number of claims arising out of a single accident or occurrence.

B.    The policy or policies shall be maintained in full force and effect during the operation of the business and shall provide for thirty days’ prior notification to the police chief of all changes in the terms and/or cancellation of the policy. 

C.    Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire automatically upon the cancellation of the insurance required by this section.

D.    The licensed operator may not sublet or permit satellite business operations to extend from his license; and

1.    The operator must be the person or entity controlling the business operations of the taxicab operation for which the license is issued;

2.    The operator may allow drivers with permits required by SGC Section 11.56.100 to lease his vehicles or drive their own vehicles if all of the following exist:

a.    The vehicles are properly licensed and registered, and

b.    The vehicles and drivers are fully insured as required by SGC Section 11.56.070 and fully comply with the other requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to insignia and color requirements, and

c.    The operator shall maintain central records for all taxicabs in his operation, and

d.    The operator shall be responsible for any damage or personal injury caused by negligent or wilful misconduct of drivers and vehicles in his operation;

E.    Any change in ownership shall require a new application for an operator’s permit or license.

(Ord. 85-679 § 4 (part), 1986.)


11.56.080 Suspension or revocation of license.

A.    The operator’s license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the chief of police if the holder thereof has:

1.    Violated any of the provisions of this chapter;

2.    Discontinued operations for more than thirty days;

3.    Committed any offense as listed in Section 11.56.050;

4.    Violated subsection D of Section 11.56.070.

B.    Except as otherwise provided in subsection C below, prior to suspension or revocation, the holder shall be given notice of the proposed action to be taken in accordance with the provisions of Section 11.56.210.

C.    Upon determining that an immediate danger to persons or property exists, the police chief may suspend the license at once. The suspension shall take effect immediately upon notice of the suspension being received by the licensee, or being delivered to the licensee’s business address as stated on the licensee’s application for the license that is being suspended. The notice provided for in Section 11.56.210 shall be mailed to the licensee by certified mail.

(Ord. 85-679 § 4 (part), 1986.)


11.56.090 Taxi driver’s permit required.

No person shall drive a taxicab for hire upon the streets of the city and borough of Sitka and no person who owns or controls a taxicab shall permit it to be so driven unless the driver of the taxicab shall have first obtained and shall have then in force a taxicab driver’s permit issued under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 85-679 § 4 (part), 1986.)


11.56.100 Application for driver’s permit.

A.    An application for a taxicab driver’s permit shall be filed with the police chief on forms provided by the municipality; and such application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee to be determined by the police chief. The application shall be verified, under oath, and shall contain the following:

1.    Name and residence address of the applicant;

2.    A concise history of the applicant’s employment;

3.    Name of prospective employer;

4.    Information relating to criminal convictions;

5.    Information relating to convictions of traffic infractions;

6.    Number of valid Alaska driver’s license;

7.    Such other information as the police chief may require;

8.    Two two-inch by two-inch full-face photographs, to be taken by the Sitka police department.

B.    The application shall be signed by the applicant; such signature shall constitute the applicant’s consent to an investigation conducted by the municipality of the applicant’s qualifications.

C.    A taxicab driver’s license shall not be issued to any person who does not meet the medical standards set forth in 2 AAC 90.440. 

(Ord. 15-11 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 09-59 § 4 (part), 2009; Ord. 85-679 § 4 (part), 1986.)


11.56.110 Police investigation of applicant for driver’s permit.

The police department shall conduct an investigation of each applicant for a taxicab driver’s permit, and a report of such investigation shall be forwarded to the police chief.

Applicants shall provide proof of their residence or residences for the ten years prior to their application and shall provide fingerprints and F.B.I. and state police record printouts as necessary. (Ord. 09-59 § 4 (part), 2009: Ord. 97-1463 § 4 (part), 1997; Ord. 97-1408 § 4 (part), 1997; Ord. 85-679 § 4 (part), 1986.)


11.56.120 Eligibility for driver’s permit.

Except as provided for in Section 11.56.130, no driver’s permit shall be issued to:

A.    A person who does not have a valid driver’s license issued by the State Department of Motor Vehicles; or

B.    A person who has been convicted of murder in the first degree or murder in the second degree, or any other unclassified felony, or their counterparts in another jurisdiction; or 

C.    A person who has been convicted of any other crime included in the Alaska Statutes not described in Section 11.56.120D or its counterpart in another jurisdiction within the time periods specified as follows:

	Years Immediately Preceding Application for Permit	Crime(s)

	10	Class A or B felony

	5	Class C felony or Class A misdemeanor or other felony or misdemeanor not specifically classified as unclassified, A, B or C

	2	Class B misdemeanor

D.    A person who has been convicted of a traffic offense, as is defined in Alaska Statute Title 28, or Title 11 of the Sitka General Code, or their counterparts in another jurisdiction, within the time periods specified as follows:

	Years Immediately Preceding Application for Permit	Crime(s)

	2	Major traffic offense, including driving while under the influence, refusal to take breath test

	1	Accumulation of eight or more points under the Department of Motor Vehicles system in any one year

E.    An applicant who fails to supply information so required or who submits false or misleading information.

(Ord. 00-1574 § 4(C), 2000: Ord. 86-679 § 4 (part), 1986.)


11.56.130 Consideration of application for driver’s permit.

A.    The chief of police shall, upon consideration of the application and the police investigation, approve or deny the application for a driver’s permit. The chief of police shall issue a statement of reasons in writing for a denial. If the application is denied, the applicant may request a hearing, which shall be held in accordance with the provisions of Section 11.56.220 to offer evidence why the denial should be reconsidered. An adverse decision may be appealed to the municipal administrator and ultimately to the municipal assembly.

B.    The chief of police shall have the power, in his/her sole discretion, to issue temporary licenses pending completion of the application investigation.

C.    The purpose of these regulations is to promote the safety of taxicab passengers and of the public generally. In considering an appeal or application, the police chief, the administrator and the assembly shall consider the nature of the disqualifying offense or other jurisdiction for permit denial, the time which has passed, as well as the applicant’s driving record, and the applicant’s completion of any condition or requirement of any probation imposed, in determining if public safety will be protected if the appeal is granted.

D.    No right of appeal should be afforded to persons convicted of a class A felony.

(Ord. 00-1574 § 4(D), 2000: Ord. 96-1353 § 4 (part), 1996; Ord. 85-679 § 4 (part), 1986.)


11.56.140 Permit to be posted.

The driver’s permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the taxicab which the driver is operating. (Ord. 85-679 § 4 (part), 1986.)


11.56.150 Suspension and revocation of driver’s permit.

A.    The police chief may suspend or revoke any driver’s permit issued under this chapter for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter and for violation of the offenses listed in Section 11.56.120.

B.    Except as otherwise provided in subsection C of this section, prior to suspension or revocation, the permit holder shall be given notice of the proposed action to be taken, in accordance with the provisions of Section 11.56.210.

C.    Upon determining that an immediate danger to person or property exists, the police chief may suspend the license at once. The suspension shall take effect immediately upon notice of the suspension being received by the licensee, or being delivered to the licensee’s business address as stated on the licensee’s application for the license that is being suspended. The notice provided for in Section 11.56.210 shall be mailed to the licensee by certified mail.

(Ord. 85-679 § 4 (part), 1986.)


11.56.160 Initial license/permit—Duration.

Unless a shorter period is specified, new licenses or permits shall be valid from the date of issuance for a term of one year. (Ord. 85-679 § 4 (part), 1986.)


11.56.170 License/permit renewal and late penalty.

The application for renewal of a license or permit shall be made to the municipality prior to the license or permit expiration date. A penalty to be determined by the police chief shall be added to the license or permit fee accompanying a renewal application received by the municipality after the expiration date. (Ord. 09-59 § 4 (part), 2009: Ord. 85-679 § 4 (part). 1986.)


11.56.180 Fees.

No taxicab operator’s license or taxicab driver’s permit shall be issued or continue to be valid unless the holder thereof has paid the fees as required. (Ord. 85-679 § 4 (part), 1986.)


11.56.190 Transfer of license or permit.

No license or permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter may be sold, assigned, or otherwise transferred. (Ord. 85-679 § 4 (part), 1986.)


11.56.200 Licenses and permits property of the municipality.

Any license or permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall remain the property of the city and borough of Sitka, and upon expiration, revocation or suspension, it shall be returned to the municipality. If a license or permit is lost or destroyed, upon affidavit made as to its loss or destruction, it may be replaced upon payment by the applicant of a required fee to be determined by the police chief. (Ord. 09-59 § 4 (part), 2009: Ord. 85-679 § 4 (part), 1986.)


11.56.210 Notice of suspension or revocation.

Unless otherwise provided, prior to revocation or suspension of a license or permit issued under the provisions of this chapter, the chief of police shall provide a notice to the holder of said license or permit. The notice shall contain the following information:

A.    The name and title of the person issuing the notice;

B.    The date on which the suspension or revocation will become effective;

C.    The reason for the revocation or suspension;

D.    That the licensee or permittee may request a hearing regarding the revocation or suspension;

E.    That the request for a hearing must be made in person or in writing and received by the police chief within ten days after receipt of the notice;

F.    That failure to appear in person or mail a letter within ten days after receipt of the notice or by its return by the Postal Service shall act as a waiver of the right to a hearing and the revocation or suspension will, if applicable, become effective on the date included in the notice.

(Ord. 85-679 § 4 (part), 1986.)


11.56.220 Hearing.

A.    Upon request for a hearing, as provided above, a hearing shall be held before the chief of police. The hearing shall be set and conducted within forty-eight hours of receipt of the request, holidays, Saturdays, and Sundays not to be included. The hearing can be set for a later date if the applicant, licensee or permittee so requests.

B.    At the hearing the applicant, licensee or permittee may contest the denial, revocation or suspension of the license or permit.

C.    If the police chief finds that the applicant, licensee or permit holder is not eligible for a license or permit, the chief of police may declare the license or permit denied, revoked or suspended. The action of the chief of police is appealable to the assembly of the city and borough of Sitka. The decision of the assembly is final.

D.    If the applicant, licensee or permittee does 	not appear at the scheduled hearing, the police chief shall enter an order supporting the denial, revocation or suspension of the license or permit.

(Ord. 85-679 § 4 (part), 1986.)


11.56.230 Rates.

A.    The police chief shall have the right, at any time, after notice to license holders and public hearing, to approve the maximum rates to be charged by taxicabs in the municipality, and no operator shall thereafter charge any passenger a rate higher than those approved by the police chief.

B.    The driver or operator of any taxicab shall post in a conspicuous place on such vehicle, and keep posted, a copy of such rates in accordance with the rates approved by the police chief.

(Ord. 09-59 § 4 (part), 2009: Ord. 85-679 § 4 (part), 1986.)


11.56.240 Receipts.

The driver of a taxicab shall, upon demand by the passenger, render to such passenger a receipt for the amount charged, either by a mechanically printed receipt or by a specially prepared receipt, on which shall be the name of the owner, license number, charges, and the date of transaction. (Ord. 85-679 § 4 (part), 1986.)


11.56.250 Acceptance and discharge of passengers.

Drivers of taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway, but shall pull up to the right-hand side as nearly as possible or, in the absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme right-hand side of the road and there receive or discharge passengers, except upon one-way streets, where passengers may be discharged at either the right-hand or left-hand sidewalk or side of the roadway in the absence of a sidewalk. (Ord. 85-679 § 4 (part), 1986.)


11.56.260 Vehicles.

A.    Vehicles must be kept in clean and sanitary condition and shall be inspected by the Sitka police department prior to being used as a taxicab and each year upon renewal of the operator’s license or permit or periodically as determined by the police chief. There will be a fee for each inspection.

B.    All vehicles belonging to, or operated by, a particular operator shall be designated by an insignia or logo sufficient to identify that operator’s taxicabs to the public.

C.    Smoking in the vehicle is prohibited under Section 9.20.015(L), entitled “Prohibition of smoking in public places.”

(Ord. 09-59 § 4 (part), 2009: Ord. 87-787 § 4, 1987; Ord. 85-679 § 4 (part), 1986.)


11.56.270 Reports and records.

Any accidents arising from or in connection with the operation of taxicabs which result in death or injury to any person or in damage to any vehicle or to any property in an amount exceeding the sum of five hundred dollars shall be reported within twenty-four hours from the time of occurrence to the police chief. (Ord. 85-679 § 4 (part), 1986.)


11.56.280 Preexisting licenses and permits.

All operator licenses and taxicab driver permits valid on January 15, 1986, the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall be and remain valid until their normal expiration dates, unless revoked or suspended in accordance with the provisions of Sections 11.56.080, 11.56.150 or 11.56.290. (Ord. 85-679 § 4 (part), 1986.)


11.56.290 Violation—Penalty.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding one thousand dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 85-679 § 4 (part), 1986.)


Chapter 11.60 IMPOUNDING VEHICLES

Sections:

11.60.010    Authority to impound vehicles.

11.60.020    Method of sale.


11.60.010 Authority to impound vehicles.

A.    Any vehicle parked in violation of any ordinance or state statute or regulation is subject to impounding. The municipality may take possession of any such vehicle and remove it to a place of storage or dispose of it immediately if authorized by any other municipal ordinance.

B.    The police shall, concurrently with the impounding of the vehicle, file a complaint against the owner, if known or reasonably can be discovered, and charge him with the violation in question.

C.    When the owner of such vehicle claims the same, he shall be informed of the nature and circumstances of the violation for which such vehicle was impounded and to obtain release thereof shall pay to the municipality an impounding fee of fifty dollars plus citation fee, plus all towing charges, which shall not exceed the actual cost to the municipality.

In addition, there shall be paid a storage fee of ten dollars per day or fraction thereof that such vehicle remains impounded after the first twenty-four hours. If the owner, upon hearing before the municipal judge, is found not guilty of the violation with which he is charged, the impounded vehicle shall be released by order of such judge immediately to the owner without the collection of the fees and other charges.

If the owner of such vehicle is found guilty by the judge, any fine or other penalty imposed shall be in addition to the impounding fee, towing and storage charges herein prescribed.

(Ord. 08-40 § 4, 2008: Ord. 81-486 § 4, 1981; Ord. 80-454 § 4 (part), 1980; Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.60.020 Method of sale.

A.    1.	Within two weekdays after a vehicle has been impounded, the chief of police shall cause to be sent by registered or certified mail, a notice to the owner thereof, and lienholder, if with the exercise of due diligence the owners and lienholders’ names can be ascertained. The notice shall accurately describe the vehicle, give the date the vehicle was impounded, and inform the owner and lienholder that unless he reclaims the vehicle within thirty days after dispatch of the letter, the vehicle will be sold at public auction to the highest bidder. The notice shall also state whether or not a citation has been issued, the fact that there is a daily storage fee, impound fee, and towing fee.

2.    The notice shall state that an administrative hearing before the municipal assembly is available if requested within twenty days of mailing of the notice. The hearing shall be to determine whether or not the various impound, towing and storage fees should be paid.

3.    The notice shall state that a person making a timely request for a hearing may receive possession of the vehicle without prepayment of accrued fees upon affirming in writing that such fees will be paid if it is ultimately determined that the fees are proper. An adverse decision may be appealed to the district court.

B.    1. The chief of police shall also cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality, a description of the vehicle, the owner’s name, if known, and the fact that the vehicle, and other vehicles similarly described, will be sold at public auction to the highest responsible bidder at a public sale under the direction of the chief of police at a specified time and place, not less than twenty days after the publication of the notice of sale.

2.    The chief of police shall keep a permanent, accurate record of all cars impounded, containing date of impounding, description of vehicle, cause for which impounded, date of redemption if redeemed, and amount paid upon redemption, date of letter to owner, if owner is known, notice of sale, record of sale and price paid at sale, and name of purchaser.

C.    Should the vehicle, at the discretion of the chief of police, be obviously of no value as a vehicle, he shall obtain confirmation of such fact after inspection and in writing from an employee of the municipal planning department, and after giving the owner and lienholder twenty days’ notice of a right of redemption or hearing from the date of mailing, the vehicle may be junked. No such junked vehicle shall thereafter be registered for road use, unless the purchaser complies with subsection D below.

D.    Any vehicle not redeemed prior to auction or prior to being junked shall be sold only as scrap, and the municipality will not give title sufficient for vehicle registration to a purchaser unless such purchaser agrees to provide proof to the municipality within five days of the sale that both of the following conditions have been met:

1.    Proper current registration of the vehicle with the state of Alaska in the name of the purchaser; and

2.    Proof of liability insurance covering the vehicle.

    Failure of a purchaser to provide such proof shall be a violation, subject to a fine of up to two hundred dollars.

E.    Junked vehicles and vehicles which do not sell at auction are normally given to the impound lot operator. If a person wishes to purchase such a vehicle from the impound lot operator, the impound lot operator shall request the municipality to give title capable of being registered, to the purchaser, only if the purchaser agrees to comply with subsection D above. Otherwise, the vehicle shall be transferred as scrap only.

(Ord. 84-590 § 4(C), 1984; Ord. 82-521 § 4(B), 1982.)


Chapter 11.64 PEDESTRIANS

Sections:

11.64.020    Pedestrians’ right-of-way in crosswalk.

11.64.030    Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalk.

11.64.040    Crossing at right angles.

11.64.050    When pedestrians shall yield.

11.64.060    Prohibited crossing.

11.64.070    Pedestrians walking along roadways.

11.64.080    Pedestrians soliciting employment or business.

11.64.090    Drivers to exercise due care.


11.64.020 Pedestrians’ right-of-way in crosswalk.

A.    When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if needed to yield to a pedestrian crossing a roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger. No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle, which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield.

B.    Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.

(Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.64.030 Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalk.

Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks.

(Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.) 


11.64.040 Crossing at right angles.

No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb. (Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.64.050 When pedestrians shall yield.

A.    Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.

B.    The foregoing rule of this section has no application under the conditions stated in Section 11.64.060 when pedestrians are prohibited from crossing at certain designated places.

(Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.64.060 Prohibited crossing.

A.    Between adjacent intersection at which traffic control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk.

B.    No pedestrian shall cross a roadway in the central business traffic district, or in any business district, other than in a crosswalk.

(Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.64.070 Pedestrians walking along roadways.

A.    Where sidewalks are provided, it is unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent street, highway or roadway.

B.    Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a street, highway or roadway shall, when practical, walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction.

(Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.64.080 Pedestrians soliciting employment or business.

A.    No person shall stand in a roadway or in proximity to a street or highway for the purpose of soliciting employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.

B.    No pedestrian shall interfere with the lawful operation of any vehicle.

(Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.64.090 Drivers to exercise due care.

Every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding a horn, when necessary, and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway. (Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


Chapter 11.68 BICYCLES

Sections:

11.68.020    Licenses.

11.68.030    Fees.


11.68.020 Licenses.

Every owner of a bicycle which is operated on municipal public streets shall, for each bicycle owned, cause to be filed with the chief of police an application for registration of the bicycle. Such application shall be made by the owner or his authorized agent, over the signature of such owner or agent. The application must show:

A.    Name and address of owner;

B.    Trade or manufacturer’s name of bicycle;

C.    Factory or serial number;

D.    Type, color and such other information as may be requested by the chief of police.

(Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


11.68.030 Fees.

The chief of police shall provide license plates for all registered bicycles, and shall charge for such plates the sum of one dollar for each calendar year or fraction thereof. (Ord. 84-597 § 4(B) (part), 1984; Ord. 73-64 § 3 (part), 1973.)


Chapter 11.70 HELMET REQUIREMENTS FOR YOUNG PERSONS RIDING CERTAIN VEHICLES

Sections:

11.70.010    Helmet requirements for young persons riding certain vehicles.


11.70.010 Helmet requirements for young persons riding certain vehicles.

A.    It shall be unlawful for any person under eighteen years of age to operate or ride upon in-line skates, skateboards, scooters, coasters, toy motorized vehicles, gasoline or electric motor-driven cycles or scooters, bicycles, tricycles, unicycles, or any similar vehicles on any public property or private property that is open for public use within the city and borough of Sitka, including highways, streets, roads, bikeways or trails, or rights-of-way, unless that person wears a certified protective helmet that is properly fitted and that is properly fastened. This requirement also applies to any minor who rides in a restraining seat, trailer, backpack or similar child-restraining device used by someone who operates in-line or roller skates, skateboards, scooters, coasters, toy motor vehicles, gasoline or electric motor-driven cycles or scooters, bicycles, tricycles, or any similar vehicles. A parent or guardian having control or custody of a minor whose conduct violates this section shall be liable for the fine imposed by this section.

B.    No parent or guardian of any minor shall allow the minor to violate this chapter.

C.    A certified protective helmet is a helmet containing a manufacturer certification that meets the standards of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) or the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC).

D.    For the first violation of this section, the individual cited will be given the opportunity to correct the citation by providing proof to the Sitka police department that a helmet was purchased or acquired otherwise for the minor. If such evidence is presented, the city and borough or court shall dismiss such citation. The fine for a violation of this section following a citation that has been dismissed based on the previous two sentences or sustained shall be twenty-five dollars. The fine for a violation that follows a violation that has resulted in a twenty-five dollar fine shall be fifty dollars. (Ord. 15-11 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 05-11 § 4, 2005.)


TITLE 11 FOOTNOTES

1    Editor’s Note: Sections 11.28.010—11.28.040 are derived from the Sitka General Code.


Title 12 (RESERVED)


Title 13 PORT AND HARBORS 

Chapters: 

13.02    General Provisions

13.04    Definitions 

13.06    Charges/Fees

13.07    Harbor Use Privileges and Prohibitions

13.08    Reserved Mooring Stalls

13.09    Anchoring

13.10    Float Regulations

13.12    Enforcement

13.13    Nuisances

13.14    Vessel Impoundment and Disposition

13.15    Float Homes

13.16    Commercial Marine Trade Permits 


Chapter 13.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections: 

13.02.010    Purpose.

13.02.020    Harbormaster.

13.02.030    Port and harbors commission.

13.02.040    Jurisdiction limits of the Sitka harbor system.


13.02.010 Purpose.

The purpose of these regulations is to provide for orderly development, management, protection, safety and efficient use of all harbor spaces and port facilities within the municipal harbor system by commercial vessels, government vessels, pleasure vessels and the boating public. By the mooring of any vessel within the harbor system, the owner, operator, or master of any vessel agrees to follow the rules and requirements of all the provisions within this title. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.) 


13.02.020 Harbormaster.

There is created a port and harbors department which will be operated under a harbormaster and staff. The harbormaster will have supervision responsibility and authority to administer all city and borough owned or operated floats, harbor spaces and port facilities, subject to supervision by the municipal administrator. The harbormaster will have the powers to assign to all vessels, aircraft and other waterborne structures places for docking, berthing, mooring and anchoring within the floats and docks and within all water area in the designated harbor system and to reassign any such stall or space should conditions warrant the same. It is illegal to moor, dock or anchor in any area within harbor jurisdiction unless specifically authorized by the harbormaster. The harbormaster will have the authority to impound or seize any vessel within the system for improper moorage activities or dead storage. Without any obligation or liability on the harbormaster’s part or that of the municipality for his failure to do so, or duty to do so, the harbormaster may replace defective mooring lines, pump boats which are found in a dangerous condition, move any boat found endangering other vessels or raise any sunken vessel. The harbormaster will have the authority to board, inspect for infractions of the law and require compliance prior to the vessel owner continuing the activity that resulted in the infraction. (The responsible boat owner will be billed actual costs associated with any emergency services.) (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.02.030 Port and harbors commission.

There exists a port and harbors commission consisting of seven members who act as an advisory body to the assembly on matters concerning the harbor system. Their duties will include: working with the harbormaster and administrator planning for new harbors; evaluating needs for harbor services; examining and updating harbor ordinances; review of current harbor operations and annual budgets; recommending priorities, moorage rates and other charges; receiving and evaluating formal and informal advice on harbor operations from citizens and preparing a yearly report to the assembly on the status of the municipal harbor system. The commission will meet nine times per year with additional meetings as needed at the discretion of the chairperson. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.02.040 Jurisdiction limits of the Sitka harbor system.

The geographic boundaries of jurisdiction for the harbormaster will be: that area seaward of the western shore of Baranof Island from the south end of Crescent Harbor to the southern point of the Sitka Airport runway, then continuing north and east along the southerly and easterly shores of Charcoal and Alice Island and continuing northerly and westerly along the easterly shore of Japonski Island to the northwesterly side of the breakwater established in Western Anchorage. Then continuing north and easterly along said breakwater to the westerly shore of Baranof Island, thence continuing southerly and easterly along the shores of Sitka Channel through Crescent Harbor and back to the point of beginning, including Sitka Channel and the Western Anchorage area to the breakwater. Within these geographic confines are contained the municipally owned or operated Crescent Harbor, Sealing Cove Harbor, ANB Harbor, Seaplane Float, Thomsen Harbor, Eliason Harbor, Japonski work float, as well as any and all other public spaces, parking lots, ramps, restrooms, docks or port facilities. (See jurisdiction map, Exhibit A, set out at the end of this title.) The entire area described in this section shall be referred to as the Sitka harbor system in this title. The harbormaster shall have the authority to post such signs as are necessary to facilitate the safe and orderly movement of vessels, vehicles and pedestrians. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


Chapter 13.04 DEFINITIONS 

Sections: 

13.04.010    Anchor. 

13.04.020    Charter/vessel for hire. 

13.04.030    Commercial marine trade. 

13.04.040    Designated harbors. 

13.04.050    Designated harbor work areas. 

13.04.060    Dinghy/lighter. 

13.04.070    Distress. 

13.04.080    Emergency. 

13.04.090    Float homes. 

13.04.100    Harbor. 

13.04.110    Harbormaster. 

13.04.120    Hot berth. 

13.04.130    Liveaboard. 

13.04.140    Moor. 

13.04.150    Permanent transient. 

13.04.160    Person. 

13.04.170    Qualifying interest. 

13.04.180    Stall. 

13.04.190    Transient vessel. 

13.04.200    Transfer of cargo. 

13.04.210    Traffic lanes. 

13.04.220    Vessel. 

13.04.230    Vessel length. 

13.04.240    Waterborne structures. 


13.04.010 Anchor. 

“Anchor” means to secure a vessel to a bed or body of water by dropping a weighted ground line or tackle or by use of a buoy or other means to prevent more than a measurable movement of the vessel. (Ord. 18-52S § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.04.020 Charter/vessel for hire. 

“Charter/vessel for hire” means any vessel licensed to carry passengers for hire; “bare boat” is a boat rented with or without crew or operator. (Ord. 18-52S § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.) 


13.04.030 Commercial marine trade. 

“Commercial marine trade” means any business, commercial entity, or for-profit enterprise engaged in offering services for the commercial or charter marine industry or private marine users in the designated harbors and designated harbor work areas. This can include, but is not exclusive to, welding, fabrication, electrical, and plumbing services, offered by a business operating within the city and borough. (Ord. 18-52S § 4 (part), 2018.)


13.04.040 Designated harbors. 

“Designated harbors” means any of the city and borough owned harbors listed below where the city and borough infrastructure is used. These areas include: Sealing Cove harbor, Crescent Harbor, ANB harbor, Thompson harbor, and Eliason harbor. (Ord. 18-52S § 4 (part), 2018.)


13.04.050 Designated harbor work areas. 

“Designated harbor work areas” means any of the areas listed below where the city and borough infrastructure is used. These areas include: Community port wall, Eliason harbor work float, Fishermen’s work float, Crescent harbor high load dock, Crescent harbor pole float and the GPIP dock. (Ord. 18-52S § 4 (part), 2018.)


13.04.060 Dinghy/lighter. 

“Dinghy/lighter” means a small vessel normally carried aboard a larger vessel or towed as a life boat or tender. (Ord. 18-52S § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014. Formerly 13.04.040.)


13.04.070 Distress. 

“Distress” means a state of disability or a present or obvious imminent danger which if unduly prolonged could endanger life or property. (Ord. 18-52S § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014. Formerly 13.04.050.)


13.04.080 Emergency. 

“Emergency” means a state of immediate danger to life or property in which time is of the essence. (Ord. 18-52S § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014. Formerly 13.04.060.)


13.04.090 Float homes. 

“Float homes” or “float houses” means a floating structure used wholly as a dwelling unit, which is not designed to travel on water and which is otherwise not a vessel, as defined herein, and meets construction requirements as provided in Chapters 13.15, 19.15, 19.16 and 19.17. (Ord. 18-52S § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 14-22A § 4 (part), 2014: Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014. Formerly 13.04.070.)


13.04.100 Harbor. 

“Harbor” means the Sitka harbor system or all waters, tidal areas and adjacent uplands areas, together with all facilities of a port or maritime nature publicly owned that are primarily used by or for the service of vessels, including docks, pilings, ramps, hoists, parking areas, leased water areas, concessions and/or service facilities located within. (Ord. 18-52S § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014. Formerly 13.04.080.)


13.04.110 Harbormaster. 

“Harbormaster” means the individual described in Section 13.02.020 and any assistant harbormaster or other person designated to act in the harbormaster’s place. (Ord. 18-52S § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014. Formerly 13.04.090.)


13.04.120 Hot berth. 

“Hot berth” means the practice of allowing a vessel to temporarily occupy a stall or space not reserved to said vessel. (Ord. 18-52S § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014. Formerly 13.04.100.)


13.04.130 Liveaboard. 

“Liveaboard” means any vessel used by one or more persons as a primary residence while moored in the Sitka harbor system, which meets the following requirements. A liveaboard vessel must comply with all requirements imposed on any vessel moored in the harbor system including the requirement that the vessel be powered by an engine of sufficient size to propel the vessel at a speed allowing normal steerage and to maneuver out of and into the harbor. A liveaboard vessel must be registered as such with the harbor department. A liveaboard vessel must have a safe heating system, and food preparation system, and berthing accommodations for all occupants. (Ord. 18-52S § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014. Formerly 13.04.110.)


13.04.140 Moor. 

“Moor” means to secure a vessel by the use of lines to a dock, pier or other object providing a more secure fastening to a particular location than by anchoring. (Ord. 18-52S § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014. Formerly 13.04.120.)


13.04.150 Permanent transient. 

“Permanent transient” means a vessel which is on the wait list (Section 13.08.040). The vessel will not have a permanent stall assignment but will be provided moorage and be billed for permanent moorage under Section 13.06.010. (Ord. 18-52S § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014. Formerly 13.04.130.)


13.04.160 Person. 

“Person” means any natural person, individual, partnership, corporation or governmental agency. A corporation and natural person or individual will be considered the same if the natural person has control over the former. (Ord. 18-52S § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014. Formerly 13.04.140.)


13.04.170 Qualifying interest. 

“Qualifying interest” in a vessel means the interest of a person who owns the vessel or, under provisions of written charter or lease, has exclusive control over the operation and navigation of the vessel. A person who transfers title to a vessel or enters into a charter or lease of the vessel to another, seasonally or permanently, thereby relinquishes exclusive control over the use and operation of said vessel and ceases to have a qualifying interest in said vessel. (Ord. 18-52S § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014. Formerly 13.04.150.)


13.04.180 Stall. 

“Stall” means a place to moor individual vessels in the harbor. (Ord. 18-52S § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014. Formerly 13.04.160.) 


13.04.190 Transient vessel. 

“Transient vessel” means any vessel occupying space in the Sitka harbor system for which a regular reserved stall has not been assigned. (Ord. 18-52S § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014. Formerly 13.04.170.)


13.04.200 Transfer of cargo. 

“Transfer of cargo” means all types of loading, unloading, transfer and/or containerization of any type of cargo including, but not limited to, fish, shellfish and other seafood products thereof. (Ord. 18-52S § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014. Formerly 13.04.180.)


13.04.210 Traffic lanes. 

“Traffic lanes” (navigation lanes) means those areas specifically set aside for movement to and from other locations and which will be kept open, free of obstructions and not for use for anchoring or mooring. (Ord. 18-52S § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014. Formerly 13.04.190.)


13.04.220 Vessel. 

“Vessel” means any ship, boat, skiff, barge, dredge and craft of every kind or description, whether used for commercial or pleasure purposes, which is on the water and is capable of being used as a means of transportation on or through the water, excluding seaplanes. (Ord. 18-52S § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014. Formerly 13.04.200.)


13.04.230 Vessel length. 

The method of determining vessel length within the harbor system: Vessel length will be computed as the actual overall length of any vessel, including bow sprits, outboards (in down position) or other extensions. (Ord. 18-52S § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014. Formerly 13.04.210.)


13.04.240 Waterborne structures. 

“Waterborne structures” means other than a vessel. Examples include but are not limited to barges, float houses, or other, usually unpowered, structures. (Ord. 18-52S § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014. Formerly 13.04.220.)


Chapter 13.06 CHARGES/FEES

Sections: 

13.06.010    Moorage charges and fees.

13.06.030    Nonpayment.

13.06.040    Unpaid stalls.

13.06.050    Delinquent accounts.

13.06.060    Lien created.

13.06.070    Other remedies.


13.06.010 Moorage charges and fees.

There is established, determined, and levied upon all vessels and waterborne structures moored, tied to, or in any other way attached by rope, cable, gangplank or other means to any float, piling, dock, mooring buoy or other harbor improvement which is owned, constructed, maintained or operated by the city and borough of Sitka a rental charge and/or fee for the privilege and use of such facilities. The charges and fees shall be reviewed annually by the port and harbors commission in the month of January.

A.    Moorage fees and charges shall be established by resolution and approved by the assembly.

B.    Rates, fees, charges and a description of other available services, such as electricity, recreational vehicles and boat trailer parking, launch ramp fees and grid fees shall be published and available at the harbormaster’s office and City Hall.

(Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.06.030 Nonpayment.

It is unlawful for any person to moor, berth, tie, attach or in any other manner connect to any harbor improvement or facility with any vessel or airplane, for a period not to exceed one day, without paying the prescribed rental charges previously listed. Any delinquent personal property tax or sales tax on a vessel will be paid prior to any mooring or being placed on a municipal waiting list. A late or penalty fee will be assessed after thirty days, if in arrears, as prescribed by the municipal code. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.06.040 Unpaid stalls.

If the applicable moorage fees have not been paid by the date due, following delinquent notification within thirty days, the harbormaster may declare the stall released and it may be reassigned to the next person on the waiting list for that appropriate sized boat. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.) 


13.06.050 Delinquent accounts.

Delinquent accounts shall be subject to collection procedures as followed by the city and borough and as allowed by federal and state laws. Delinquent accounts shall accrue interest at a rate of twelve percent per year on the unpaid delinquent balance. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.06.060 Lien created.

In addition to any other remedy provided for herein or at law, all mooring, grid and other miscellaneous harbor fees shall constitute a lien against the vessel, its tackle, gear, appurtenances and other similar property of the owner or operator, under federal and state law. Fees and charges delinquent ninety days or longer may be foreclosed on by impounding and selling the vessel against which the lien has vested under federal law and the provisions of this title. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.06.070 Other remedies.

All liens created shall not be exclusive remedies. A proceeding to foreclose any lien or suit thereon by the city and borough shall not preclude any other remedy, including impoundment as above, at law or in equity. The procedure for foreclosure or suit thereon of any lien shall be as set out in applicable state or federal law. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


Chapter 13.07 HARBOR USE PRIVILEGES AND PROHIBITIONS

Sections: 

13.07.005    Penalties.

13.07.010    Prohibited acts.

13.07.020    Vessel seaworthiness.

13.07.030    Safeguarding.

13.07.040    Speed limits.

13.07.050    Accident reports.

13.07.060    Responsibility for property damage.

13.07.070    Fire hazards prohibited.


13.07.005 Penalties.

All violations herein are subject to regulation and enforcement guidelines as set forth in Sections 13.12.010 and 13.12.040. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.07.010 Prohibited acts.

In addition to other prohibited actions under this title, the following conduct is prohibited:

A.    Generating loud or boisterous noises, including that which occurs while working on vessels, that disturb the reasonable peace and privacy of others;

B.    Obstructing or interfering with the harbormaster and/or harbor staff in the performance of their duties or refusing to comply with a lawful order of the harbormaster;

C.    Challenging or intending to provoke another to fight, or engaging in fighting;

D.    Consuming alcohol, except on licensed premises or private vessels, or engaging in the use of, or being an instrument in the exchange of, illicit drugs or narcotics; and

E.    Anyone violating this section may be ordered verbally by the harbormaster, or designee, to leave the harbor immediately. 

(Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.07.020 Vessel seaworthiness.

All vessels moored or docked in the Sitka harbor system must meet the following criteria:

A.    Be capable of getting underway under its own power at all times;

B.    Be a watercraft constructed and maintained for the primary purpose of navigating the waterways of Alaska and not solely for the specific purposes of maintaining a stationary place of residence, floating storage, shop, office or other nonnavigational purposes. 

(Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.07.030 Safeguarding.

Every vessel owner and operator shall use all reasonable effort and precautions in keeping the vessel in his charge well-secured with mooring lines in reasonable fit condition, sufficiently pumped at all times to keep afloat, free from fire hazards of any kind, and to otherwise attend to the needs of the vessel. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.) 


13.07.040 Speed limits.

It is unlawful for any person to operate any vessel or taxiing aircraft, except during takeoff and landing, in excess of the following speed limits:

A.    No person shall operate a vessel within the area between the Crescent Harbor breakwater entrance to the south tip of Aleutski Island to the south tip of Love Island and the north end of the channel at the rubblemound breakwater at a speed which produces a wake, wash, or wave action which may or could reasonably be expected to damage any other vessels or harbor facilities or create discomfort to an occupant by causing such other boats to pitch or heave because of such wake, wash or wave.

B.    Three miles per hour within the inner harbors of ANB Harbor, Sealing Cove Harbor, Crescent Harbor, Eliason Harbor and Thomsen Harbor. 

(Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.07.050 Accident reports.

The operator of any vessel involved in an accident resulting in the death or injury of any person or damage to property in excess of five hundred dollars shall immediately give oral notice of the accident to the harbormaster, or if he is unavailable to receive the notice, to the Sitka police department. In addition, the operator shall, within twenty-four hours after the accident, file a written report with the harbormaster containing the name of the vessel, the name of the vessel owner and operator, a description of the accident, a description of the resulting injuries or damage, a description of possible causes or contributing factors, and such other information as the harbormaster may require. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.07.060 Responsibility for property damage.

A person damaging city and borough docks, floats, ramps or other property of the city and borough shall be responsible for cost of repairs. A boat owner is strictly liable for the damages caused by a fire originating in his vessel to any municipal property. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.07.070 Fire hazards prohibited.

A.    No person may leave an unsafe fire or flame unattended aboard a vessel in the Sitka harbor system; this includes oil, gas, wood stoves and other fuel burning appliances.

B.    No person may store, deposit or leave on any float, dock or other harbor facility any gasoline, lubricating oil or other combustible liquid of any nature or description, except for temporary purposes in conjunction with the loading or unloading of a vessel.

C.    A person using a grinder, torch or flame-producing device in or upon any vessel, dock, float or other boat harbor facility shall provide a fire extinguisher adequate for putting out any fire which may result. Any grinding or cutting must be done in such a way that sparks and other debris shall not come into contact with the property of another.

D.    A person shall not ignite or detonate fireworks or flares within the boundaries of the Sitka harbor system, except by permit from the fire chief. 

(Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.) 


Chapter 13.08 RESERVED MOORING STALLS

Sections: 

13.08.005    Duty to register.

13.08.015    Safe condition of vessel.

13.08.020    Reserved moorage.

13.08.030    Moorage space assignments.

13.08.040    Waiting list.

13.08.050    Retention of a waiting list priority and stall transfer list fee.

13.08.060    Utilizing a reserved stall.

13.08.070    Stall – Sale of boat.

13.08.080    Transfer of reserved mooring.

13.08.090    Nonuse of a stall.


13.08.005 Duty to register.

A.    Every owner, operator, or agent of any vessel using the harbor for any period of time is required to register the name, address and telephone number of the registered owner and the operator of the vessel, if the vessel is operated by anyone other than the owner, the vessel’s length, breadth, registered tonnage (if any) description and uses, the vessel’s name and home port, and any other information required by the harbormaster on forms provided for that purpose, and pay the required fees immediately, but no later than twelve hours after first entering the harbor.

B.    Every owner, operator, or agent of any vessel using the facilities of the harbor shall execute a moorage agreement providing for payment of moorage fees and other charges.

C.    In the event of a change of ownership or in operator, a new vessel mooring agreement shall be signed within thirty days after the change. 

(Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.08.015 Safe condition of vessel.

A.    To qualify or remain qualified for moorage space, a vessel must:

1.    At all times meet United States Coast Guard standards which include those pertaining to navigational and safety equipment;

2.    Have a fixed propulsion system and have sufficient mode of power to permit the vessel to be maneuvered and controlled safely while transiting, entering or leaving the small boat harbors under wind and water conditions which are not unusual;

3.    Be completely seaworthy and ready for immediate cruising in local waters in compliance with Section 13.07.020; and

4.    Shall not discharge sewage into the waters of the city and borough.

B.    Whenever the harbormaster has probable cause to believe that a vessel is not qualified under this section, the harbormaster may require the owner or operator of a vessel to demonstrate that the vessel meets the qualifications in subsection A of this section within seventy-two hours from receiving notification from the harbormaster.

C.    The harbormaster may refuse mooring space to any vessel which does not meet the qualifications of this chapter and may terminate the moorage agreement for any mooring space occupied by an unqualified vessel under this section. The harbormaster may require, upon notice to the owner or operator of an unqualified vessel that the moorage agreement has been terminated, the vessel is illegally moored and such vessel must be removed from the harbor within seven days. Any vessel remaining in the harbor after the time specified in the notice shall be subject to impoundment or removal as a nuisance under this title.

D.    Any person whose vessel’s moorage agreement is terminated under this section shall not be allowed to tie to any municipally owned harbor infrastructure, or anchor within the jurisdiction of the Sitka harbor system. 

(Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.08.020 Reserved moorage.

Reserved moorage may be obtained, as available, at locations designated or assigned by the harbormaster. Reserved space will be assigned based on a waiting list which will be maintained in the harbor office and will be on a first-come, first-served basis determined upon the date the application was received, the type and size of boat space required and the availability of such spaces. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.) 


13.08.030 Moorage space assignments.

Moorage spaces may be held in the names of individual persons, government agencies, educational institutions, and nonprofit organizations. Corporations may hold moorage spaces; however, if a corporation is sold or taken over by another corporation, individual, or business entity, the moorage space will be forfeit. Partners may hold a moorage space equally, but if the space holder wishes to add a partner’s name to the space assignment, the new partner must go on the wait list and will be added to the space assignment when his/her name comes up for assignment. Partnerships must be true partnerships and both names must be on the vessel documentation or registration. Should a partnership dissolve, it will be up to the partner retaining the moorage space to submit a release from the other partner indicating their agreement to the retention. The stall will then transfer to the individual retaining the stall. The harbormaster retains the right to review and obtain a copy if necessary of U.S. Coast Guard documentation papers of ownership or state of Alaska vessel title or registration. Moorage spaces may only be assigned to vessel owners. Vessel owners may not lease their vessels and hold a moorage space after six months without the approval of the harbormaster. Any holder of a reserved mooring stall shall not sublease, rent, or in any other manner permit or allow any other vessel to occupy said space, unless specifically permitted and approved by the harbormaster for sufficient reason given. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.08.040 Waiting list.

There will be a moorage waiting list maintained by the harbormaster and displayed in the harbor office for public inspection. The list will be based on receipt of a nonrefundable administrative fee, equivalent to the first quarter’s mooring fee based on the overall length of the listed vessel. The nonrefundable administrative fee will not be applied to the first quarter’s moorage fee when a stall is assigned. All permanent moorage vacancies will be filled by the first applicant on the list who has a vessel of the required length, beam, electrical needs or other overall factors deemed by the harbormaster to be most suitable for the empty berth. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.08.050 Retention of a waiting list priority and stall transfer list fee.

An applicant who does not respond to a written notice sent by the harbormaster, by certified mail, to the last address in the files of the harbor department, will be removed from the waiting list. Upon accepting a stall assignment and payment of a twenty-five-dollar nonrefundable stall transfer list fee, the applicant may be placed on a stall transfer list for the same vessel. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.08.060 Utilizing a reserved stall.

The municipality reserves the right to provide temporary moorage or “hot berthing” of another vessel within a reserved mooring space when said space is unoccupied. A holder of a reserved stall or space within the Sitka harbor system should provide a usage plan to the harbormaster, if he/she knows he/she will be absent for any reasonable extended length of time more than twenty-four hours, giving his/her estimated time of departure and return. The stall holder will not have the right to designate any specific vessel to use the stall. Should the reserved stall holder return earlier than expected, the holder will contact the harbormaster, as early as possible, to facilitate time to remove the temporary vessel from the reserved space. If the harbormaster is not available, the reserved stall holder will moor at the transient area until he/she can contact the harbor department. The harbormaster will inform temporary users of any absent holder’s reserved mooring space that said use will continue only for the duration of the holder’s boat’s absence and that the harbormaster is authorized to move the temporary vessel to another location upon return of the holder’s boat. Any temporary stall user will therefore be required to keep the harbormaster notified of his/her whereabouts. Any boat owner desiring to moor temporarily in a reserved but vacant stall will apply to the harbormaster. No such stall or space will be utilized unless authorized by the harbormaster. The boat owner temporarily assigned to a reserved mooring space will not utilize the utilities which may have been provided for the reserved stall holder unless authorized by the harbormaster. If electricity is used, the stall holder will be credited to his current usage for that month. Nothing in this section limits the harbormaster’s authority to move any moored boat to another location in the event of a fire or other emergency requiring such action. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.08.070 Stall – Sale of boat.

When a person sells his/her boat, he/she will notify the harbormaster within one week of the sale and state whether the stall will be released. A change of ownership occurs when a name is changed, added, or dropped from a vessel’s documentation. A stall is not transferable by the holder. Persons who sell their boat but intend to purchase another one which is of a proper size to fit into the existing stall may retain their stall for a period of up to six months. If, at the end of that time, they have not obtained ownership of another boat or furnished proof of intent to procure a boat within a reasonable extended period of time as determined by the harbormaster, the reserved space will be forfeited. Any such person wishing to retain the stall will be responsible for the continued mooring rate fee as established by Section 13.06.010. The fee will be based on the length of the stall. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.) 


13.08.080 Transfer of reserved mooring.

Any person holding a reserved mooring space or a position on the approved waiting list may not transfer such space or list position to any other person except that a preferential annual slip assigned to a vessel may be retained if the transfer is between husband and wife, to a natural or legally adopted son or daughter or grandson or granddaughter or is legally inherited by a member of the owner’s family and documented as such to the satisfaction of the harbormaster. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.08.090 Nonuse of a stall.

If the owner of a vessel, to which a reserved mooring space is assigned, does not use that space or slip for at least three months of each calendar year, the reserved mooring space will be forfeited and the harbormaster will notify said owner, in writing, subject to written appeal for an extension to the Ports and Harbor Commission. The harbormaster may waive this requirement, on a case-by-case basis, under exceptional circumstances such as extended ocean voyages or major vessel repair. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


Chapter 13.09 ANCHORING

Sections: 

13.09.010    Anchored vessels and waterborne structures.


13.09.010 Anchored vessels and waterborne structures.

Anchoring within Western Anchorage will be permitted from March 1st to September 30th. Unless it is a float house, authorized under Chapter 13.15, any anchored vessel or waterborne structure must meet vessel seaworthiness requirements under Section 13.07.020, if applicable, and shall not be a nuisance as defined in this title. Any anchored vessel or waterborne structure that does not meet the applicable requirements or is declared a nuisance:

A.    May be subject to impoundment under Chapter 13.14 of this code and any other applicable enforcement actions under law.

(Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


Chapter 13.10 FLOAT REGULATIONS

Sections: 

13.10.010    Notice to owners.

13.10.020    Dead storage.

13.10.030    Minimum-maximum length.

13.10.040    Vehicles and parking.

13.10.045    Vehicles prohibited.

13.10.046    Boat launch ramp and trailer parking.

13.10.047    Recreational vehicle park rules and regulations.

13.10.048    Recreational vehicle/boat trailer winter storage rules and regulations.

13.10.050    General requirements.

13.10.060    Harbor electrical system.

13.10.070    Notices – Bulletin boards.

13.10.080    Distribution of handbill and leaflets – Permit required.

13.10.090    Skiffs or secondary vessel mooring.

13.10.100    Pets within the Sitka harbor system.

13.10.110    Unlawful disposal in Sitka harbor system.

13.10.140    Cleaning fish.

13.10.150    Storage prohibited.

13.10.160    Grid.

13.10.170    Gear/cargo loading float.

13.10.180    Work float.

13.10.185    Sealing Cove boat trailer area.

13.10.190    Airplane float.

13.10.195    Regulations for airplanes operating within the Sitka harbor system.

13.10.200    Garbage facilities.

13.10.210    Children.

13.10.220    Swimming.

13.10.230    Restriction on offloading more than five hundred pounds of commercially caught raw fish in the harbor system. 


13.10.010 Notice to owners.

By the mooring of any vessel within the Sitka harbor system, the owner, operator, or master of any vessel agrees to all of the provisions contained within this title. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.10.020 Dead storage.

It is declared that city and borough owned or operated floats, mooring spaces or other facilities have been installed and are operated for the convenience and use of fishermen and pleasure boat owners and are not for the purposes of providing dead storage. Moorage of any type of waterborne structure, houseboat, flatboat or barge is specifically prohibited except float houses as authorized under Chapter 13.15. This prohibition extends to the entire area of jurisdiction of the harbor system but will exclude those fishing scows specifically owned or operated by on-shore cold storage plants which are brought into the city and borough for maintenance or off-season storage only. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.10.030 Minimum-maximum length.

The minimum-maximum length of any boat or ship or any other vessel which moors at any city and borough harbor float will be based on the length of the stall, and will be subject to the harbormaster’s discretion based on safety. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.10.040 Vehicles and parking.

No vehicle will be allowed or permitted to park on the approach to any float so as to obstruct said approach except as a necessary purpose of discharging passengers or freight. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.10.045 Vehicles prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle, motor scooter, motorcycle, skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, or other similar device on any municipal float. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.10.046 Boat launch ramp and trailer parking.

A.    The city and borough boat launch facility shall be open to the public. It is unlawful to block access to either of the launch ramps at Sealing Cove or Crescent Harbor.

B.    Short-term parking is available for trailers. There is also a three-day and a ten-day area.

The harbor department will issue citations and impound trailers that exceed the time limit. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.10.047 Recreational vehicle park rules and regulations.

The facility is intended to service short-term visitors to Sitka. It is not intended to become a location for permanent occupants.

A.    The RV park is open annually from April 1st through September 30th. Occupancy is limited to a maximum of thirty consecutive days.

B.    The registration and fee shall be collected by harbor department personnel or park host and shall be paid in advance.

C.    Each occupant shall be responsible for keeping their assigned space neat and clean.

D.    No tents, wannigans, sheds, additions, or extensions to the RV, camper or trailer occupying the space are allowed.

E.    Recreational vehicles with holding tanks may dump free of charge at the municipal wastewater treatment disposal facility. 

(Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.10.048 Recreational vehicle/boat trailer winter storage rules and regulations.

A.    The recreational vehicle/boat trailer park at Sealing Cove will be open for winter storage of recreational vehicles, boat trailers, boats on boat trailers, and motor vehicles from October 1st through March 31st of each year, after paying appropriate fees at harbormaster’s office.

B.    No recreational vehicle, boat trailer, or motor vehicle may be stored or remain at the recreational vehicle trailer park unless:

1.    The recreational vehicle, boat trailer, boat on boat trailer, or motor vehicle has required license plate(s), current vehicle registration, and current license tags; and

2.    The recreational vehicle, boat trailer, or motor vehicle is operational.

C.    Any recreation vehicle, boat trailer, boat on boat trailer, or motor vehicle not removed by March 31st will be impounded at the owner’s expense. 

(Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.) 


13.10.050 General requirements.

The following rules are intended to minimize adverse effects on neighboring shore side properties adjacent to the harbors within the Sitka harbor system:

A.    To the extent allowed by safety considerations, harbor lights, and all bright lights, including vessel deck lights, will be directed away from the shoreline.

B.    The use of crab lights (sodium, mercury, crab, flood, etc.) is prohibited within the harbors within the Sitka harbor system and between the breakwaters and O’Connell Bridge between the hours of eight p.m. and seven a.m.

C.    The use of any sound system, public address and/or paging systems of any sort will be limited to the hours of seven a.m. and eight p.m. The performance of any vessel repairs requiring noisy activities, including the revving of vessel engines, will be limited to the same hours. In case of emergencies, contact the harbormaster. 

(Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.10.060 Harbor electrical system.

The following regulations govern the use of electricity within the Sitka harbor system:

A.    Connections to any vessel moored within the Sitka harbor system are under the direction of the harbormaster and are subject to the following:

1.    Use of nonmarine battery chargers is strictly prohibited. All chargers used within the system must contain an isolator circuit or be run through an isolator so that no current is discharged into the municipal system.

2.    Use of extension cords, plugs, caps and other components between the vessel’s private system and the municipal shore side system will comply with the electrical code of the city and borough and be of a specific marine design recognized and approved by the city and borough.

3.    Only heating lamps with porcelain type sockets may be used.

4.    Any onboard heater capable of causing a fire if overturned must be equipped with a safety switch which will automatically disconnect the electrical power, if so overturned.

B.    The harbormaster will, by permission of vessel owner or agent, have the authority to enter any vessel connected to the municipal electrical system to inspect electrical equipment to assure compliance with this and other applicable codes. If permission is not granted, the harbormaster may disconnect said shore power from the offending vessel.

C.    It is unlawful for any person to interfere, tamper with, or connect any wires, plugs or other devices to any of the electrical wiring or electrical outlets upon any of the docks, floats or gangways maintained, constructed or owned by the city and borough without the permission of the harbormaster.

D.    Violation of any of the provisions of this section is punishable up to the maximum of five hundred dollars. 

(Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.10.070 Notices – Bulletin boards.

Except in those areas designated by the harbormaster, it is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to post any matter upon any bulletin board or to create any writing or printed material and post it to any float, piling, dock or any other portion of the Sitka harbor system, except in those areas designated by the harbormaster. Any unauthorized material will be immediately removed by the harbormaster and destroyed. All material will be dated and is limited to thirty days. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.) 


13.10.080 Distribution of handbill and leaflets – Permit required.

Distribution of handbills and leaflets is forbidden within the Sitka harbor system and in the adjacent public parking areas. Persons intending to distribute handbills and leaflets within the Sitka harbor system will be required to obtain a permit from the municipality. A condition for the issuance of such permits shall be that the permittee agree to clean up any discarded handbills and leaflets in the harbor area and adjacent parking lot areas at the end of each day. Failure to properly clean up the area shall result in revocation of such permits by the city and borough of Sitka. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.10.090 Skiffs or secondary vessel mooring.

No skiff or other secondary vessel will be separately moored to the Sitka harbor system except at a berth specifically assigned for moorage to the owner of that skiff and with appropriate fees paid. No floating skiff will be tied or otherwise moored to any other vessel moored to that berth in any way as to protrude into the passage lane to another berth or in such a way as to block passage from any other vessel. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.10.100 Pets within the Sitka harbor system.

Any dog, cat or other pet living aboard any boat in the Sitka harbor system, or crossing the floats to a vessel, shall be subject to the entirety of Title 8 as enforcement guidelines. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.10.110 Unlawful disposal in Sitka harbor system.

It is unlawful to:

A.    Dump garbage or trash into any boat harbor, harbor uplands or associated tidelands;

B.    Abandon or leave old boats, hulks or wrecks within the Sitka harbor system;

C.    Spill, dump, discharge or in any other manner dispose of flammable waste such as gasoline, lubricating oil, or other combustible liquids into any boat harbor, uplands, or associated tidelands; and

D.    Leave or dispose of spoiled fish, bait, or gear on the city and borough floats. Vessel owners will tend to their gear promptly after each commercial opening. Any failure to provide necessary cleanup action will be considered a nuisance. 

(Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.10.140 Cleaning fish.

It is unlawful to:

A.    Dispose of any fish, shellfish or other animal, or waste parts of fish, shellfish or other animal, into the Sitka harbor system waters, so as to not attract birds which could create a hazard with aircraft near the Rocky Gutierrez Airport.

B.    To clean fish on any portion of a city and borough dock or float, except at designated fish cleaning stations. Waste bins are available at the harbor from June through September. Any waste outside of those dates shall be disposed of in a way not to attract vermin, birds, sea lions, bears, etc., in accordance with both Section 9.24.050 and Chapter 13.12. 

(Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.10.150 Storage prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to use any harbor for storage, on any floats, docks or gangways or any other portion of the municipal harbor system, of any pipes, nets, wares, merchandise, or gear of any sort or type without the permission of the harbormaster. Even when permission is given, it is for a specific, short length of time to facilitate gear changing, loading or other necessary activity and not as a convenient place of storage of personal items. Should a skiff or other item having value be found stored on the docks or floats in violation of this section, the harbormaster will impound said items and dispose of them as follows:

A.    They will be stored for thirty days.

B.    The owner will be notified, if known, by certified mail, that the items have been impounded and must be reclaimed within the thirty days, after paying reasonable storage and associated costs, or they will be subject to sale at the end of thirty days with the owner responsible for any unrecovered costs. Public and owner notification shall run concurrently. 

(Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.10.160 Grid.

No boat more than thirty-five tons per bent will be allowed on the south grid. No boat more than six tons per bent will be allowed on the north end grid. If persons wishing to exceed the above limits wish to use the grid, they must contact the harbormaster for special consideration. Maximum time on grid is ninety-six hours. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.) 


13.10.170 Gear/cargo loading float.

Unless other arrangements have been made with the harbormaster, for activity other than loading or unloading, the following rules apply to the gear/cargo loading float:

A.    The time limit on the loading float is two hours;

B.    Vehicle access shall be for vessels tied to the gear/cargo loading float only, when there is actual loading between vessel and vehicle; and

C.    Parking is not for casual access to vessels tied in the harbor. Improper use of the gear/cargo loading float is unlawful and subject to penalties in Chapter 13.12. 

(Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.10.180 Work float.

A year-round work float is available for use and located on Sitka Channel across from ANB Harbor. The intent for this work float is gear work only and is subject to seventy-two-hour consecutive use unless prior permission is given by harbormaster. Vessel must be removed for twenty-four hours before another seventy-two hours can be used. This float is equipped with water and electricity. No overnight moorage is permitted without the harbormaster’s permission. No storage of any gear, nets or materials is permitted without the harbormaster’s permission and only in case of an emergency. The Crescent Harbor, Float 4 work float is available for temporary winter moorage from September 15th until April 15th. Penalties for violating this section are specified in Chapter 13.12. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.10.185 Sealing Cove boat trailer area.

Parking of boat trailers in the Sealing Cove boat trailer area is limited to ten days. Changing parking stalls in the parking area shall not initiate a new ten-day period. A trailer must be removed from the parking lot for forty-eight hours before another ten days of parking may be allowed. Penalties for violation of this section are specified in Section 11.40.170(D)(4) for overtime parking. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.10.190 Airplane float.

The municipal airplane float shall be administered and enforced by the harbormaster but subject to:

A.    Commercial operations shall be allowed at the municipal airplane float with the harbormaster’s approval and proper permitting. Such operations shall be charged an appropriate user fee.

B.    The municipal plane floats are for the use of active planes.

C.    Only repair and maintenance work of a minor nature shall be allowed on the float, which is defined as that work which would ordinarily be completed in one twenty-four-hour period. The harbormaster shall have discretion in enforcing this provision.

D.    No person may moor a vessel at any municipal plane float. 

(Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.10.195 Regulations for airplanes operating within the Sitka harbor system.

Airplanes operating within the Sitka harbor system shall:

A.    Follow international navigation rules while operating on the water;

B.    Not taxi on step in the channel except during takeoff and landing. There is to be a no wake zone in affect in Sitka Channel from O’Connell Bridge to the rubble mound breakwater north of Eliason Harbor;

C.    Use the takeoff and landing corridor located on the southwest side of Western Anchorage, paralleling Japonski Island, from the government pier, out to the breakwater. Pilots have the option to use other areas when wind and weather conditions require, but must maintain adequate separation from vessel traffic. Approximately eighty percent of seaplane operations will be conducted in the designated area;

D.    Do not fly within five hundred feet of any structures, except as necessary for takeoff and landing. This includes the O’Connell Bridge. 

(Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.10.200 Garbage facilities.

Objects too large to fit into the litter container shall be disposed of at the municipal landfill by the owner at his/her expense. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.10.210 Children.

Children under the age of twelve are prohibited on the docks unless in the immediate presence of a parent, guardian or responsible adult. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.) 


13.10.220 Swimming.

Swimming and diving (with the exception of authorized commercial scuba diving or snorkeling and special events approved by the harbormaster) from any city and borough owned or managed float, dock, or wharf is prohibited. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.10.230 Restriction on offloading more than five hundred pounds of commercially caught raw fish in the harbor system.

A.    The city and borough owned hoist is the only place more than five hundred pounds of commercially caught raw fish, taken by one vessel, on one fishing trip, may be offloaded in the harbor system. Anyone committing a violation of this section is liable for up to a five-hundred-dollar fine. See fines, Section 13.12.050(C).

B.    If the hoist is unavailable, commercially caught raw fish may be taken to another area after consultation with the harbormaster. 

(Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


Chapter 13.12 ENFORCEMENT

Sections: 

13.12.010    General.

13.12.040    Written warning.

13.12.050    Fines.


13.12.010 General.

A.    The harbormaster has the authority to order vessels, occupants or visitors to leave the harbor for violations of any portion of this title. Moorage and berthing is a privilege which may be revoked for violations of this title. The harbormaster is granted the authority to impound vessels and remove vessels from the harbor system either temporarily or permanently under the provisions of this title. The owner of record and/or the person in charge of the vessel will be responsible for any and all infractions charged against the vessel.

B.    Persons utilizing the harbor facilities shall obey all municipal, state and federal laws and regulations, as well as those generally accepted safety standards, as well as refrain from engaging in prohibited acts under this title. 

(Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.12.040 Written warning.

If, at the discretion of the harbormaster, an infraction of the rules of the harbor system may be resolved with a written warning to the offending vessel owner, he/she may do so, retaining a copy for the harbor files. Said written warning will specify the infraction and notify the owner that further action will be taken if the offense is repeated or does not cease immediately. Any such written warning will be hand delivered in person or mailed by certified mail. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.) 


13.12.050 Fines.

The maximum penalty will be five hundred dollars, minimum will be fifty dollars and a standard penalty for violations will be as follows:

A.    Cleaning fish – waste (Section 13.10.140):

	First offense	$100.00

	Second or subsequent offense	$250.00

B.    Excessive wake (Section 13.07.040):

	First offense	$50.00

	Second or subsequent offense	$100.00

C.    Offloading more than five hundred pounds commercially caught raw fish (Section 13.10.230) within a five-year period:

	First offense	$250.00

	Second or subsequent offense	$500.00

D.    Nuisance violations (Section 13.13.025 – soot) within one year:

	First offense	$50.00

	Second offense	$100.00

	Third or subsequent offense	$300.00

E.    Harbor electrical violations (Section 13.10.060(A)) within one year:

	First offense	Written warning

	Second offense	$100.00 and shut off power to vessel

	Third or subsequent offenses	$300.00 and shut off power to vessel

F.    Harbor electrical violations (Section 13.10.060(C)) within one year:

	First offense	$250.00

	Second or subsequent offenses	$500.00 and subject to removal from Sitka harbor system

G.    Violations of vehicle loading and unloading area regulations (Section 13.10.170) shall be twenty-five dollars per offense.

H.    Violations of work float usage (Section 13.10.180) shall be up to five hundred dollars per offense. 

(Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


Chapter 13.13 NUISANCES

Sections: 

13.13.010    Nuisances declared.

13.13.020    Other nuisances.

13.13.025    Emission of soot from an oil stove in a vessel.

13.13.030    Abatement or disposal.

13.13.040    Abandoned property.

13.13.060    Floating objects.

13.13.070    No custody of nuisances.


13.13.010 Nuisances declared.

A.    For the purposes of this title, a vessel is a nuisance if:

1.    The vessel is in violation of the mooring or traffic regulations of the Sitka harbor system;

2.    The stall rent or any other fee or charge due the city and borough for the vessel has not been paid thirty days after the due date of the rent, fee or charge owed;

3.    The vessel causes an obstruction to navigation;

4.    The vessel is unfit, unseaworthy or maintained in such a manner as to make it liable to sink;

5.    The vessel is unqualified under the provisions of Section 13.08.015;

6.    The vessel constitutes a fire hazard; or

7.    The vessel is sunken or is in imminent danger of sinking.

B.    A vessel declared to be a nuisance is subject to abatement and removal from the Sitka harbor system or other municipal waters by the city and borough or its agents, without liability to the city and borough or its agents for any damage done by virtue of the removal or for any of its consequences.

C.    Any vessel declared to be a nuisance under this section shall be considered a derelict vessel for purposes of AS 30.30. 

(Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.13.020 Other nuisances.

Refuse of all kinds, structures or pieces of any structure, dock sweepings, dead animals or parts thereof, timber, logs, piles, boomsticks, lumber, boxes, paint, plastic bags, empty containers and oil of any kind floating uncontrolled on the water, and all other substances or articles of a similar nature are declared to be public nuisances, and it shall be unlawful for any person to throw or place in or permit to be thrown, or placed any of the above-named articles or substances within the Sitka harbor system or the municipal waters, either by high tides, storms, floods or otherwise. Nets, gear and other material left on any float or dock for more than twenty-four hours are declared a nuisance, and shall be tagged with a warning tag by the harbormaster. Any person causing or permitting the nuisances placed shall remove the same and upon his failure to do so within twenty-four hours of tagging may be removed by the harbormaster. When the harbormaster has authorized such nuisances to be removed, all costs of such removal or storage shall be paid by and recoverable from the person creating the nuisance. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.) 


13.13.025 Emission of soot from an oil stove in a vessel.

Each owner and operator of a vessel in the harbor system shall take all reasonable measures to prevent the emission of soot from oil stoves. If a vessel’s oil stove emits soot that settles onto or touches another vessel, the owner or operator of the vessel from which the soot came shall face a correctional citation, and if not corrected shall pay the fine imposed in Section 13.12.050(D). A third offense of emission of soot from an oil stove shall be declared a nuisance. (Ord. 15-14 § 4 (part), 2015: Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.13.030 Abatement or disposal.

A.    Nuisances described under this chapter constituting a clear and present danger to the public health, safety or general welfare may be summarily abated without notice prior to impoundment subject to Section 13.14.050.

B.    Vessels declared nuisances which do not constitute a clear and present danger to the public health, safety or general welfare may be removed, impounded and disposed of as provided in Section 13.14.040.

C.    Other nuisances under Sections 13.13.010 through 13.13.025 may be impounded and disposed of by destruction, private sale, or any other means deemed reasonable by the harbormaster. Such disposition is to be made without liability of the city to the owner of the nuisance. 

(Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.13.040 Abandoned property.

Any vessel in the Sitka harbor system which is abandoned but has not been declared a nuisance may be impounded, sold or otherwise disposed of as provided in AS 30.30. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.13.060 Floating objects.

All vessels, watercraft, logs, piling, building material, scows, houseboats or any other article of value found adrift within the Sitka harbor system may be taken in charge by the harbormaster and may be subject to the reclamation by the owner thereof on payment by him to the city and borough of any expenses incurred by the city and borough, and in case of a failure to reclaim may be sold or disposed of as abandoned property. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.13.070 No custody of nuisances.

The Sitka harbor system shall not accept ownership or custody of nuisance or abandoned vessels or any nuisance as declared under Sections 13.13.010 through 13.13.025 unless expressly accepted by the harbormaster in writing. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


Chapter 13.14 VESSEL IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION

Sections: 

13.14.010    Impoundment of boats or vessels for violations.

13.14.020    Storage charge.

13.14.030    Notice to owner.

13.14.040    Right to preimpoundment hearing.

13.14.050    Post-impoundment notice and hearing.

13.14.060    Appeals.

13.14.070    Notice of disposition.

13.14.080    Form of disposition.


13.14.010 Impoundment of boats or vessels for violations.

The harbormaster may, pursuant to this section, impound a vessel by immobilizing it or removing or having it towed from the water and placed in city and borough or commercial storage with all expenses and risks of haul-out and storage to be borne by the owner of the vessel. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.14.020 Storage charge.

The owner or person entitled to possession of a vessel impounded by the city and borough shall be subject to and liable for actual storage charge and shall be subject to and liable for all costs incurred by the city and borough by reason of the impounding or removal. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.) 


13.14.030 Notice to owner.

Except as provided in Section 13.13.030(A), at least thirty days prior to impounding any vessel, the city and borough shall cause to be posted on the vessel, in the harbormaster’s office, in the City Hall and on the bulletin board at the United States Post Office, notice of such action to be taken by the city and borough. A copy of the notice shall be mailed to the owner, operator or agent of the vessel at his last known address, which address shall be the same as that furnished in accordance with the provisions of Section 13.08.005. The notice shall contain the name and/or number of the vessel, the name and address, if known, of the owner and the location of vessel. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.14.040 Right to preimpoundment hearing.

A.    Except as provided in Section 13.13.030(A), the owner of a vessel or person entitled to possession of the vessel has the right to a preimpoundment administrative hearing to determine whether there is probable cause to impound the vessel if the owner or person entitled to possession of the vessel files a written demand for such a hearing with the municipal clerk within fifteen days after the mailing of the notice required by Section 13.14.030.

B.    A hearing shall be conducted before a hearing officer designated by the municipal administrator within forty-eight hours of receipt of a written demand for a preimpoundment hearing from the person seeking the hearing unless such person waives the right to a speedy hearing. Saturdays, Sundays and city and borough holidays are excluded from the calculation of the forty-eight-hour period. Preimpoundment hearing request forms are available at the harbormaster’s office.

C.    The hearing officer shall be someone other than the persons who will direct the impounding and storage of the vessel. The sole issue before the hearing officer shall be whether there is probable cause to impound the vessel in question. “Probable cause to impound” shall mean such a state of facts as would lead a person of ordinary care and prudence to believe that there was a breach of law rendering the vessel subject to impoundment. The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in an informal manner and shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence.

D.    The person demanding the hearing shall carry the burden of establishing his right to possession of the vessel in question. The harbormaster shall carry the burden of establishing that there is probable cause to impound the vessel.

E.    After the preimpoundment hearing, the hearing officer shall prepare a written decision and certificate of probable cause if probable cause exists. A copy of the decision and the certificate shall be provided to the harbormaster, the vessel owner, and the person demanding the hearing. The decision of the hearing officer is final.

F.    Failure of the owner or person entitled to possession of the vessel to request or attend a scheduled preimpoundment hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to such hearing.

G.    Upon receipt of a certificate of probable cause, the harbormaster may proceed with impoundment and disposition of the vessel by removal, sale or destruction as authorized by this chapter. 

(Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.) 


13.14.050 Post-impoundment notice and hearing.

A.    Unless otherwise provided, the procedure set forth in this section shall apply whenever a vessel has been impounded or removed or a nuisance vessel abated pursuant to Section 13.13.030(A) or the preimpoundment hearing procedures under Section 13.14.040 were not followed.

B.    When action is taken to impound, remove, or otherwise abate a nuisance vessel that poses clear and present danger to the public health, safety or general welfare, notice shall be personally delivered or mailed to the owner of the vessel, if the name and location of the owner is known, within twenty-four hours after the impoundment, removal or abatement.

C.    The owner of the vessel or person entitled to possession of the vessel has a right to a post-impoundment hearing if that person submits a written demand for a post-impoundment hearing to the municipal clerk within fifteen days after the city and borough mailed the notice of impoundment.

D.    A post-impoundment hearing shall be conducted before a hearing officer designated by the municipal administrator within forty-eight hours of receipt of a written demand for a post-impoundment hearing from the person seeking the hearing unless such person waives the right to a speedy hearing. Saturdays, Sundays and city and borough holidays are excluded from the calculation of the forty-eight-hour period. Post-impoundment hearing request forms are available at the harbormaster’s office.

E.    A post-impoundment hearing officer shall determine whether there was probable cause to impound the vessel. If the hearing officer determines that there was not probable cause to impound the vessel, the vessel shall be released to the owner without payment of the towing, storage or other accrued storage, impoundment, and abatement charges or the owner shall be entitled to a refund or reimbursement of the charges if they were paid. If the hearing officer determines that there was probable cause for the impoundment of the vessel, the harbormaster may proceed to dispose of the vessel as provided in this chapter.

F.    Failure of the owner or person entitled to possession of the vessel to request or attend a scheduled post-impoundment hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to such hearing. 

(Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.14.060 Appeals.

Any appeal from the decision by the hearing officer in a preimpoundment or post-impoundment hearing must be filed within thirty days of the decision to the Alaska Superior Court at Sitka in accordance with Alaska Rules of Appellate Procedure. (Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.14.070 Notice of disposition.

A.    After impounding a nuisance vessel, the city and borough shall publish a notice of disposition once in a newspaper of general circulation and, if possible, post a notice of disposition on the vessel at least thirty days before disposing of the vessel.

B.    A duplicate of the notice must be served by certified mail, with return receipt, on:

1.    The registered owner of the vessel, if known, at the address on record with the United States Coast Guard; and

2.    All lienholders who have filed a financing statement indexed in the name of the registered owner, or who are shown on the records of a state agency or the United States Coast Guard.

C.    The notice of disposition must include a description of the vessel, the name and/or number of the vessel, if any, the name and address of the owner, if known, the location of the vessel, and the means of disposition. If a public auction will be held, the location, date, and time of the auction shall be included in the notice of disposition. 

(Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.14.080 Form of disposition.

A.    If the vessel is not repossessed within thirty days after the publication or mailing of the notice required under Section 13.14.070, the vessel may be disposed of by negotiated sale except that when two or more prospective purchasers indicate an interest in purchasing the vessel, the vessel will be sold at public auction to the highest bidder. The city and borough may conduct the public auction under this chapter or execute the city and borough’s lien against the vessel in federal court and subject the vessel to a public auction conducted by the U.S. Marshals Service.

B.    The proceeds of any sale of the vessel at a public auction under this chapter shall be first applied to the costs of conducting the sale, then to impoundment fees and storage charges, and the balance, if any, shall be forwarded to the registered owner of the vessel, if the owner can be found. If the owner cannot be found, the balance shall be deposited with the commissioner of the state of Alaska Department of Administration and shall be paid out in accordance with state law. The proceeds of any sale of the vessel at a public auction sanctioned by federal law shall be dispersed in accordance with federal law. A lienholder shall receive priority of payment from the balance of the proceeds to the extent of the lien. A registered owner has one year to make a claim for the remaining proceeds from the sale.

C.    If no prospective purchaser indicates a desire to purchase the vessel within thirty days after the publication or mailing of the notice required under Section 13.14.070, the vessel may be disposed of as junk, donated to a government agency, or destroyed.

D.    Any disposition of the vessel is to be made without liability of the city and borough, its employees or agents to the owner, operator or lienholder of the vessel. 

(Ord. 14-07 § 4 (part), 2014.) 


Chapter 13.15 FLOAT HOMES

Sections: 

13.15.010    Floating homes.

13.15.020    Occupancy.

13.15.030    Development standards.

13.15.040    Construction.

13.15.050    Safety.

13.15.080    Moorage identification.

13.15.090    Parking.


13.15.010 Floating homes.

A.    General. Every floating home constructed, erected, enlarged, altered, conveyed, or moved into the jurisdictional limits of the harbor system after the effective date of this code shall be in compliance with this chapter and other pertinent laws and ordinances. 

B.    Permits Required. Prior to placement of a floating structure, the owner shall apply for a permit from the building official. The owner shall furnish the building official with a location drawing, showing the general dimensions of the structure and its proposed place of location. The structure must comply with relevant sections of Title 19. 

C.    Every floating home must gain the necessary permits in order to moor, including but not limited to:

1.    Department of Environmental Conservation;

2.    Environmental Protection Agency.

(Ord. 14-22A § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.15.020 Occupancy.

A float home shall contain no more than one dwelling unit and may not be used for business/commercial purposes unless approved in the moorage agreement. (Ord. 14-22A § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.15.030 Development standards.

A.    The dimensions of the floating structure must comply with Section 19.15.020.

B.    Floating homes:

1.    May be up to two stories with a maximum height of thirty feet;

2.    Must have a 5:12 pitched roof; gable style; one-foot minimum eaves;

3.    Must have bevel lap siding, side wall shingle of wood or other approved material;

4.    Doors and windows shall be wrapped with a minimum three-and-one-half-inch trim; and

5.    Construction must have the intent to enhance the aesthetic of the harbor environment.

C.     The architecture of the structure must have the intent of enhancing the aesthetics of the harbor environment while being in compliance with the building safety code. In keeping with this intent, architectural deviations from subsection B of this section may be approved by an ad hoc committee appointed by the administrator. Such deviations must be in compliance with relevant sections of Title 19.

The ad hoc committee will be composed of:

1.    One planning commission member;

2.    One port and harbors commission member;

3.    One public works staff member;

4.    One planning department staff member;

5.    One member at-large.

(Ord. 14-22A § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.15.040 Construction.

All construction must comply with application sections in Title 19. (Ord. 14-22A § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.15.050 Safety.

Safety equipment within a float home shall include one fire extinguisher of a type and in a location to be established by the building official, one axe for cutting mooring lines, and one life ring thirty inches in diameter with at least twenty-five feet of line. (Ord. 14-22A § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.15.080 Moorage identification.

A float home shall have prominently affixed to it a numbered address for identification. (Ord. 14-22A § 4 (part), 2014.)


13.15.090 Parking.

Off-street parking spaces shall be available on a first-come basis. (Ord. 14-22A § 4 (part), 2014.)


Chapter 13.16 COMMERCIAL MARINE TRADE PERMITS 

Sections:

13.16.010    Introduction. 

13.16.020    Permit required. 

13.16.030    Rules and regulation. 

13.16.040    Enforcement and penalties. 

13.16.050    Use of funds. 


13.16.010 Introduction. 

The city and borough owns and operates the harbor system which is under the authority of the harbormaster. This chapter intends to capture all locations where a commercial marine trade permit will be required for operation at designated harbors and designated harbor work areas, as defined in Chapter 13.04. In adopting this chapter, the city and borough is exercising its proprietary interests as an owner and operator of all city and borough owned property. Nothing in this chapter, however, limits the city and borough’s ability to further exercise its proprietary powers as it deems necessary to protect its interests or those of the public. (Ord. 18-52S § 4 (part), 2018.)


13.16.020 Permit required. 

A.    General. No person shall conduct, offer to conduct, solicit to conduct, or take orders to conduct commercial marine trade services in designated harbors or designated harbor work areas, except as authorized by a valid permit obtained from the city and borough pursuant to this chapter. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be called a “commercial marine trade permit.”

B.    Terms. An annual commercial marine trade permit shall be valid for the period from January 1st of each calendar year through December 31st of the same calendar year, unless sooner revoked or terminated. A commercial marine trade permit, or any rights or privileges thereunder, may not be assigned or transferred. Acceptance of a permit by the permittee shall constitute an agreement and acknowledgment by such permittee that the permittee has no property right in the permit. Acceptance of a permit by the permittee shall constitute an agreement and acknowledgment by such permittee that the permittee shall indemnify and hold the city and borough, its elected and appointed officers, its employees, and its agents harmless from and against any and all loss, damage or expense for any injury to or death of any person or persons, or for damage to property, resulting from or arising out of any act or omission of such permittee, or any of the permittee’s employees, agents, representatives, customers, or contractors. The city and borough, its elected and appointed officers, its employees, and its agents make no representations concerning and assume no responsibility for or regarding any services sold or activities by any permittee, or any of permittee’s employees, agents, representatives, customers, or contractors.

C.    Application. A person or entity seeking a permit shall file a written application on a form provided by the city and borough. The application shall contain the following information:

1.    Name, mailing address, and telephone number of the applicant and all principals;

2.    Name, mailing address and telephone number of the operations manager;

3.    Type of commercial marine trade services to be provided; and

4.    An acknowledgment by the applicant that applicant agrees to be bound by all of the terms, conditions and provisions set forth in this chapter, and such additional rules and regulations established by the harbormaster.

D.    Insurance. Each permittee shall at all times during the period of operations maintain a current commercial general liability insurance policy in the amount of not less than one million dollars combined single limit, which policy shall name the city and borough, its elected and appointed officers, its employees, and its agents as additional insured. The policy shall not contain any self-insured retention, and shall include a provision requiring written notification to be given to the city and borough by the insurance company not less than thirty days before the policy is canceled, modified, or terminated for any reason. Permittees shall submit a copy of the policy, or, at the option of the city and borough, other satisfactory proof of insurance, prior to operations under the permit. 

E.    Issuance of Permit. The harbormaster shall grant the application upon finding that the applicant is fit, willing, and able to comply with the law. The permit shall state the name and address of the permittee, the date of issuance and such additional terms, conditions, provisions and limitations. A decision to deny an application for a permit may be appealed by the applicant to the city and borough administrator no later than seven days after such denial is delivered to the applicant. A letter sent to the applicant’s mailing address by first class mail shall constitute delivery. An appeal from the decision of the city and borough administrator may be taken to the superior court for the state of Alaska no later than thirty days after the administrator sends notice of such denial to the applicant. 

F.    Terms of Renewal. Each permit issued under this chapter shall expire on the last day of December following its issuance. Permits once issued and approved prior to start up of operations may be renewed and reissued by the city and borough upon application to the city and borough. Permits will not be renewed unless the finance department certifies that all sales taxes have been paid.

(Ord. 18-52S § 4 (part), 2018.)


13.16.030 Rules and regulation. 

The harbormaster may establish rules and regulations necessary for the safe and orderly operation of the commercial marine trade services authorized by a commercial marine trade permit. The harbormaster shall provide prior written notice to all permittees of such rules and regulations before they may be enforced. (Ord. 18-52S § 4 (part), 2018.)


13.16.040 Enforcement and penalties. 

A.    The harbormaster has the authority to enforce this chapter and the rules and regulations established under this chapter. The harbormaster shall issue a written notice of violation to the permittee or offender, which includes the fine imposed and/or action taken. Within seven days after the date of delivery of written notice of such fine and/or action, the permittee may appeal the decision of the harbormaster to the city and borough administrator or his/her designee. Appeal from the administrator’s decision may be made no later than thirty days after such decision to the superior court for the state of Alaska in Sitka.

B.    The permittee is responsible for all violations of this chapter and the rules and regulations established under this chapter committed by the permittee, its employees, agents, representatives, customers, or contractors. The maximum penalty for violation of this chapter is five hundred dollars. 

C.    Conducting commercial marine trade services in violation of a permit is punishable by a fifty dollar fine for the first offense, a one hundred dollar fine for the second offense, and a fine of up to five hundred dollars for any subsequent offenses as determined by the harbormaster in his/her sole discretion. Such fines are separate from any revocation imposed pursuant to subsection E of this section. For the purposes of this section, prior offenses must be within the previous five years.

D.    Conducting commercial marine trade services without a permit is punishable by a one hundred dollar fine for the first offense, a two hundred dollar fine for the second offense, and a fine of up to five hundred dollars for any subsequent offenses as determined by the harbormaster in his/her sole discretion. For the purposes of this section, prior offenses must be within the previous five years.

E.    Revocation. The harbormaster may at any time revoke a permit issued under this chapter for noncompliance with any term, condition, or provision of the permit, or violation of any provision of this chapter or other applicable local, state, or federal law, ordinance, rule, or regulation. The harbormaster may also revoke such a permit upon a determination that the operation of the permittee is causing a hazard, or a disruption of pedestrian, vehicular, or watercraft traffic, or that the area affected by the permit is required for another public purpose. The permittee shall be given written notice of the proposed revocation of the permit. Within seven days after the date of delivery of written notice of proposed revocation, the permittee may appeal the decision of the harbormaster to the city and borough administrator or his/her designee. Appeal from the administrator’s decision may be made no later than thirty days after such decision to the superior court for the state of Alaska in Sitka.

(Ord. 18-52S § 4 (part), 2018.)


13.16.050 Use of funds. 

All fines collected under the terms of this chapter shall be deposited into the harbor fund. (Ord. 18-52S § 4 (part), 2018.)


Exhibit A for Title 13


[IMAGE]



Title 14 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS

Chapters:

14.04    Ice and Snow Removal

14.12    Signs

14.16    Regulation of Obstruction of Sidewalks

NOTE:    Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this title.


Chapter 14.04 ICE AND SNOW REMOVAL 

Sections:

14.04.010    Water allowed to collect or freeze on sidewalks.

14.04.020    Ice and snow removal.

14.04.030    Enforcement.

14.04.040    Conditions caused by state or municipal action.


14.04.010 Water allowed to collect or freeze on sidewalks.

No owner, agent or person in possession of any house, building or other structure within the city and borough limits of the municipality, shall allow or permit any roof or eaves to drip or leak water, or allow or permit any water to flow or filter from any such property, upon any public sidewalk within the city and borough limits of the municipality, in any manner whereby such dripping, leaking, flowing or filtering water collects or freezes upon any public sidewalk whereby such sidewalk becomes dangerous to life or limb. (Ord. 73-60 § 3 (part), 1973.)


14.04.020 Ice and snow removal.

All property owners are responsible for keeping the portions of sidewalks or public thoroughfares that are adjacent to their property free of snow and ice and clear of all other obstructions or menaces dangerous to life or limb. A reasonable time after snowfall shall be allowed to remove the snow. (Ord. 15-14 § 4 (part), 2015: Ord. 73-60 § 3 (part), 1973.)


14.04.030 Enforcement.

If the owner or person in possession of the property, or the agent thereof, fails or neglects to comply with the provisions of the foregoing, the municipality, by direction of its chief of police or municipal engineer may make such sidewalk or thoroughfare, or any part thereof, safe and passable, and the costs and expenses thereof shall be assessed against the property and the owner thereof. The costs and expenses shall be a lien on the property and shall be enforced and collected as provided by law. (Ord. 73-60 § 3 (part), 1973.) 


14.04.040 Conditions caused by state or municipal action.

Sections 14.04.010 through 14.04.030 shall not apply if the conditions have been directly caused by state or municipal action. (Ord. 73-60 § 3 (part), 1973.)


Chapter 14.12 SIGNS

Sections:

14.12.010    Erection of signs along municipal streets, highways, and sidewalks.


14.12.010 Erection of signs along municipal streets, highways, and sidewalks.

A.    Classification. All streets within the municipality shall be designated as streets or through highways by the streets and roads committee of the assembly.

B.    Signs Located on Right-of-way.

1.    Streets. Signs may be located on the right-of-way of municipal streets provided permission is first obtained from the chief of police after his determination that such sign is of reasonable size and in no way interferes with the necessary line of sight for safe traffic. Permission to maintain any sign on the right-of-way may be revoked without reason given;

2.    Through Highways. There shall be no signs located on the right-of-way of through highways.

C.    Signs and Marquees over Rights-of-way or Sidewalks. There shall be no signs or marquees suspended from structures on private property but which hang over sidewalks or over areas back of the curb line, if there is a curb, or back of the shoulder line, if there is no curb, unless such signs are of reasonable size, do not obstruct vision for the purposes of safe pedestrian or vehicle traffic, the bottom of the sign is at least eight feet above the pedestrian walkway, and the sign is securely and safely constructed. The chief of police is authorized to determine the factors stated above and upon any adverse determination shall give notice to the owners thereof to change the signs or marquees to conform to the provisions of this section within thirty days.

(Amended during 3/15 supplement; Ord. 73-60 § 3 (part), 1973.)


Chapter 14.16 REGULATION OF OBSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS

Sections:

14.16.010    Obstructions prohibited.


14.16.010 Obstructions prohibited.

A.    Notwithstanding any other provision of law, between eight a.m. and six p.m. from May 1st through September 30th of each year it shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow the placement, maintenance, or existence of any fixture or object outside of a building in the eight-foot space starting at the curb and going away from the street on:

1.    Lincoln Street between Baranof Street and Harbor Way;

2.    Harbor Way between Lincoln Street and Harbor Drive;

3.    Harbor Drive between Harbor Way and Lincoln Street;

4.    Lake Street between Lincoln Street and Oja Way;

5.    Katlian Avenue between Lincoln Street and the right-of-way that separates Lots 4 and 6 of Block 1 of United States Survey 2542; or 

6.    Cathedral Way between Seward Street and Lincoln Street.

B.    Violation of this section is an infraction punishable by a fine of two hundred fifty dollars for each day the obstruction exists. In addition to the penalty described in the previous sentence, the city and borough is also authorized to seek an injunction against a violator who has been cited more than twice for a violation of this section.

C.    It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the fixture or object placed or maintained is or consists of: 

1.    A transit facility, traffic control device, sign, street light, public trash receptacle, fire hydrant, bicycle rack, or other structure or object lawfully placed on a sidewalk by or on behalf of the state or the city and borough; and benches as approved by the municipal administrator;

2.    A sign or display while in use as part of a lawfully conducted demonstration or rally; provided, that the object does not obstruct pedestrian traffic; and further provided, that it is used and displayed only during the period of time that the demonstration or rally is attended and ongoing and the attendees remove the sign or display at the conclusion of the demonstration or rally;

3.    An item placed as part of a lawful street closure or street fair;

4.    A sidewalk construction permit issued under applicable law;

5.    Poles, distribution boxes, and related structures of utilities;

6.    Postal deposit and delivery boxes;

7.    A building encroachment or other permanent obstruction that existed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section; or

8.    More than seven feet off the ground.

(Ord. 04-07 § 2, 2004.)


Title 15 PUBLIC UTILITIES Revised 7/19

Chapters:

15.01    Electric Utility Policies Amended Ord. 19-26

15.02    Watershed Control Program

15.04    Sewer System Revised 7/19

15.05    Water System

15.06    Solid Waste Treatment and Refuse Collection Revised 7/19

15.07    Storm Drainage

15.08    Utility Poles

15.12    Private Extensions of Water, Wastewater, and Stormwater Utilities

15.15    Utility Cost Subsidization Program

NOTE:    Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this title.


Chapter 15.01 ELECTRIC UTILITY POLICIES  Amended Ord. 19-26

Sections:

15.01.005    Definitions.

15.01.010    Statement of purpose.

15.01.012    Level of authority and responsibilities.

15.01.020    Electrical rates.  Amended Ord. 19-26

15.01.025    Customer and city rights and responsibilities.

15.01.030    Deposits—Fees.

15.01.035    General requirements.

15.01.040    Service connections.

15.01.045    Line extension.

15.01.050    Subdivisions.

15.01.055    Mobile home parks, RV parks, private marinas and boat docks.

15.01.060    Rental structures.

15.01.065    Motors and controllers.

15.01.070    Undesirable characteristics.

15.01.075    Special equipment.

15.01.080    Customer generation.


15.01.005 Definitions.

“ANSI” means the American National Standards Institute.

“City” means the city and borough of Sitka.

“Employees” means the employees of the city and borough of Sitka charged with the responsibility of delivering services to the citizens and customers while ensuring good business practices, and considering the needs and wants of customers.

“IEEE” means the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.

“NEC” means the National Electrical Code.

“NESC” means the National Electrical Safety Code.

“OSHA” means the Occupational Safety and Health Act.

“Overhead point of delivery” means customers’ service entrance conductors at the weather head.

“RUS” means the United States Department of Agriculture’s Rural Utilities Service.

“SDCG” means the Sitka design and construction guidelines.

“Underground point of delivery” means the supply terminals in a customer’s meter base, current transformer enclosure or supply (line) side of a customer-owned disconnect(s) in a privately owned system.

“Utility” means the city and borough of Sitka electric department. (Ord. 16-38 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 05-15 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


15.01.010 Statement of purpose.

The city wants to treat its citizens in a fair and consistent manner, while recognizing the distinct needs and requirements of each customer. To promote uniformity of service, the city has adopted this customer service policy. This customer service policy provides guidelines for electric service while meeting the requirements of good business practices.

The mission of the utility is to provide its customers with adequate and reliable electric utility service at the lowest cost, consistent with industry standards and sound business principles. It is the customer’s responsibility to install their service conductors and equipment in accordance with the customer service policy and the utility’s Sitka design and construction guidelines (SDCG). It is the customer’s further responsibility to comply with all financial obligations set forth in the customer service policy and related payment plans in order to ensure uninterrupted access to electrical power. The long-term inability to pay electrical charges shall not be the basis for supplying electricity without charge, or for reduced charges, to customers without explicit action of the assembly. (Ord. 16-38 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 05-15 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


15.01.012 Level of authority and responsibilities.

The utility director is responsible for the planning, design, construction, operation and maintenance of the electric utility system. In addition, the utility director is designated as the grievance officer for customers. The utility director is authorized to hear concerns and complaints, and settle disagreements. Only the utility director shall have the authority to direct reconnections of electric service, which has been disconnected for nonpayment or failure to meet agreed-upon terms of customer repayment plans, after normal working hours.

The finance director is responsible for the billing and collection of all fees and charges for electric service. The finance director shall have the responsibility to consider all complaints and concerns regarding electrical billings and disconnections for failure to meet financial payment obligations. The finance director shall have the authority and responsibility to direct the disconnection of electrical service for customers for nonpayment or failure to meet agreed-upon terms of customer repayment plans. Other than stipulated by other sections of this chapter, the finance director shall not have any specific responsibility to notify customers of impending disconnection in advance; furthermore, a customer’s failure to honor specific commitments, either temporally or financially, shall result in immediate disconnection of electrical service without advance notice. The finance director, at his or her discretion, may, but is not required to, authorize the reconnection of any customer’s electric service if the finance director deems it to be in the best interest of the utility and the municipality to do so. The finance director also has the discretion to, but is not required to, waive fees associated with a reconnection.

The discretionary authority of the finance director shall be limited in certain aspects, as follows:

A.    The finance director may extend the due date for any payment up to fourteen days upon completion of a signed agreement with a customer firmly committing to such a date;

B.    The finance director may manage disconnections in such a way as to avoid otherwise disconnections for unmet customer financial obligations of fifty dollars or less;

C.    The finance director may, but shall not be required to, direct that electric service be continued for customers with a serious medical condition for which electrically operated medical machinery is required to operate on a twenty-four-hour basis in order to sustain the life of the customer.

The administrator will create, maintain and update a customer service procedure manual and the Sitka design and construction guidelines (SDCG) procedures manual, both of which will be in compliance with the Sitka General Code. These manuals may be updated by approval of the administrator with assembly notification. These manuals and codes may be more restrictive than the Sitka General Code where the municipal administrator deems necessary. (Ord. 16-38 § 4 (part), 2016.)


15.01.020 Electrical rates.  Amended Ord. 19-26

A.    All electric rates are subject to sales tax if applicable. These rates are effective for all electricity billed after October 1, 2017, regardless of when electricity was consumed. 

    	The assembly shall consider annually an adjustment to the electric rates, based on the Consumer Price Index, at a time when any adjustment could be made effective July 1st of the year applied. An adjustment, if any, shall be based on the prior year annual report for the municipality of Anchorage, Alaska, from the United States Department of Labor and Workforce Development, Consumer Price Index, and determined to be the percent change to the current year from the percent change of the prior year, and will be effective July 1st of any year applied. The first such adjustment date may be July 1, 2018.

B.    Residential Services.

1.    Applicable to all residential customers for all uses in the home or residence, subject to the rules and regulations and customer services policies of the city and utility.

2.    Energy Charges. 

	All kWh from the first billing cycle in October through the last billing cycle in March	$0.120 per kWh

	All kWh from the first billing cycle in April through the last billing cycle in September	$0.192 per kWh

	Customer charge is $20.48 per month

C.    General Service—Small.

1.    Applicable to all nonresidential customers for all uses, including lighting, heating and power, when the electricity consumed in the preceding twelve months is less than one hundred thousand kWh and has a measured demand of less than fifty kW, subject to the rules, regulations and customer service policies of the utility and the city. Typical customers in this class could include: restaurants, retail vendors, churches, fueling stations, and service industries.

2.    Energy Charges. 

	All kWh from the first billing cycle in October through the last billing cycle in March	$0.1180 per kWh

	All kWh from the first billing cycle in April through the last billing cycle in September	$0.1880 per kWh

	Customer charge is $40.95 per month

3.    Demand Charges. 

	First 25 kW	No charge

	Over 25 kW	$5.88 per kW

D.    General Service—Large.

1.    Applicable to all nonresidential customers for all uses, including lighting, heating and power, when the electricity consumed in the preceding twelve months is equal to or greater than one hundred thousand kWh or has a measured demand equal to or greater than fifty kW, subject to the rules, regulations and customer service policies of the utility and the city. Typical customers in this class could include: grocery stores, industrial users, and seafood processing facilities.

2.    Energy Charges. 

	All kWh	$0.1450 per kWh

	Customer charge is $63.00 per month

3.    Demand Charges. 

	First 25 kW	No charge

	Over 25 kW	$5.88 per kW

E.    General Service—Public Authority.

1.    Applicable to all noncommercial and nonresidential customers for all uses, including lighting, heating and power, subject to the rules, regulations and customer service policies of the utility and the city. Typical customers in this class could include: schools, tribal governments, and other public government buildings.

2.    Energy Charges. 

	All kWh	$0.1470 per kWh

	Customer charge is $47.25 per month

3.    Demand Charges. 

	First 25 kW	No charge

	Over 25 kW	$5.88 per kW

F.    Boat Service.

1.    Applicable to separately metered boats, lights, heaters, pumps or other uses.

2.    Energy Charges.

	All kWh from the first billing cycle in October through the last billing cycle in March	$0.120 per kWh

	All kWh from the first billing cycle in April through the last billing cycle in September	$0.1920 per kWh

	Customer charge is $20.48 per month

G.    Street and Security Light Service.

1.    The utility will only install, at the expense of the customer, yard or security lights which can be attached to existing poles which are the property of the utility.

2.    Rate per Month. This fee is in addition to the actual installation charges required for installing the desired fixture.

Monthly unmetered street or security light energy rate is calculated as follows:

	(0.482 kWh per lamp watt) times (the wattage of the lamp) = kWh per month.

	Example: 0.482 kWh x 100 watt lamp = 48 kWh per month.

	Monthly energy rate is: kWh per month times $0.1964 per kWh.

	48 kWh per month x $0.1964/kWh = $9.43 per month energy rate.

	Typical lamp energy rates:

	70 watt	$6.62 per month

	100 watt	$9.42 per month

	150 watt	$14.12 per month

	175 watt	$16.50 per month

	250 watt	$23.56 per month

	400 watt	$37.88 per month

	1,000 watt	$94.63 per month

The above costs include the cost of maintenance of the unmetered street and security lights.

3.    Previously Installed Security Lights. Customers found to be benefitting from a previously installed security light shall have the option of removal of the light at no charge.

4.    A street light may be installed and maintained by the city provided it is for the purpose of public safety. If a light is requested by a customer, it is the responsibility of the customer to show that concurrence is reached by all affected neighbors.

H.    Controlled Service Interruptible Load—Large Consumer.

1.    Applicable to Interruptible Loads Greater Than One Hundred Kilowatts. The customer must have written approval from the city and borough electric department for an alternative system. Loads must be new, not conversions of existing loads. Associated equipment utilized by the alternative firm portion of the load, such as electric fans and pumps used in the distribution of heat, shall be wired separately from the controlled service so as not to be interrupted.

2.    Character of Service. Interruptible without notice, and available only when there is a surplus of hydroelectric energy—alternating current sixty cycles, single-phase or three-phase. Characteristics depend upon available circuits.

3.    Rate per Month. Basic customer charge for each month or portion of a month: two hundred dollars.

    	Energy Charge. Conceptually, the energy charge for all kilowatt-hours shall be adjusted monthly so as to be no more than ninety percent of the equivalent average price paid by the state of Alaska or the city and borough of Sitka, whichever is lower, for No. 2 fuel oil delivered in Sitka.

    	The energy charge calculation will be performed by multiplying 0.0317 times the average price paid two calendar months prior by the state of Alaska or the city and borough of Sitka, whichever is lower, for No. 2 fuel oil delivered in Sitka. This factor assumes an overall oil heating system efficiency of seventy percent and a heat equivalent of fuel oil of one hundred thirty-eight thousand five hundred ninety-nine BTU per gallon. The maximum energy charge for all kilowatt hours under this rate shall be eleven and fifty-five one hundredths cents per kilowatt hour.

    	Example 1: If the city and borough’s price for No. 2 fuel oil is one dollar and twenty cents per gallon, the rate would be 0.0317 times one dollar and twenty cents equals three and eighty hundredths cents per kilowatt hour.

    	Example 2: If the city and borough’s price for No. 2 fuel oil is four dollars and twenty cents per gallon, the rate would be 0.0317 times four dollars and twenty cents equals thirteen and thirty-one hundredths cents per kilowatt hour. However, due to the maximum energy charge, the energy charge in this case would be eleven and fifty-five one hundredths cents.

    	In the event that the customer must utilize interruptible energy when it is considered not available, energy will be provided at a penalty rate.

4.    Penalty Rate. The penalty rate will be equal to one and one-half times the firm rate. Penalty rates will be in effect when the city and borough has acted to interrupt the customer’s controlled service load but the customer chooses not to be interrupted. If the customer chooses to not be interrupted, they will forfeit the ability to continue to participate in the program, unless the city administrator determines that a true emergency had occurred.

5.    Temporary Incentive Rate. When it is in the best interest of the city and borough of Sitka, the city administrator may negotiate a temporary incentive rate with individual customers to encourage new capital investment which increases or adds new interruptible customers. In no case will the temporary rate be applied to a customer for more than ten years.

6.    Control Criteria. Electrical loads are subject to interruption as deemed necessary by the city and borough. Typical conditions could include peak loading, hydroelectric generation shortages, maintenance or other emergencies. The city and borough will provide customers with five days’ notice for planned interruptions. For unplanned interruptions, the city and borough will provide as much notice as practicable.

7.    Service Connection. Consumer is to install metering equipment separate from the normal continuous service connection, which meter may be a submeter of the firm service meter, and install an electrically operated switch or circuit breaker that can only be operated by the utility. The specific metering and circuit switching equipment design for interruptible service is subject to review and approval by the utility.

8.    Special Provisions.

a.    The city and borough of Sitka shall not be liable for loss or damage caused by interruption of service. The city and borough of Sitka will not be responsible for start-up or operations of the customer’s alternative system.

I.    Fuel Surcharge. A fuel surcharge shall be implemented to recover the utility’s costs of supplemental diesel generation in excess of budgeted funds for projected diesel operations. The costs of supplemental diesel generation to be recovered include fuel oil, lubricating oil, filters, labor, and other ancillary costs in excess of budgeted funds. The fuel surcharge will be levied as a per kilowatt hour (kWh) rate and will be calculated as follows: the quarterly projected cost of supplemental diesel operations which exceeds budgeted diesel operations divided by quarterly projected kWh sales. KWh sales projections will be kWh sales for the same period from the previous fiscal year times a load growth factor. The fuel surcharge will be recovered over a twelve-month period. The utility will maintain a balancing account to match revenues from the fuel surcharge with actual supplemental generation expenses, and will adjust this account on a quarterly basis. Any surplus in the balancing account at the end of a recovery period will be retained by the utility and will be utilized exclusively to reduce future fuel surcharges. Any deficit in the balancing account at the end of a recovery period will be added to the estimated costs to be recovered in the next recovery period. Fuel surcharges may be recalculated and changed during any quarter upon approval of the municipal administrator due to emergencies or other unforeseen circumstances.

    	Kilowatt hours sold on an interruptible service basis or for street lights are not subject to a fuel surcharge. 

J.    Determination of Demand. The billing demand shall be the maximum average kilowatt load used by the customer for any period of fifteen consecutive minutes during the billing period as indicated by a demand meter.

K.    Tax Provision. Any taxes levied are in addition to the electric rates and fees charged.

L.    Resale of Energy. The utility will not allow the resale of energy or another person and/or organization to connect to or share the customer’s electric service.

    	Landlords may allow common tenants of the same physical structure to share electrical service under one landlord account.

M.    Power Factor. The customer agrees to maintain unity power factor as nearly as possible. Unless specifically agreed to in writing, the utility shall not be obligated to deliver power to the customer at any time at a monthly average power factor below ninety-five hundredths lagging. The customer will be given ample time to bring the power factor into compliance which shall not exceed six months from the time of official notification by the utility or make other arrangements with the utility. The utility may bill for all kVarh in excess of ninety-five hundredths average power factor for the billing period at the rate of nine and forty-five hundredths cents per kVarh.

N.    Energy Assistance Fund. An energy assistance fund is hereby established to provide an opportunity for city and borough of Sitka electric customers to make a voluntary monthly contribution to a fund that will provide limited financial assistance to customers. The intent of the program is to help provide emergency financial assistance to customers to pay electric utility bills. The program will be administered by the Salvation Army.

O.    Reserved.

P.    Commercial Electric Rate Temporary Incentive Program—New Commercial Customers or Existing Commercial Customers with a New Load.

1.    The administrator may authorize and approve a temporary incentive electric rate for a new commercial customer or an existing commercial customer with a new load. The customer must submit an application and qualify for the rate.

2.    To apply, the customer must submit an application to the electric department, on a form supplied by the electric department. The application must include a power system “one-line” diagram of the proposed new load, along with an estimate of the annual kWh for the proposed new load stamped by a certified Alaska engineer.

3.    To qualify, the customer must meet the following requirements:

a.    The load for the proposed new service must be new, not a conversion of an existing load;

b.    The annual customer billings for the proposed new service, as estimated by the electric department under the existing general service rate service class, must exceed seventy-five thousand dollars per year; and

c.    The customer must be commercial.

4.    Once the customer is qualified, the administrator must authorize the application by finding that granting a temporary incentive rate is in the best interests of the city and borough and that the rate does not create an unreasonable competitive advantage over existing commercial customers.

5.    Once the application is authorized by the administrator, the electric department shall negotiate a temporary incentive electric rate agreement with the customer; and, when signed by the customer, it shall be submitted to the administrator for approval by signature. In no case will the rate be applied to a customer for more than three years. In all agreements, the customer shall be required, at the customer’s expense, to provide a separate meter and a new service connection.

6.    Upon signing the agreement, the administrator shall provide the assembly with a copy of the agreement. A copy of the agreement shall be available to the public at all times through the municipal clerk at the Sitka City Hall.

7.    Once the agreement is approved by the administrator, the customer shall request a connection from the utility office, advise the attending utility officer that the new service is a “temporary incentive electric rate” class, and is required to provide the attending utility officer a copy of the agreement. The electric department shall be responsible for terminating the rate pursuant to the terms of the agreement.

8.    If the customer fails to install or operate the new service equipment according to the approved power system “on-line” diagram, or otherwise comply with the approved agreement, the temporary incentive electric rate may be revoked by the administrator upon thirty days’ prior written notice to the customer.

(Ord. 18-39 § 4, 2018; Ord. 17-39S § 4, 2017; Ord. 17-06S § 4, 2017; Ord. 17-05S § 4, 2017; Ord. 16-38 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 15-23 § 4, 2015; Ord. 13-39 § 4, 2013; Ord. 13-28 § 4, 2013; Ord. 13-06 § 4, 2013; Ord. 12-20 § 4 (part), 2012; Ord. 11-37 § 4, 2011; Ord. 06-40 § 4(A), 2006; Ord. 06-13 § 4(A), 2006; Ord. 05-45 § 4(A) (part), 2005; Ord. 05-15 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


15.01.025 Customer and city rights and responsibilities.

A.    Customer Responsibilities.

1.    New customers establish credit in one of these ways:

a.    Provide proof of twelve months of good payment history with another utility.

b.    Provide acceptable surety bond or letter of credit (commercial account only).

c.    Provide a cash deposit.

d.    Be an existing city customer with a good payment history.

2.    Allow utility personnel access to property to set up and maintain service.

3.    Customers must pay their bill by the due date shown on each monthly bill or a finance charge will be applied. Payments received on the due date must be made in person at the city customer service desk or by direct phone contact with the city customer service representative. If a customer has agreed to make an extra payment towards past due balances in conjunction with a payment plan, such payments must also be made by the due date on each monthly bill.

    	It is the customer’s responsibility to ensure that customer service personnel are notified in advance of a customer’s inability to fully pay all charges and fees by the date on which they are due, as indicated on the utility bill. Utility customer service personnel shall have no obligation to proactively inform customers of consequences of failure to fully pay charges when due, or of impending disconnections of electrical service unless otherwise specifically stated elsewhere in this chapter.

    	It is the customer’s responsibility to ensure that all individuals who have need to inquire about, or manage the details of, a customer’s account are added to that account. Customer service personnel may not release account information to individuals who are not authorized to obtain such information.

4.    Notify customer service of another person or customer who should receive any notice of service interruption for nonpayment of bills.

5.    Notify customer service if there is someone in the household who is seriously ill, handicapped or on a life support system.

6.    Notify customer service of questions or complaints about service.

7.    The customer must be aware of city-owned property at the customer’s home or business and take all reasonable and proper precautions to prevent damage to it. In the event that the city-owned property is damaged because of the customer’s negligence, the utility will charge the customer the actual costs of replacement or repair.

8.    Install, maintain and repair wiring inside the customer’s premises.

9.    The customer must notify the city when electric use changes may make him/her eligible for a rate change.

10.    The customer must ensure that no damage occurs with the initiation, termination or change of utility service requested past the point of city connection.

11.    The customer will not permit any person, except as authorized by the utility, to make any connections, repairs or changes to service drops, vaults, splice boxes, equipment or any unmetered portion of the service serving the property which is owned by the utility.

12.    When a change of occupancy (tenant or owner) takes place on any premises being serviced by the utility, notice of such change shall be given within ten days prior to such change. The outgoing customer will be held responsible for any and all charges for electrical services supplied, to include charges for disconnection and reconnection for nonpayment until such notice has been received by the finance utility.

B.    Customer Rights.

1.    A customer has a right to request his/her deposit be refunded if he/she establishes credit by other means, maintains an excellent credit rating for one year or discontinues service from the city. 

2.    If the customer is notified of an impending disconnection for nonpayment, he/she has a right to request installment payments designed to pay the account in full according to an agreement at the discretion of the city’s finance director.

3.    The customer has a right to request a review by the city’s finance director of any complaint.

C.    City Responsibility.

1.    Refund the customer’s deposit if conditions are met.

2.    Give written notice fifteen working days before service is interrupted for failure to pay (the customer’s bill contains the fifteen-day notice). The notice will respect a customer’s right to privacy regarding publication of debt.

3.    Avoid disconnection for nonpayment after four-thirty p.m. on a Friday, on a weekend or on a holiday.

4.    Avoid disconnection for nonpayment during freezing weather conditions (below thirty-two degrees Fahrenheit).

5.    Provide and explain rate schedules, how meters are read and other additional reasonable information.

6.    Respond to questions or complaints from customers. The city may not agree with the complaint but pledges prompt, courteous and honest answers within one day of the complaint.

7.    Provide available historic billing and usage information for a customer’s account when requested by the customer.

D.    City Rights.

1.    To access the city’s utility facilities on customer’s premises.

2.    To receive notice of changes in address, status of utility service or problems with utility service.

3.    To receive timely payment for services delivered to a home or business.

4.    To take legal action regarding equipment tampering or financial delinquencies by the customer.

(Ord. 16-38 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 05-15 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


15.01.030 Deposits—Fees.

A.    Deposits are required as follows:

1.    Two hundred fifty dollars for residential.

2.    Three hundred fifty dollars for commercial.

3.    Seventy-five dollars for harbor.

B.    Service Charges.

1.    There will be a separate ten dollar service charge for each of the following types of electrical services:

a.    Establishing a new customer service account.

b.    Transferring an existing customer service account to a new location. (Example: boat slips, residential, commercial.)

2.    There shall be a separate fifty dollar charge for each of the following types of electrical services:

a.    Connecting or disconnecting existing electrical service due to a customer request during the hours of eight a.m. and four p.m., Monday through Friday.

b.    Disconnecting or reconnecting electrical service disconnected due to nonpayment during the hours of eight a.m. and four p.m., Monday through Friday.

3.    There will be a separate two hundred dollar service charge for the following type of electrical service:

a.    An electrical service trouble call during the hours of eight a.m. and four p.m., Monday through Friday, if determined to be the responsibility or fault of the customer.

4.    There will be a separate five hundred dollar service charge for the following types of emergency electrical services:

a.    Emergency reconnection of electrical service disconnected due to nonpayment outside the hours of eight a.m. to four p.m., Monday through Friday including holidays. Any emergency reconnection of electrical service due to nonpayment shall be authorized in advance by the utility director and shall be contingent upon the availability of service personnel to perform the reconnection and finance personnel to receive and process the service charge.

b.    An electrical service trouble call outside the hours of eight a.m. to four p.m., Monday through Friday, if determined to be the fault or the responsibility of the customer. Payment must be received in advance before electrical service is reconnected after normal working hours due to disconnection for nonpayment or problems which are the fault of the customer. Decisions to reconnect electrical service before receiving payment shall be at the discretion of the utility director. The utility director shall be under no obligation to direct the reconnection of electrical service if finance personnel are unavailable to receive and process service charges.

5.    Work Orders. Customer services are provided and tracked through a work order number assigned to each job. Customers requesting services that require billing shall obtain and sign a work order at the utility customer service desk. The work order authorizes and initiates the project. Tracking of material, labor and equipment and billing is done with the work order.

    	All service charges are subject to sales tax if applicable. All charges will be billed to the customer, except for reconnection due to nonpayment. Service charges for reconnection due to nonpayment must be paid in cash or other legal tender at the city utility customer service desk, 100 Lincoln Street, before service will be reestablished.

C.    Fees—New Services on Existing Distribution Lines. Before the utility will install a new service on existing distribution lines, the customer shall pay all appropriate fees and sales tax. The customer shall contact the electrical department for an estimate of the work. The electrical department shall provide the customer a nonbinding estimate of the work. The customer shall then pay a deposit to the city and borough of Sitka for an amount equal to the estimate prior to the work being performed. Subsequent to the work being completed the city and borough shall invoice the customer for any additional charges not in the estimate or credit will be applied to the customer account.

1.    Clarification. For purposes of these policies, a residential structure is defined as any structure designed for human habitation in which at least fifty percent of the square footage is normally used for human habitation.

2.    New Single Residential Service Fee.

a.    Overhead Service. The customer shall be responsible for the actual cost of installing the service.

b.    Underground Service. The customer shall be responsible for the actual cost of installing the service.

c.    Installation Fees. The fees shall be charged at a rate equivalent to the actual costs including material, labor, design and engineering, equipment, and overhead. A written estimate detailing the estimated cost will be provided upon request. Estimates made by the utility are not binding.

3.    Remodeling Existing Residential Structure Fee. No fee will be charged, provided an upgrade of the service entrance is not required.

4.    Fees for Additions to Existing Residential Structures. The actual cost shall be charged if the construction results in the relocation or replacement of the existing service entrance.

5.    Fees for Replacing Existing Residential Structures. Fees for replacing existing residential structures due to fire, flood or other disaster which destroys the structure shall be charged as follows: The actual cost shall be charged if the construction results in the location or replacement of the existing service entrance.

6.    Fee for Properties Being Served by an Electrical LID. Fees for properties being served by an electrical LID shall be charged as provided for in Title 17.

7.    Residential Service Disconnect/Reconnect Fees for Electrical Service Repair. There shall be a total two hundred dollar service fee charged for a customer-requested disconnect and reconnect of any electrical service at the point of delivery for the purpose of repairing or upgrading the existing service. This fee shall be collected at the time of application for the disconnect.

    	If the service configuration is substantially modified, the customer shall be charged actual cost in lieu of the two hundred dollar fee. Actual cost is to include all labor, materials, equipment and overhead.

8.    All Other Electrical Services. The fees for all other electrical services, including three-phase transformers, submarine cable and services (islands), industrial, commercial, etc., shall be charged at a rate equivalent to the actual cost including material, labor, design and engineering, equipment, and overhead. A written estimate detailing the estimated cost will be provided upon request. Estimates made by the utility are not binding.

D.    Meter Tests. Tests at the request of the customer will be made, and if the meter is found to register within over two percent of the correct value, the customer shall pay a test fee of thirty dollars. If the meter is found to exceed the two percent limit plus or minus, the bill for the preceding twelve months may be adjusted accordingly, and no charge will be made for the testing.

E.    Credit Applications. Credit applications will be available and must be filled out before a customer has electrical services rendered in their name. If it is found that the customer has misinformed or misled the city with false information, the account can be closed without notification until all matters are clarified and adhered to according to the policies of the city. All information furnished on said credit application will be confidential and used only by the city or its assigns.

F.    Vacation Rates. None.

G.    Fees and Charges. All fees, charges, actual costs and/or service charges are based on the average labor, benefits and any administrative or other costs incurred by the city. These rates are subject to annual review.

H.    Actual Costs. Actual costs for vehicles and materials are billing rates plus shipping and overhead per the following: The actual cost for labor is double the employee’s wage per hour, to account for the wages, benefits, employer taxes, and overhead. Subcontractor costs may also be charged if a subcontractor is required. The minimum time charged for vehicle costs and labor is one hour. A written estimate of actual costs is available upon request, in accordance with subsection (C)(8) of this section.

	Vehicle Costs	Billing Rate per Hour

	Pickup/SUV/Van < 1 ton	$28.00

	Truck, flatbed, 1 ton	$34.00

	Chipper	$60.00

	Crane truck, 5 ton	$80.00

	Tractor with backhoe	$90.00

	Service truck, 1-1/2 ton w/bucket	$146.00

	Bucket truck, 65 ft+ reach	$180.00

	Crane truck, 10 ton	$180.00

	Materials

	Cost plus 50% for shipping and warehousing

	Labor

	Double the employee’s wage per hour

	Subcontractor

	Costs charged by subcontractor plus overhead

(Ord. 16-38 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 12-20 § 4 (part), 2012; Ord. 07-22 § 4 (part), 2007; Ord. 07-18 § 4, 2007; Ord. 06-40 § 4(B), 2006; Ord. 06-13 § 4(B), 2006; Ord. 05-15 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


15.01.035 General requirements.

A.    Right of Access. The utility, through its authorized employees or agents, shall have access to its meters and equipment at all reasonable times for the purpose of reading meters and testing, examining, repairing, or replacing any equipment which is the property of the utility. If such equipment is so located that locks must be operated to reach it, the utility shall be supplied with keys to such locks. In cases where locking devices have been installed on customers’ disconnect devices, it is required that emergency municipal personnel, i.e., fire and police, also be supplied keys to such locks.

B.    Application for New Service. Each customer requesting service shall supply the utility with the necessary information to provide the service. This information shall be supplied on an application for service form, available at the utility or customer service desk located at 100 Lincoln Street, Sitka, Alaska. A work order will be opened to provide the service. Large industrial or commercial services and service contracts shall contain such provisions and stipulations as may be necessary or desirable to protect the interests of both the utility and the customer, as determined by the utility director. In the absence of a signed agreement or application for service form, the delivery of service by the utility and its acceptance by the customer shall be deemed to constitute an agreement and acceptance of the policies.

C.    Easements and Rights-of-Way. Where it is required to place equipment, vaults, splice boxes, structures, or other materials owned by the utility associated with providing services, the owner(s) involved with the project shall be required to grant an easement to the city and borough of Sitka electric department. This easement shall include all areas as prescribed by the utility. Utility personnel will forward a copy of the recorded easement to the owner(s). In cases involving islands, tidelands, wetlands, etc., all Corps of Engineers permits and Department of Natural Resources costs will be paid for by the customer. Rights-of-way are also required to be conveyed to the city and borough of Sitka. The grant of utility easement must be complete, signed by the property owner, copied to the city, and recorded by the State Recorder’s Office. The city will pay the recording fees.

D.    Temporary Electrical Service. Temporary service is normally rendered for construction purposes, but may also be rendered to traveling shows, public event displays, etc. Whenever possible, it is recommended that temporary construction services be placed in the permanent location. Where there are existing secondaries of sufficient capacity (also suitable phase and voltage), service will be provided at applicable rates under these conditions:

1.    Provision by the customer of a temporary electric service construction post or construction pole within one hundred feet of existing facilities with suitable protective devices and meter socket;

2.    Payment by the customer must be made in accordance with normal billing procedures for the actual cost of installation and removal; and

3.    Temporary service must be initiated with a work order at the utility customer service desk, 100 Lincoln Street, Sitka, Alaska.

E.    Character of Service. The utility will designate the character of electric service. All service shall be alternating current (AC), sixty hertz. Nominal secondary delivery voltages are one hundred twenty volt, two hundred forty volt single-phase and two hundred forty volt three-phase, for overhead service. Service may also be delivered at one hundred twenty/two hundred eight or two hundred seventy-seven/four hundred eighty volts three-phase grounded wye, only where such secondaries exist. When the size of the load justifies a separate transformer installation, all costs associated with such transformer installation will be borne by the customer. The delivery of one hundred twenty/two hundred eight volts shall be at the option of the utility. In general, delivery voltages and phases will be those available at the point of service. If different phases or voltages are necessary, the costs shall be computed in accordance with the policies set forth herein. To determine the type of service to be supplied, the customer shall consult the utility before proceeding with the installation of wiring or ordering of electrical equipment. Padmount transformer for three-phase service can only be in voltages of one hundred twenty/two hundred eight and two hundred seventy-seven/four hundred eighty volts.

F.    Service Taps. All connections between utility wires and customer wires will be made and removed exclusively by utility-authorized personnel. The utility reserves the right to make all service connections. The connection of utility’s electric service or any alternative thereof by anyone except utility-authorized personnel is prohibited. Violators of this rule will be prosecuted. The user of such a connection shall be presumed to have made or consented to the unauthorized connection and will be responsible for any costs and/or power charges as well as the party making the unlawful connection, unless proven to the contrary.

    	Any tap made ahead of any service equipment for fire pumps, exit lights, control power for the circuit breaker, etc., shall be provided with proper disconnect equipment and over current protection adequate for the service load. Such connections shall be made only where specifically approved by the utility and must be metered, either by the existing or an additional meter.

G.    Pole Attachments. The utility forbids any attachments or work by others on its poles or facilities without specific written authorization. Customers utilizing utility power poles by permission will be required to enter into a joint pole use agreement with the city and borough, and will be required to pay joint pole use fees.

H.    Grounding. The grounding conductor and equipment of the service shall be effectively and permanently grounded in accordance with the latest edition of the NEC or in accordance with the requirements of applicable authorities. Grounding electrodes shall be copper, copper clad, or galvanized steel. Under no circumstances shall a gas, water, or fuel oil piping system be used as the grounding electrode. Metallic riser conduits on the outside of the building and water piping within the building shall be independently grounded.

I.    Objectionable Effects. The utility reserves the right to disconnect service where equipment used by the customer results in objectionable effects upon or interferes with the operation of facilities of the utility, its customers, or another public service company unless the customer discontinues use of such equipment or installs corrective equipment to overcome the objectionable effect or interference. The customer will be charged for the cost to disconnect the service.

J.    Load/Phase Balance. The customer shall balance three-phase loads so there is less than a twenty percent imbalance.

K.    Meter/Meter Seals. Meters shall be provided by the utility and all meter installations and points of access to unmetered wiring on the customer’s premises will be sealed by the utility. All cabinets and equipment enclosures containing unmetered conductors shall be made sealable before the service is energized. Metered and unmetered conductors shall not share the same conduits as raceways.

(Ord. 16-38 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 05-15 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


15.01.040 Service connections.

The administrator shall establish written policies and procedures for customer service connections and shall make this information available to the public. (Ord. 16-38 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 05-15 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


15.01.045 Line extension.

A.    Line extensions may be constructed by the utility or by a contractor. They will become the property of the utility to own and maintain if constructed along a public road or serve more than one customer. All construction must be in compliance with the NESC along with the SDCG. Underground line extensions are prepared by the utility.

B.    Overhead or underground line extensions to subdivisions shall be paid for by the subdivision developer. In the case of multiple owners, agreement between all parties must be documented in writing prior to commencement of work.

C.    The cost of overhead or underground line extensions shall be the responsibility of the customer. These extensions can be constructed by the utility or a contractor; however, they shall become the property of the utility upon being energized and shall be constructed according to these policies.

D.    For underground service locations, the utility shall be consulted in every case before work is started so that it may designate the facility from which the service will be taken, the location of the conduit, and meter location. Precautions must be taken when trenching near other underground facilities or poles to prevent undermining of the pole. The customer or contractor performing the work will be held financially responsible for any damage to utility facilities. Customer-installed conduits and trenches must be inspected and approved by the utility before backfilling.

E.    Utility Pole Replacements or Relocations. If the utility requires a pole to be relocated or replaced, the riser will be reattached at the utility’s expense.

F.    Risers installed on utility-owned poles shall be galvanized rigid steel or utility-approved plastic conduit and brought to a point not less then eight feet nor more than twelve feet above ground line. Two four-inch risers or their space equivalent are the maximum permitted on one pole.

G.    On privately owned poles, the customer shall furnish and install the galvanized steel or utility-approved plastic conduit and mounting straps up to the pole to a point twelve inches below the utility’s secondary conductors.

H.    Relocation of Poles or Equipment. In the event any customer requests their delivery point to be moved or desires a pole or other utility equipment moved, including yard lights, fixtures, transformers and/or other facilities located thereon, for any reason, the utility will, if feasible from an engineering point of view and provided the necessary right-of-way can be obtained, do so and will require the customer to pay an amount sufficient to reimburse the utility for all actual costs including materials, labor, equipment, and overhead. In the event that conditions not defined occur, then the principles and policies as outlined herein and in the extension policy shall be applied.

(Ord. 16-38 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 05-15 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


15.01.050 Subdivisions.

A.    General. All electrical facilities in new subdivisions shall be installed underground per the SDCG.

B.    Services. Underground services will be the responsibility of each customer.

C.    Single Developer. The developer of a subdivision of a parcel of land will be responsible for providing and installing all underground electrical facilities. This includes primary, secondary, transformers, termination cabinets, pull boxes, etc.

(Ord. 16-38 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 05-15 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


15.01.055 Mobile home parks, RV parks, private marinas and boat docks.

Mobile Home Parks, RV Parks, Private Marinas and Boat Docks. The utility will provide metering for individual mobile homes, RV spaces and boat marinas under the current rate structure providing the following conditions are met:

A.    The system owners shall furnish and install a wiring system to connect to the utility facilities via main disconnect(s). This device shall be installed by the customer at a predetermined location set by the utility for the purpose of protection, isolation, sectionalizing, maintenance and testing between privately owned equipment and electric circuits, and municipally owned equipment and electric circuits.

    	This device shall be designed and rated to carry expected load and to open and close all ungrounded conductors of the circuit simultaneously from their source of supply by nonautomatic means and to open all ungrounded conductors of the circuit simultaneously from their source of supply automatically on a predetermined load current or fault current in excess of specified design.

    	Utility maintenance and replacement responsibility terminates at the supply (line) side of the customer-owned disconnect(s).

B.    The system owner shall furnish and install a wiring system connecting each service location with a meter socket and protective device (breaker/disconnect). Such a wiring system and protective device (breaker/disconnect) shall be of adequate capacity to maintain standard current and voltage to each location. Systems are to be installed in accordance with all current codes and requirements.

C.    Whenever a service is disconnected, it shall be brought into compliance with current codes and standards prior to being reenergized.

(Ord. 16-38 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 05-15 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


15.01.060 Rental structures.

A.    Owner Policy. Special conditions may apply to electrical service provided to rental structures. The owner or owner’s representative of such structures may request that the account for the rental structure be placed in “owner status” for the purposes of cleaning and nonoccupancy only. Accounts in owner status are subject to the following conditions:

B.    While in owner’s status, an account will be charged for all electricity consumed, subject to minimum consumption requirements.

C.    The owner/landlord is not required to pay a residential deposit if in good credit standing with the city. Residential deposits will be required, however, from all tenants when the structure is rented.

D.    The owner/landlord must notify the utility customer service desk immediately upon occupancy of a rental unit. If the unit is occupied and the utility customer service desk has not been notified of the occupancy, the owner/landlord is liable and responsible for all electricity charges for the account until such notification is given and the account is switched to the tenants.

E.    Under no circumstances will the owner turn an electrical meter on or off. Meter connects and disconnects will be performed by the utility.

F.    When an owner account is transferred to a tenant, or transferred from a tenant back to an owner, a service charge will be charged to the account.

G.    If a renter is being disconnected for nonpayment of electrical charges, the municipality will notify the owner, if said owner has provided contact information, that service to the rental structure is being disconnected before the physical disconnection occurs.

H.    Upon vacation of the rental structure by tenants the account will automatically be transferred to the landlord/owner. The transfer will be subject to a service charge.

I.    If owner/landlords turn off electric service, they will be liable for any costs that are incurred by the tenants and/or the municipality.

J.    If any owner is disconnected for nonpayment, the municipality will immediately remove the owner status from all of the individual’s owner accounts. Thereafter, each account must individually meet the billing credit policy herein.

K.    If an owner is disconnected for nonpayment and the municipality has not been notified that a tenant has occupied the structure, the owner will be immediately charged for all appropriate services while the structure was occupied, and the account will not be reconnected until all charges are paid in full.

(Ord. 16-38 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 05-15 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


15.01.065 Motors and controllers.

The administrator shall establish written policies and procedures for customer motors and controllers and shall make this information available to the public. (Ord. 16-38 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 05-15 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


15.01.070 Undesirable characteristics.

The utility may refuse or discontinue service to customers who operate equipment which causes detrimental voltage fluctuations (such as, but not limited to, hoists, welders, radio transmitters, X-ray apparatus, elevator motors, compressors and furnaces). The customer must reasonably limit such fluctuations upon request by the utility. Undesirable load characteristics include, but are not limited to, twenty percent unbalanced load between phases, a power factor below ninety percent, or cyclical demand fluctuations produced by the customer’s equipment. The utility may require, as a condition of service, that customers install, at their expense, equipment that will eliminate the undesirable load characteristics. (Ord. 16-38 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 05-15 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


15.01.075 Special equipment.

The administrator shall establish written policies and procedures for customer special equipment connections and shall make this information available to the public. (Ord. 16-38 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 05-15 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


15.01.080 Customer generation.

A.    General. All installations of customers’ generating equipment require adherence to fundamental rules for safeguarding of all personnel and the utility’s equipment. The utility must be consulted before any generating equipment is connected to any circuit which is or can be supplied from the distribution system. This is to assure against any unanticipated backfeed of electricity into the utility’s system.

B.    Standby Generators. This type of generator is for emergency supply for lighting and other load and is usually connected in case of loss of the normal supply. A double throw switch or conductor shall be provided to positively disconnect from the normal supply and transfer all ungrounded conductors of any emergency lighting or power load to the standby generator. Automatic transfer systems must be approved by the utility.

C.    Systems Operated in Parallel with the Utility’s Supply. Customers considering the installation of generating equipment to supply all or a portion of their electrical energy requirements and who wish to arrange for, or continue to receive, service from the utility’s system for their remaining electrical energy requirements and/or for standby service must consult the utility regarding the design, installation, and operation of such generating equipment. This consultation should be done before the customer is committed to a specific system design.

(Ord. 16-38 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 05-15 § 4(A) (part), 2005.)


Chapter 15.02 WATERSHED CONTROL PROGRAM

Sections:

15.02.010    Purpose.

15.02.020    Legal description.

15.02.030    Defacing property.

15.02.040    Sanitation.

15.02.050    Refuse deposit.

15.02.060    Camping restrictions.

15.02.070    Removal of soil, trees or plants.

15.02.080    Building construction—Permit required.

15.02.090    Injury to trees or plants.

15.02.100    Intoxicating beverages.

15.02.110    Enforcement.

15.02.120    Violation—Penalty.


15.02.010 Purpose.

This watershed control program is enacted to comply with Environmental Protection Agency requirements and to protect the watershed for the Sitka water supply. (Ord. 92-1091 § 4 (part), 1992.)


15.02.020 Legal description.

Legal description of the Blue Lake watershed is as follows:

All lands above the Blue Lake Dam and consisting of the following sections (possibly unsurveyed).

T56S, R64E, CRM, Section 1.

T55S, R64E, Sections 1, 2, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 34, 35, 36.

T56S, R65E, Sections 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

T55S, R65E, Sections 1 through 36.

T55S, R66E, Sections 10, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. 

(Ord. 92-1091 § 4 (part), 1992.)


15.02.030 Defacing property.

No person in the watershed shall wilfully mar, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or remove, any building, sign, notice or placard, monument, stake, post or other boundary marker. (Ord. 92-1091 § 4 (part), 1992.)


15.02.040 Sanitation.

No person in the watershed shall throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters or on the slopes constituting the watershed drainage of the watershed of the municipality, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid which will or may result in pollution of the water. Swimming, wading, washing and other forms of water-contact activity are not allowed. (Ord. 92-1091 § 4 (part), 1992.)


15.02.050 Refuse deposit.

No person shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse or other trash in a watershed. (Ord. 92-1091 § 4 (part), 1992.)


15.02.060 Camping restrictions.

A.    For the purposes of this section, “camp” shall mean an open-air location with or without temporary shelter.

B.    No person shall camp on lands comprising the municipal watershed and/or which contribute to the municipal water supply without a permit issued by the city and borough of Sitka. An overnight emergency shall not constitute a violation of this section. 

(Ord. 92-1091 § 4 (part), 1992.)


15.02.070 Removal of soil, trees or plants.

No person in the watershed shall dig or remove any beach sand, whether submerged or not, or any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs, or plants, downed timber or other wood, or materials or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means or agency. (Ord. 92-1091 § 4 (part), 1992.)


15.02.080 Building construction—Permit required.

No person in the watershed shall construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any public service utility into, upon or across such lands, except on special, written permit issued therefor. (Ord. 92-1091 § 4 (part), 1992.)


15.02.090 Injury to trees or plants.

No person in the watershed shall damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the bark of any tree or plant. No person shall attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant or in any way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area. Recreational berry picking and flower gathering is permitted. (Ord. 92-1091 § 4 (part), 1992.)


15.02.100 Intoxicating beverages.

A.    No person shall have brought alcoholic beverages, nor shall any person drink alcoholic beverages at any time within the confines of the watershed.

B.    No person shall enter nor having entered the watershed be under the influence of intoxicating liquor. 

(Ord. 92-1091 § 4 (part), 1992.)


15.02.110 Enforcement.

A.    The police department shall, in connection with its duties by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this chapter.

B.    The police department shall have the authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing or device in the watershed used in violation of this chapter. 

(Ord. 92-1091 § 4 (part), 1992.)


15.02.120 Violation—Penalty.

The penalty for violations of this chapter shall be up to one thousand dollars. (Ord. 92-1091 § 4 (part), 1992.)


Chapter 15.04 SEWER SYSTEM Revised 7/19

Sections:

15.04.010    Definitions.

15.04.020    Unlawful sewage—Disposal methods designated.

15.04.030    When connection to public sewer is required.

15.04.040    Private sewage disposal—Permit and inspection required.

15.04.050    Private sewage disposal—System specifications.

15.04.060    Private sewage disposal—Connection of system to public sewer upon availability.

15.04.070    Private sewage disposal—Owner to operate and maintain.

15.04.080    Private sewage disposal—ADEC may impose additional requirements.

15.04.090    Building sewer connection—Permit and inspection required.

15.04.100    Service connection charge.

15.04.105    Special connection fee district for Sawmill Creek Road Sanitary Sewer Project Phase 2.

15.04.110    Sewer connections—Installation costs—Permit—Inspection.

15.04.120    Bonded contractor’s responsibility.

15.04.130    Sewer service lines—Specifications.

15.04.140    Protection of excavations.

15.04.150    Public sewers limited to sewage.

15.04.160    Substances prohibited in sewers designated.

15.04.170    Grease, oil and sand interceptors.

15.04.180    Substances restricted in public sewer designated—Requirement of preliminary treatment authorized.

15.04.190    Preliminary treatment facilities—Maintenance by owner.

15.04.200    Control points for testing industrial waste.

15.04.210    Provisions not to preclude special arrangements.

15.04.220    CBS sewer service line.

15.04.230    Owner’s sewer service line.

15.04.240    Sewer mains—Damage.

15.04.250    Vandalizing facilities declared disorderly conduct.

15.04.260    Penalties.

15.04.270    Powers and authority of inspectors.

15.04.280    Discontinuance of service by the CBS.

15.04.290    Excessive flows.

15.04.300    Notices.

15.04.310    Appeals.

15.04.320    Rates and fees. Revised 7/19


15.04.010 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“ADEC” means the Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation.

“BOD” (denoting “biochemical oxygen demand”) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at twenty degrees Celsius, expressed in parts per million by weight.

“Building” means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.

“CBS” means the city and borough of Sitka.

“CBS sewer service line” means that portion of a sewer service line that extends from the sewer main to the property line. See graphical representation at the end of this section.

“CBSS” means the city and borough of Sitka standard specifications.

“Combined sewer” means a sewer receiving both surface or roof runoff and sewage.

“Garbage” means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.

“Industrial wastes” means the liquid wastes from industrial processes, as distinct from sanitary sewage.

“Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater.

“Owner” means one who holds a lawful title to the property.

“Owner’s sewer service line” means the sewer service line, including clean-out, extending from the property line to the plumbing of the building being served. See graphical representation at the end of this section.

“Person” means any individual, firm, company, corporation, partnership, association, society or group.

“pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.

“Public sewer system” means the sewer system owned and operated by the CBS.

“Sanitary sewage treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.

“Sanitary sewage works” means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.

“Sanitary sewer” means a sewer system that carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and ground waters are not lawfully admitted.

“Sanitary sewer mains” and “mains” means the pipe laid for the purposes of carrying sewage discharged from service lines.

“Sewage” means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments.

“Sewer service line” means the entire sewer service line connecting the sewer main with the plumbing systems of buildings being served. See graphical representation at the end of this section.

“Storm sewer” or “storm drain” means a sewer that carries storm and surface or roof waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.

“Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering.

Graphical Representation Of:

• Owner’s Sewer Service Line

• CBS Sewer Service Line

• Sewer Service Line
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.020 Unlawful sewage—Disposal methods designated.

A.    It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the CBS, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the CBS, any human or animal excretion, garbage or other objectionable waste.

B.    It is unlawful to discharge into any natural outlet within the CBS, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the CBS, any sanitary sewage, industrial waste or other polluted water, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter and applicable state laws.

C.    Except as provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.030 When connection to public sewer is required.

In the best interest of the health and welfare of the residents of the CBS, the owner of all houses, buildings or other structures designated or used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose, situated within the CBS, and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is located a sanitary sewer of the CBS, is required, at his/her expense, to connect all toilet and wastewater facilities directly with the proper public sewer system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within ninety days after installation; provided, that said public sewer system is within two hundred feet of the property line. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.040 Private sewage disposal—Permit and inspection required.

A.    Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of Section 15.04.030, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter and other regulatory provisions, including ADEC regulations.

B.    Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the CBS building department. The application for such permit shall be made in writing and supplemented by any plans, specifications, ADEC permits, ADEC certificate to construct, and other information as is deemed necessary by the CBS.

C.    A private sewage disposal system shall not be operated until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the CBS, and the owner has provided the CBS with a copy of the ADEC certificate to operate. The agent of the CBS shall be allowed to inspect the construction, and no underground portions shall be covered until such inspection.

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.050 Private sewage disposal—System specifications.

The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all requirements and recommendations of the ADEC. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet unless specifically permitted by the ADEC and the CBS. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.060 Private sewage disposal—Connection of system to public sewer upon availability.

At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with Section 15.04.030, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned by removal or filled with suitable material as required by the ADEC. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.070 Private sewage disposal—Owner to operate and maintain.

The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the CBS, and all such private sewage facilities, as herein provided, shall be the responsibility of the user or owner of the private sewage disposal system, and the CBS is in no way responsible for any maintenance or repair, or stoppage or breakage, nor for any damages resulting therefrom, in such private sewage disposal systems. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.080 Private sewage disposal—ADEC may impose additional requirements.

No statement contained in Sections 15.04.040 through this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the ADEC or the CBS building official. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.090 Building sewer connection—Permit and inspection required.

A.    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the public works department.

B.    When making a sewer connection under a public works department permit, the contractor making the connection shall notify the public works department when the connection is ready for inspection. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the environmental superintendent or his designee.

C.    Swing ties of the connection between the sewer service line and the sewer main and at the junction between the owner’s sewer service line and the CBS sewer service line shall be provided as detailed on the connection permit form.

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.100 Service connection charge.

A.    At the time the applicant files for a connection permit where no service previously existed; or, if the applicant is filing for a change in service connection, or size, or to serve a new structure, the applicant shall submit with the application the service connection charge of seven hundred sixty dollars. This charge is to cover the costs to the CBS of locating the stub-out from the sewer main (if available), inspection of the sewer service line, administrative costs, and permit fees. Upon approval of the connection, the property owner may proceed in accordance with the provisions in Section 15.04.130.

B.    The connection of a sewer service line to a sanitary sewer main located in the state highway right-of-way may be subject to state utility permit fees. Said fees shall be paid by the property owner.

(Ord. 18-27 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 17-21 § 4 (part), 2017; Ord. 16-25 § 4 (part), 2016; Ord. 15-10 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 14-20 § 4 (part), 2014; Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.105 Special connection fee district for Sawmill Creek Road Sanitary Sewer Project Phase 2.

Notwithstanding any other provision of law, there is hereby established a Special Connection Fee District for Sawmill Creek Road Sanitary Sewer Project Phase 2. The boundaries of the district described in the previous sentence are shown in the attached map. Property owners in the district described in this section desiring to connect shall pay a connection fee for each direct or indirect connection to the city and borough system. A direct connection is a connection that is made in the Sawmill Creek Road right-of-way, and an indirect connection is a connection that is made through further subdivision in the future or through multiple connections outside of the right-of-way. For the first three years after the city and borough notifies the property owner by certified letter that Sawmill Creek Road Sanitary Sewer Project Phase 2 is complete, the connection fee is six thousand dollars. The fee will increase by three percent each year after the first three years. To promote connection, the city and borough will finance at two and one-half percent interest the connection fee if the connection is performed no later than one year after the city and borough notifies the property owner by certified letter that Sawmill Creek Road Sanitary Sewer Project Phase 2 is complete. In addition, financing will be available for connection fees assessed as part of the building permit process for new construction. The term shall be twenty years at a fixed interest rate equivalent to the prime rate less two and one-half percent, or three percent, whichever is greater. To avoid mandatory connection, the wastewater treatment systems must be certified by an engineer licensed to practice in the state of Alaska or the system must have been installed within the last ten years and the owner can provide a copy of the original ADEC Certificate to Operate for the system. The ten-year time period will commence from the date of the certified letter the public works office sends stating the sewer project is complete. The certification must be completed within six months of municipal sewer system completion. The certification format shall be approved by ADEC and shall be sealed and signed by the licensed engineer. The certification shall indicate that the system is functioning properly and is not adversely impacting public health. The certification shall include documentation of regular maintenance, including pumping. All active utility accounts in the Sawmill Creek Road Sanitary Sewer Project Phase 2 will be required to pay the standard wastewater treatment monthly utility bill beginning one year after receipt of the certified letter stating the sewer project is complete. 


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 05-26 § 4, 2005.)


15.04.110 Sewer connections—Installation costs—Permit—Inspection.

A.    The property owner is responsible for all costs for installation of a sewer service line. Installation of the owner’s sewer service line (from the structure to the property line) may be performed by the property owner or by a private contractor.

    Only a licensed contractor qualified to install sanitary sewer collection systems and approved by the public works director shall perform the installation of the CBS sewer service line (from the sanitary sewer main to the property line). All installations shall be made according to the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted by the state of Alaska and the CBS and as shown on the applicable standard details of the CBSS.

    	The property owner shall obtain a permit from the CBS prior to installation.

    	Forty-eight hours’ notice shall be given to the environmental superintendent prior to commencing work. CBS inspectors will be available Monday through Friday from seven a.m. to four p.m. Inspections requested and granted outside of normal business hours shall be reimbursed on a time and expenses basis, with billings at current CBS rates. If the property owner contracts to install the service, prior to commencing any work the contractor shall furnish:

1.    Contractor’s license (state of Alaska);

2.    Proof of workmen’s compensation insurance, if required by law;

3.    Other proof of capability to perform such work as required by the public works director.

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.120 Bonded contractor’s responsibility.

A.    All materials, supplies, equipment and personnel required for the installation of a sewer service line (from the sanitary sewer main to the structure) shall be provided by the applicant’s contractor. Materials shall conform to the standards outlined in the CBSS. All work performed must be done in accordance with all applicable safety laws and regulations.

B.    The contractor shall be responsible for any repair and maintenance on the sewer connection for a period of one year from the date of installation.

C.    The contractor shall be responsible for all damage to streets, sidewalks, and other structures affected by construction.

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.130 Sewer service lines—Specifications.

A.    All work shall be performed per the CBSS.

B.    A separate sewer connection shall be provided for every building. Exceptions will be allowed only by special permission granted by the public works director for good cause shown.

C.    Old building sewers or portions thereof may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on inspection and test, to meet all requirements of this chapter.

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.140 Protection of excavations.

Any excavation made by a contractor in a public right-of-way or immediately adjacent thereto shall be protected and guarded by adequate barricades and marked with warning lights from one-half hour before sunset to one-half hour after sunrise and other times when visibility problems may exist. Such barricades and warning devices shall be placed in number and location as required by the State Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices and as may be required by the public works director or designee. The protection of the public from the danger of such excavation shall be the responsibility of the contractor, and the contractor shall be liable for any damage caused by his failure to properly protect and guard such excavation as herein required. If the contractor fails to protect and properly guard such excavation as herein required, the CBS may protect and properly guard such excavation and charge the costs thereof to the contractor, who shall upon receiving written notice of the amount of charge promptly pay the same to the CBS. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.150 Public sewers limited to sewage.

A.    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or cooling water into any sanitary sewer.

B.    Discharge of industrial process water into any sanitary sewer will be considered on a case-by-case basis and must be approved in writing by the environmental superintendent.

C.    Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the public works director. 

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.160 Substances prohibited in sewers designated.

Except as provided in this chapter, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following discharge waters or wastes to any public sewer:

A.    Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit.

B.    Any water or waste that may contain more than one hundred parts per million, by weight, of fat, oil or grease.

C.    Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or other explosive liquid, solid or gas.

D.    Any garbage that has not been properly shredded (to one-sixteenth inch particle size).

E.    Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, syringe needles, wood, paunch manure or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works.

F.    Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and one-half or higher than nine or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works.

G.    Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, or constitute a hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.

H.    Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant.

I.    Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance.

J.    Water used for heat exchange in a heat pump or other heat exchange equipment.

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.170 Grease, oil and sand interceptors.

A.    Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the environmental superintendent and/or building official, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amount or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients.

B.    All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the environmental superintendent and/or building official and be located so as to be easily cleaned and inspected.

C.    Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation.

D.    The CBS reserves the right to inspect interceptors with notice to owner.

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.180 Substances restricted in public sewer designated—Requirement of preliminary treatment authorized.

Where necessary, in the opinion of the environmental superintendent, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the environmental superintendent.

Examples of wastewater characteristics requiring treatment prior to discharge into public sewers:

A.    Having a five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than three hundred parts per million by weight;

B.    Containing more than three hundred fifty parts per million by weight of suspended solids;

C.    Containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in Section 15.04.160(E); or

D.    Having an average daily flow greater than one percent of the average daily sewage flow of the CBS; shall be subject to the review and approval of the public works director.

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.190 Preliminary treatment facilities—Maintenance by owner.

Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or waste, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation, by the owner, at his expense. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.200 Control points for testing industrial waste.

A.    All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes referred to in Section 15.04.180 shall be determined by standard methods. In the event that no control manhole or sampling location has been required, the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer will be used for the tests.

B.    When required by the environmental superintendent, the owner of any property served by a sewer connection carrying industrial waste shall install at his expense a control manhole or suitable sampling location, and same shall be maintained by him and accessible at all times.

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.210 Provisions not to preclude special arrangements.

A.    Industrial Waste Discharge. No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the CBS and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or characteristic may be accepted by the CBS for treatment, subject to payment from the industrial concern. Characteristics of industrial wastewaters may dictate that the CBS cannot accept such wastewater due to the CBS’s current treatment process and/or without approved pretreatment of wastewater prior to introduction into the public sewer system.

B.    Municipal Sanitary Sewer Appurtenances on Private Property. No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the CBS and specific customers.

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.220 CBS sewer service line.

The CBS sewer service line becomes the property of the CBS upon final acceptance by the public works department. The CBS is responsible for paying all maintenance costs associated with the CBS sewer service line, except when an obstruction is located in the CBS sewer service line. The owner of the premises being served shall reimburse the CBS for its actual cost of maintenance and repairs, and inspection costs associated with an obstruction. The public works director or designee may authorize the owner of the premises served to hire a licensed bonded contractor to perform the work and repair to the CBS sewer service line and remove the obstruction, provided such work is performed to the satisfaction of the CBS. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.230 Owner’s sewer service line.

Owner’s sewer service line shall be installed, maintained, and repaired by the owner of the premises served. Any obstructions within the owner’s sewer service line are the responsibility of the owner. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.240 Sewer mains—Damage.

The CBS shall not be held responsible or liable for any claim or action due to or arising from any suspension of operation, breakage, unavoidable accident or injury of any kind occurring to, or caused by, the sewer mains by an act of God, beyond the CBS’s control, or caused by the elements, strikes, riots or a terrorist. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.250 Vandalizing facilities declared disorderly conduct.

No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the CBS sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.260 Penalties.

Every person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and penalties assessed as prescribed in Title 1 of the Sitka General Code. (Ord. 10-37 § 4, 2010: Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.270 Powers and authority of inspectors.

The public works director, building official, environmental superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the CBS shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.280 Discontinuance of service by the CBS.

The CBS may refuse to connect or may discontinue service for violation of any provisions of the chapter, or for failure to pay charges for service when due, or for violation of rate schedules or contract provisions. The discontinuance of service for any of these causes does not release the customer from an obligation to pay for services received or charges specified in any existing contract. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.290 Excessive flows.

The CBS may refuse sewer service or place flow and volume restrictions, and may discontinue service to any premises where excessive flows by one customer will result in inadequate service to others. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.300 Notices.

A.    Notices from the CBS to the customer will normally be given by public service announcement through local media. Where conditions warrant and in emergencies, the CBS may notify either by telephone, messenger, or written door hanger notice.

B.    Notices from customers to the CBS may be given by the customer or his authorized representative, orally or in writing, at the CBS public works department, or to an agent of the CBS duly authorized to receive notices or complaints.

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.310 Appeals.

A.    Any person who is dissatisfied with the action of the public works director, under this chapter, in denying a permit or granting a permit where conditions are imposed or in modifying a permit or with any other order by which such person may be affected, may, within ten days from the notice of such action, appeal to the CBS administrator by giving notice thereof to the CBS municipal clerk. An applicant for a permit shall not be in fault of his duty to apply for or amend a permit during the period in which an appeal made pursuant to this section is pending. In the event of such appeal, the public works director shall present to the CBS administrator a written report setting forth the reason or reasons for any order affecting the persons appealing. Any person who is dissatisfied with the appeal decision of the CBS administrator, may, within ten days from the notice of such action, appeal to the CBS assembly by giving notice thereof to the CBS municipal clerk. An applicant for a permit shall not be in fault of his duty to apply for or amend a permit during the period in which an appeal made pursuant to this section is pending. In the event of such appeal, the CBS administrator shall present to the CBS assembly a written report setting forth the reason or reasons for any order affecting the persons appealing.

B.    The CBS assembly shall have full power to review any action or order issued by the CBS administrator under this chapter, and the determination of the CBS assembly shall be final.

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


15.04.320 Rates and fees. Revised 7/19

A.    Base rate: sixty-two dollars and ninety-three cents per unit per month.

	UNIT DESCRIPTION	UNIT

	Residential/Dwelling Unit(1)	1.0(2)

	Commercial (General, Miscellaneous)(3)	1.0

	Clubs and lodges without bar or restaurant	 

	Garages, service stations	 

	Offices including medical (10 or less employees)	 

	Shops and stores without food processing	 

	Commercial Specifics(3) (1 Minimum) Plus	Per Each	 

	Bar, lounge, restaurant, snack bar	seat or stool	0.05

	Barber, beauty shop (one station = 1.0)	station	0.6

	Bowling alley	lane	1.0

	Church	10 seats	0.1

	Office/office space	over 10 employees	0.2

	Hospital	bed	0.8

	Meat market	 	3.0

	Supermarket, grocery store with food process	 	8.0

	Rest home	bed	0.2

	Hotel, motel(4)	room	0.3

	Dormitory, boardinghouse(4)	bed or room	0.3

	RV park(4)(6)	RV space	0.3

	Bed and breakfast(4)	room	0.15

	Commercial laundry	wet machine	8.0

	Launderette	wet machine	1.0

	Schools, college, day care(5)	10 students	0.4

	Theater	10 seats	0.2

	Car wash (no minimum)	stall	2.0

Notes:

(1) Including apartments and trailers, per each. (Apartments shall be assessed as if on a separate meter.)

(2) Base rate.

(3) Business in homes shall be assessed for the additional appropriate commercial rate.

(4) Hotel, motel, B&B may count rooms only. Dormitory or boardinghouse must count beds or rooms. RV parks count RV spaces with utility hookups.

(5) Approximate enrollment—may be reviewed annually.

(6) RV parks have all mobile units able to be underway on the road with a minimal amount of time and not require special permits to drive on the road. Underway can be under its own power, pulled by a vehicle or in the bed of a pickup. Rental rates are based on the day and utilities are included.

B.    Sewer Service in Conjunction with Metered Water. 

1.    General Sewer Service in Conjunction with Metered Water. Minimum charge: one times the unmetered sewer base plus three dollars and forty cents per one thousand metered gallons.

Note: Special provisions may be made for facilities such as fish processors, which do not discharge all wastewater into the municipal sewer system. These facilities may be assessed on their equivalent employee loads, such as with offices, dormitories, etc.

a.    The charge for any establishment not herein designated will be either:

i.    As metered if a meter has been installed; or

ii.    The minimum charge as outlined for sewer service, if a meter has not been installed; or

iii.    As determined administratively by the public works director.

b.    A commercial enterprise consisting of more than one facility shall be charged the sum of the applicable rates for each facility.

c.    Partial charges for services are prorated based on a thirty-day month.

2.    Gary Paxton Industrial Park. Treated wastewater, metered: minimum charge of one hundred twenty-four dollars and forty cents per month.

a.    Treated wastewater, metered: three dollars and seventy-two cents per one thousand gallons water use.

C.    Connection Fee. Seven hundred sixty dollars per connection.

(Ord. 19-20S § 4, 2019; Ord. 18-27 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 17-21 § 4 (part), 2017; Ord. 16-25 § 4 (part), 2016; Ord. 15-46 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 15-10 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 14-20 § 4 (part), 2014: Ord. 13-30 § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 12-37 § 4 (part), 2012; Ord. 11-26 § 4, 2011; Ord. 10-15 § 4, 2010; Ord. 06-20 § 4, 2006; Ord. 05-15 § 4(B) (part), 2005.)


Chapter 15.05 WATER SYSTEM 

Sections:

15.05.010    Definitions.

15.05.020    Delivery of supply.

15.05.030    Ownership of system and equipment.

15.05.040    Liability for damage to CBS system or equipment.

15.05.050    CBS responsibility for CBS equipment—Right to operate unencumbered.

15.05.060    Free access by CBS agents for inspection.

15.05.070    CBS not liable for damage to or by customer equipment.

15.05.080    Notices.

15.05.090    Waste.

15.05.100    Unauthorized operation of curb stop or service valve.

15.05.110    Unauthorized opening or closing of mains prohibited.

15.05.120    Violations, fraud or abuse.

15.05.130    Investigation.

15.05.140    Unsafe facilities.

15.05.150    Noncompliance with regulations.

15.05.160    Appeals.

15.05.170    Demand detrimental to others.

15.05.180    Interruption of service.

15.05.190    Curtailment.

15.05.200    Resale of water.

15.05.210    Supplying water to others.

15.05.220    Frozen water service line.

15.05.230    Application for connection to existing water main—Initiating service.

15.05.240    Service connection charge. 

15.05.250    New water service line installation.

15.05.260    Water taps.

15.05.270    Size of service.

15.05.280    Protection of excavations.

15.05.290    Bonded contractor’s responsibilities.

15.05.300    Maintenance.

15.05.310    Notice prior to work—Inspections.

15.05.320    Permits for repairs or replacement.

15.05.330    On-property inspection.

15.05.340    Warranty period.

15.05.350    Division of ownership—Installation, placement of service and maintenance.

15.05.360    Discontinuance of service by the CBS.

15.05.370    Service to high elevations.

15.05.380    Unusual quantities.

15.05.390    Number of service connections.

15.05.400    Cross-connections.

15.05.410    Joint service connections.

15.05.420    Connections required.

15.05.430    Emergency maintenance.

15.05.440    Meters—Installation and repair.

15.05.450    Meter accuracy standard designated.

15.05.460    Meters—Size and type.

15.05.470    Meters—Changes in size or location.

15.05.480    Meters—Joint use prohibited.

15.05.490    Meters—Control valves.

15.05.500    Meter test on CBS request.

15.05.510    Meter test on customer request.

15.05.520    Service turnoff for nonpayment—Notice—Authorized.

15.05.530    Cutoff of service and forfeiture of deposit for nonpayment.

15.05.540    Service turnoff for nonpayment—Authorized.

15.05.550    Service turnoff for nonpayment—Procedure.

15.05.560    Interest rate on delinquent accounts.

15.05.570    Service turnoff for nonpayment—Restoration of service.

15.05.580    City to determine priority of service—Superior rights of CBS residents.

15.05.590    Fire protection services.

15.05.600    Fire protection systems.

15.05.610    Relocation of fire hydrants.

15.05.620    Rates and fees. 


15.05.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“Building” means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.

“Building (existing)” means a building erected prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and/or one which has not been constructed, but for which a legal building permit has been issued.

“CBS” means the city and borough of Sitka.

“CBS water service line” means that portion of a water service line that connects the water main with the curb stop. See graphical representation at the end of this section.

“CBSS” means the city and borough of Sitka standard specifications.

“Contractor” means a person who constructs, installs, repairs, excavates or connects water services.

“Curb box” means a device usually consisting of a long piece of pipe or tubelike casing placed over a curb stop through which a key (valve wrench) is inserted to permit the operation of the curb stop.

“Curb stop (curb valve or property valve)” means a valve placed in the water service line, usually at a point near the right-of-way or property line, that allows the passage, interruption and control of water flow.

“Owner” means one who holds a lawful title to the property.

“Owner’s water service line” means that portion of the water service line that connects the curb stop with the plumbing system within the building being served. The owner’s water service line includes the curb stop and valve box (curb box). See graphical representation at the end of this section.

“Person” means any individual, firm, company, corporation, partnership, association, society or group.

“Public water system” means the potable water system owned and operated by the city and borough of Sitka.

“Water hook-up” means the process of installing the complete water service line from the main to the building.

“Water main” means that part of the city water distribution system intended to serve more than one water service line and that is located within the public right-of-way or easement.

“Water service line” means the entire water service line connecting the water main with the plumbing system of the building being served. See graphical representation at the end of this section.

“Water tap” means the cutting or drilling of an opening in the water main and attaching a saddle and/or corporation stop.

Graphical Representation Of:

• Owner’s Water Service Line

• CBS Water Service Line

• Water Service Line
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.020 Delivery of supply.

The CBS will exercise reasonable diligence and care to deliver a continuous and sufficient supply of water to the customer at a proper pressure and to avoid any shortage or interruption in delivery. The CBS will exercise reasonable diligence to supply safe and potable water at all times. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.030 Ownership of system and equipment.

All water mains, valves, fittings, hydrants, meters and other equipment and appurtenances that the CBS has accepted into the municipal system, except owner’s water service line, shall be the property of the CBS. The CBS will not pay rent or any other charges for water appurtenances, including housings and connections, located on a customer’s premises. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.040 Liability for damage to CBS system or equipment.

The customer shall be liable for any damage to the CBS system or equipment which is caused by an act of the customer, his tenants, agents, employees, contractors, licensees or permittees. Damage to the system or equipment shall include but not be limited to breaking of seals and locks on meters, tampering with meters, tampering with backflow preventers, injury to meters, including but not limited to damage by hot water or steam, and damage to meter boxes, remote counters, curb stops, curb boxes, meter stops and other service appurtenances. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.050 CBS responsibility for CBS equipment—Right to operate unencumbered.

A.    CBS equipment on the customer’s premises remains the property of the CBS and may be repaired, replaced or removed by CBS employees or agents at any time without consent of the customer.

B.    No payment will be made to the property owner for the right to install, maintain, replace or remove CBS equipment, and the property owner must in no way interfere with its operation. The property owner must keep vicious dogs or other animals secured or confined to avoid interference with the utility operation and maintenance.

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.060 Free access by CBS agents for inspection.

The duly appointed employees of the CBS, under the direction of the public works director, shall have free access at all reasonable hours of the day to any and all parts of structures and premises in which water is or may be delivered for the purpose of inspecting connections, the conditions of conduits and fixtures, and the manner and extent to which the water is being used. The CBS does not, however, assume the duty of inspecting the customer’s line, plumbing and equipment, and shall not be responsible therefor. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.070 CBS not liable for damage to or by customer equipment.

The CBS shall not be liable for any loss or damage of any nature whatsoever caused by any defect in the owner’s water service line, plumbing or equipment, nor shall the CBS be liable for loss or damage due to interruption of service, temporary changes in pressure, or water quality. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.080 Notices.

A.    Notices from the CBS to customers will normally be given by public service announcement through local media. Where conditions warrant and in emergencies, the CBS may notify either by telephone, messenger, or door hanger notice.

B.    Notices from customers to the CBS may be given by the customer or his authorized representative, orally or in writing, at the CBS public works department, or to an agent of the CBS duly authorized to receive notices or complaints.

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.090 Waste.

A.    Where water is wastefully or negligently used on a customer’s premises, the CBS may discontinue service if such conditions are not corrected after due notice by the CBS.

B.    It is unlawful for any person to allow any water to run from any water tap or outlet continuously unless such water is metered and paid for on a metered rate.

C.    If the owner’s water service line is determined to be leaking, or is otherwise compromised, the owner shall repair and address the leak within ten days after receipt of notice by the CBS unless additional time is granted by the public works director. Owner shall notify the CBS of repair work per Section 15.05.310(A).

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.100 Unauthorized operation of curb stop or service valve.

Where water service has been discontinued for any reason, and the water is turned on by the customer or other unauthorized person, the water may then be shut off by the CBS and secured. The charges for shutting off and securing the water shall be computed at current CBS billing rates. These charges shall be billed to the offending customer, and water shall not be furnished to the premises until such charges are paid and the CBS has reasonable assurances that the violation will not recur. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.110 Unauthorized opening or closing of mains prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person other than CBS employees to turn on or off any municipal water mains or fire hydrants, unless authorized to do so by the environmental superintendent or his designee. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.120 Violations, fraud or abuse.

The CBS will refuse or discontinue service to any premises where it is deemed necessary to protect the CBS from fraud, abuse, or threat of contamination of the public water supply. Discontinuance of service from one or both of these causes will be made immediately upon receipt of knowledge by the CBS that the condition or conditions exist. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.130 Investigation.

The public works director shall have the authority to inspect any building or premises served by the public water system for any violation of relevant CBS or state law. The public works director or his designee shall furthermore have the authority to turn off any water service when any such violation exists. No person shall refuse to admit, after notice and at reasonable hours, the premises owned or occupied by him, or hinder any authorized agent of the CBS entering such premises for the purpose of inspecting any piping in connection with the water distribution system.

Every person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and penalties assessed as prescribed in Title 10 of the Sitka General Code. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.140 Unsafe facilities.

The CBS may refuse to furnish water and may discontinue services to any premises where plumbing facilities, appliances or equipment using water are dangerous, unsafe or not in conformity with federal, state or local laws and regulations. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.150 Noncompliance with regulations.

The CBS may, upon five days’ notice, discontinue service to a customer’s premises for failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.160 Appeals.

A.    Any person who is dissatisfied with the action of the public works director, under this chapter, in denying a permit or granting a permit where conditions are imposed or in modifying a permit or with any other order by which such person may be affected, may, within ten days from the notice of such action, appeal to the CBS administrator by giving notice thereof to the CBS municipal clerk. An applicant for a permit shall not be in fault of his duty to apply for or amend a permit during the period in which an appeal made pursuant to this section is pending. In the event of such appeal, the public works director shall present to the CBS administrator a written report setting forth the reason or reasons for any order affecting the persons appealing. Any person who is dissatisfied with the appeal decision of the CBS administrator, may, within ten days from the notice of such action, appeal to the CBS assembly by giving notice thereof to the CBS municipal clerk. An applicant for a permit shall not be in fault of his duty to apply for or amend a permit during the period in which an appeal made pursuant to this section is pending. In the event of such appeal, the CBS administrator shall present to the CBS assembly a written report setting forth the reason or reasons for any order affecting the persons appealing.

B.    The CBS assembly shall have full power to review any action or order issued by the CBS administrator under this chapter, and the determination of the CBS assembly shall be final.

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.170 Demand detrimental to others.

The CBS may refuse to furnish water or restrict flow and volume, and may discontinue service to any premises where excessive demand by one customer will result in inadequate service to others. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.180 Interruption of service.

The municipality will use reasonable diligence to provide an adequate and uninterrupted supply of water, but if the supply shall be interrupted without notice for any cause, the municipality shall not be liable for personal injuries, loss or damages resulting therefrom, nor will such failure constitute breach of agreement for service. The municipality reserves the right to temporarily suspend service for the purpose of making repairs or improvements to the system, but in such cases, whenever practical, public notice shall be given and every effort will be made to make such interruption as short as possible. The same policy pertains to sewer service. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.190 Curtailment.

Should a serious water shortage develop, and should it become mandatory that the municipality place into effect a curtailment program, then the municipality reserves the right to limit the use of water as may become necessary. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.200 Resale of water.

Unless otherwise provided for by contract, the customer shall not resell water furnished by the municipality. Reference CBS Ordinance 95-1296 for further details. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.210 Supplying water to others.

The customer shall not supply water furnished by the municipality to others unless otherwise provided for by contract with the CBS. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.220 Frozen water service line.

Consumers will be responsible for all frozen water service lines, and the CBS will not be responsible therefor. The CBS will maintain all CBS water service lines (main to curb stop) except for damages resulting from freezing. The owner shall be solely responsible for repairs to water service lines damaged by freezing. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.230 Application for connection to existing water main—Initiating service.

A.    Each applicant for water service shall complete an application form provided by the CBS public works department, giving the date of application, location of premises, whether the property has been served before, the date on which applicant desires to have service begin, purposes for which service is to be used, the address for mailing or delivery of bills, the applicant’s address (owner, tenant or agent), the class and size of service, and such other information as the CBS may reasonably require. In signing the application, the customer agrees to abide by the provisions of this chapter.

B.    The customer or his designee shall be required to be on the premises when the water is turned on, or provide written request for the water to be turned on, and shall be responsible for valves on his premises being turned off when the water service is turned on.

1.    Water tap to CBS water main shall be installed only by CBS-approved contractors and then, except as provided elsewhere in this chapter, only upon payment of the fee as provided by the rules and rates schedules adopted pursuant to this chapter.

2.    No person shall install a water service line without first obtaining and paying for a written permit from the person designated to issue such permit or from the CBS public works director.

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.240 Service connection charge. 

A.    At the time the applicant files for a connection permit where no service previously existed; or, if the applicant is filing for a change in service location, or size, or to serve a new structure, the applicant shall submit with this application the service connection charge of seven hundred sixty dollars. This charge is to cover permit fees, inspection and administrative costs.

B.    The connection of a water service line to a water main located in the state highway right-of-way may be subject to state utility permit fees. Said fees shall be paid by the property owner.

(Ord. 18-26 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 17-21 § 4 (part), 2017; Ord. 16-25 § 4 (part), 2016; Ord. 15-10 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 14-19 § 4 (part), 2014; Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.250 New water service line installation.

A.    The property owner is responsible for all costs for installation of a service line or fire line from the water main to the structure. Only a licensed contractor qualified to install municipal water systems and approved by the public works director shall perform the installation of the water service line from the water main to the structure being served. All installations shall be made according to the Uniform Plumbing Code adopted by the state of Alaska and the CBS, and as shown on the applicable standard details of the CBSS. The property owner shall obtain a permit from the CBS prior to installation.

B.    All water service lines shall be installed and mains tapped by a contractor licensed by the state. As a prerequisite to commencing any work on the utility, the contractor shall furnish:

1.    Contractor’s license (state of Alaska);

2.    Proof of workmen’s compensation insurance, if required by law;

3.    Other proof of capability to perform such work as required by the public works director.

C.    No person, firm or corporation shall be allowed to install a water connection or tap into the main without first obtaining a written permit from the CBS.

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.260 Water taps.

A water tap is accomplished with an appropriate tapping machine which has the capability of drilling, and inserting a corporation stop under pressure with a minimum loss of water. All taps must be done by a licensed/bonded contractor, approved by the CBS public works director and inspected by the CBS. Accepted tap sizes include: one inch, one and one-half inches, two inches, four inches and larger.

All water taps within the roadway will require a right-of-way permit from the CBS public works department in addition to a water main tap permit from the CBS. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.270 Size of service.

A.    If there is one building per lot, there will be one main line tap and one on-property service to serve the building. The size of the service can be determined by the following table:

1.    One-inch or one and one-half inch service connection: zero to two living units, unless required otherwise by the building official;

2.    One and one-half inch service connection: three or four living units, unless required otherwise by the building official.

B.    The plumbing system for all structures larger than four units must be engineered by a professional engineer, and the calculations and connection size shall be indicated by the applicant’s engineer.

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.280 Protection of excavations.

Any excavation made by a contractor in a right-of-way or immediately adjacent thereto shall be protected and guarded by adequate barricades and marked with warning lights from one-half hour before sunset to one-half hour after sunrise and other times when visibility problems may exist. Such barricades and warning devices shall be placed in number and location as required by the Alaska Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices and as may be required by the public works director or designee. The protection of the public from the danger of such excavation shall be the responsibility of the contractor, and the contractor shall be liable for any damage caused by his failure to properly protect and guard such excavation as herein required. If the contractor fails to protect and properly guard such excavation as herein required, the CBS may protect and properly guard such excavation and charge the costs thereof to the contractor, who shall upon receiving written notice of the amount of charge promptly pay the same to the CBS. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.290 Bonded contractor’s responsibilities.

A.    All materials, supplies, equipment and personnel required for the installation of the water service line, including tapping into the main, shall be provided by the contractor. Materials shall conform to the standards outlined in the CBSS. All work performed must be done in accordance with all applicable safety laws and regulations.

B.    The contractor shall be responsible for any repair and maintenance on the CBS’s water service line for a period of one year from the date of its installation.

C.    The contractor shall be responsible for repair of all damage to streets, sidewalks, and other structures affected by water service line installation.

D.    The contractor shall fulfill warranty requirements per Section 15.05.340.

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.300 Maintenance.

A.    Customers will be responsible for the repair of damages to the owner’s water service line.

B.    Customers will be responsible for the repair of the complete water service line as a result of freezing.

C.    The CBS will be responsible for the repair of damages resulting from freezing for water mains only.

D.    The CBS will be responsible for the repair of damages to the CBS’s water service line excluding damages resulting from freezing, except as provided in Section 15.05.040.

E.    Warranty responsibility by the bonded contractor is outlined in Section 15.05.290.

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.310 Notice prior to work—Inspections.

A.    Forty-eight hours’ notice shall be given to the environmental superintendent prior to commencing work. CBS inspectors will be available Monday through Friday from seven a.m. to four p.m. Inspections requested and granted outside of normal business hours shall be reimbursed on a time and expenses basis, with billings at current CBS rates.

B.    The CBS will inspect all water service line work within the right-of-way and on private property without exceptions. No water tap shall be made without the CBS inspector present. The CBS inspector shall be allowed access to all parts of the work at all times and shall be furnished with every reasonable facility for ascertaining whether or not the work as performed is in accordance with the requirements of the specifications. The contractor’s responsibility for work performance under the permit shall in no way be relieved because of the presence or the absence of an inspector. Inspectors shall be authorized to inspect all work done and materials furnished.

C.    The owner may make emergency repairs to the owner’s water service line without providing the prior notice required in subsection A of this section. “Emergency,” for the purposes of this chapter, means an unforeseen situation requiring prompt repair to eliminate immediate or impending public health hazards or damage to private or public property. The owner is required to provide details of the repair (time/date, location, specific problem, method of repair and by whom) to the environmental superintendent within two working days of the emergency repair.

D.    The CBS will not approve any service which is not in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code and the CBSS. The water permit must be on-site during water service line construction. The inspection shall be done in the presence of the contractor or representative. No water system or part thereof shall be covered, concealed or put into use until it has been inspected and accepted by the CBS as prescribed in this chapter. The inspection shall include but not be limited to the following: excavation, pipe laying, curb box, curb valve, water tap, acceptable materials, backfill and compaction, one service per structure or undeveloped lot. Service extensions cannot cross adjoining property lines.

E.    The inspector will inspect the work performed for compliance with workmanship and material requirements of the CBSS.

F.    If the inspector finds that any work is being performed in an unsafe manner or in a manner that may expose the CBS or its property to any risk of personnel or property damage or liability, the inspector is authorized to order that all work be stopped until the deficiencies or undesirable conditions are alleviated or corrected.

G.    Curb boxes shall be approved by the CBS and shall be installed in a manner as to not damage curb valves, service lines, or the curb box. Minimum separation of water taps shall be per the CBSS.

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.320 Permits for repairs or replacement.

The owner shall obtain a permit from the CBS public works department prior to installing, repairing, modifying or replacing a water service line. A separate permit shall be obtained for each lot to be served. No licensed/bonded contractor listed on the permit shall allow any other person to do or cause to be done any work under a permit secured by permittee except persons in his employ. Every water connection permit issued by the CBS under the provisions of this chapter shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not completed within one hundred eighty days of date of issue.

The owner may make emergency repairs to the owner’s water service line without first obtaining a permit to do such work. “Emergency,” for the purposes of this chapter, means an unforeseen situation requiring prompt repair to eliminate immediate or impending public health hazards or damage to private or public property. The owner is required to complete an after-emergency work permit with the public works department within two working days of such work being initiated. This after-emergency work permit will also fulfill the requirements of Section 15.05.310(C).

It is prohibited for any person to construct, repair or modify a water service that is considered bootlegged. “Bootlegged,” for the purposes of this chapter, means lines constructed without permits or utilized without being accepted by the CBS. This includes service lines crossing adjacent property lines. The CBS will not be held liable for any bootlegged services. The CBS will not be obligated to perform any maintenance, repairs or rerouting because of bootlegged lines freezing, breaking, etc. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.330 On-property inspection.

The water permit must be on-site during water service line construction. The CBS will not approve service connection/extension which is not in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code as adapted by the state of Alaska and the CBS. The on-property inspection permit must be at the location and posted in a conspicuous place prior to the inspection. The inspection will be performed in the presence of the contractor or representative. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.340 Warranty period.

A one-year warranty period is begun on the date of the final inspection. The contractor will be responsible for maintaining and making repairs on the CBS water service line installation and road surfaces during the warranty period. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.350 Division of ownership—Installation, placement of service and maintenance.

A.    The CBS shall own and maintain all water mains and CBS water service lines to the customer’s curb box and maintenance shall be performed by authorized employees or agents of the CBS. The customer shall own, install and maintain the owner’s water service line from the curb valve to the structure, including the curb box. Installation shall be performed according to Section 15.05.250.

B.    The location of the service line within the right-of-way shall be at the discretion of the CBS water department.

C.    The customer is responsible for locating right-of-way boundaries, property lines, obtaining easements and state right-of-way permits if necessary for the installation of water mains and service lines.

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.360 Discontinuance of service by the CBS.

The municipality may refuse to connect or may discontinue service for violation of any of its service policies, or for customer’s failure to pay charges for service when due, or for violation of rate schedules or contract provisions, or for theft or illegal diversion of water. The discontinuance of service for any of these causes does not release the customer from an obligation to pay for services received or charges specified. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.370 Service to high elevations.

Where a customer’s service is at too high an elevation to be served by normal public water system pressure, the CBS may, at its option, require the customer to provide a suitable pumping system, which may include a backflow preventer, as a condition of service. The installation shall be subject to approval by the environmental superintendent. The pumping system shall be designed by a qualified engineer retained at customer’s expense. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.380 Unusual quantities.

A.    When an abnormally large quantity of water is desired for filling a swimming pool, or for other purposes, arrangements must be made with the environmental superintendent prior to taking such water.

B.    Permission to take water in unusual quantities will be given only if the CBS facilities and other consumers are not inconvenienced.

C.    Payment for unusual quantities of water will be in accordance with the regular schedule for water rates if service is through a meter or will be fixed by the environmental superintendent in the case of nonmetered service.

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.390 Number of service connections.

The owner of a single parcel of property may apply for and receive as many services as he and his tenants require; provided, that his application or applications meet the requirements stated in this chapter and meet the approval of the environmental superintendent and public works director. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.400 Cross-connections.

Backflow prevention devices shall be installed on any premises where, in the judgment of the environmental superintendent and/or building official, the nature and extent of the activities, or the materials used or stored on the premises, could present a hazard to the water supply in the event a cross-connection were to be made.

A.    Cross-Connections. No water service shall be installed or continued in use unless the water supply is protected by backflow prevention devices as may be required by subsection B of this section. The installation or maintenance of a cross-connection that will endanger the water quality of the potable water supply of the CBS shall be unlawful and is prohibited. Any such cross-connection now existing or hereafter installed is declared to be a public nuisance and the same shall be abated. The control or elimination of cross-connections shall be in accordance with this section, together with the latest edition of appropriate manuals of standard practice pertaining to cross-connection control. The environmental superintendent shall have the authority to establish requirements more stringent than state regulations if he deems that the conditions so dictate. The CBS shall adopt rules and regulations as necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.

B.    Use of Backflow Prevention Devices.

1.    Backflow prevention devices shall be installed on water service lines or within any premises where, in the judgment of the CBS, the nature and extent of the activities, or the materials stored on the premises, would present an immediate and dangerous hazard to health and/or be deleterious to the quality of water should a cross-connection occur; even though such cross-connection does not exist at the time the backflow prevention devices shall be installed under circumstances including but not limited to the following:

a.    Premises having an auxiliary water supply.

b.    Premises having internal cross-connections that are not correctable, or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impracticable to ascertain whether or not cross-connections exist.

c.    Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross-connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short notice to assure that cross-connections do not exist.

d.    Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being established or re-established.

e.    Premises on which any substance is handled under pressure so as to permit entry into the public water supply, or where a cross-connection could reasonably be expected to occur. This shall include the handling of process waters and cooling waters.

f.    Premises where materials of a toxic or hazardous nature are handled in such a way that if back siphonage should occur, a serious health hazard might result.

g.    The following types of facilities will fall into one of the above categories where a backflow prevention device is required to protect the public water supply. A backflow prevention device shall be installed at these facilities unless the CBS determines that no hazard exists:

i.    Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics;

ii.    Laboratories;

iii.    Metal plating industries;

iv.    Piers and docks;

v.    Sewage treatment plants and pump stations;

vi.    Food or beverage processing plants;

vii.    Chemical plants using a water process;

viii.    Petroleum processing or storage plants;

ix.    Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors;

x.    Others specified by the environmental superintendent.

h.    Other premises, as specified by the environmental superintendent and/or building official, where backflow prevention devices are required to protect the public water supply.

2.    The type of protective device required shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists.

a.    An air-gap separation or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the public water supply may be contaminated with sewage, industrial waste of a toxic nature, or other contaminant which could cause a health or system hazard.

b.    In the case of a substance that may be objectionable but not hazardous to health, a double check valve assembly, air-gap separation, or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed.

3.    Backflow prevention devices required by this section shall be installed near the water meter, or at a location designated by the CBS. The device shall be located so as to be readily accessible for maintenance and testing and, furthermore, where no part of the device will be submerged and installed in accordance with manufacturer’s recommendations.

4.    It is the responsibility of the building owner to maintain compliance with this section.

5.    The policies, procedures, and criteria for determining appropriate levels of protection shall be in accordance with the “Accepted Procedure and Practice in Cross-Connection Control Manual—Pacific Northwest Section—American Waterworks Association,” Seventh Edition.

6.    Any protective device required by this section shall be a model approved by the environmental superintendent. A double check valve assembly or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device will be approved if it has successfully passed performance tests of the University of Southern California Engineering Center or other testing laboratories satisfactory to the environmental superintendent. These devices shall be furnished and installed by and at the expense of the customer.

7.    Backflow prevention devices installed pursuant to this section, except atmospheric vacuum breakers, shall be inspected and tested by a certified backflow assembly tester upon installation and annually thereafter, or more often if necessary. Maintenance is the sole responsibility of and shall be at the customer’s expense. Whenever the devices are found to be defective, they shall be repaired, overhauled, or replaced at the customer’s expense. Inspections, tests, repairs, and records thereof shall be accomplished under CBS supervision by certified testers. Testing records shall be provided by the owner to the CBS building official within ten days of test date. Testing records shall be provided on a CBS backflow assembly test report form.

8.    No underground sprinkling device will be installed without adequate backflow prevention devices at the point from which the water for irrigation is taken from the public water supply.

9.    Failure of the customer to cooperate in the installation, maintenance, testing or inspection of backflow prevention devices required by this section shall be grounds for the termination of water service to the premises, or, in the alternative, the installation of an air-gap separation at the customer’s expense.

C.    Cross-Connection Inspection.

1.    No water shall be delivered to any structure hereafter built within the CBS or within areas served by the CBS water until the same shall have been inspected by the CBS for possible cross-connections and been approved as being free of same.

2.    Any construction for industrial or other purposes which is classified as a hazardous facility pursuant to subsection (B)(1)(g) of this section, where it is reasonable to anticipate intermittent cross-connections, or as determined by the environmental superintendent, shall be protected by the installation of one or more backflow prevention devices at the point of service from the public water supply or any other location designated by the CBS.

3.    Inspections may be made periodically of all buildings, structures, or improvements of any nature now receiving water through the CBS system, for the purpose of ascertaining whether cross-connections exist. Such inspections shall be made by the CBS.

D.    Installation Permits. If cross-connection control devices are found to be necessary, the owner of the property served must apply to the CBS public works department for an installation permit.

E.    Additional Remedies. In the event an improper cross-connection is not corrected within the time limit set by the environmental superintendent, or, in the event the CBS is refused access to any property for the purpose of determining whether or not cross-connections exist, delivery of water to the property shall cease until the deficiency is corrected to the CBS’s satisfaction. In addition, the CBS may effect the necessary repairs or modifications at the expense of the property owner and refuse delivery of water to the property until the cost thereof shall have been paid.

(Ord. 15-14 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.410 Joint service connections.

A separate water service connection shall be provided for each separate residential or commercial structure. The minimum diameter shall be no less than one inch. It is prohibited to intertie two or more residential structures into a single and/or common service connection. It is prohibited by Section 308 of the Uniform Plumbing Code for a water service to cross property lines unless the lines are within CBS-approved utility easements. This shall apply even though the property may be owned by the same person. Lease lines are to be treated in the same manner as if they were property lines. If the lot is subdivided, the owner shall, if needed, relocate his service connection or extend the water main in order to comply with the regulations of this chapter. (Amended during 3/15 supplement; Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.420 Connections required.

A.    Every building in which plumbing fixtures are installed and every premises having water piping thereon shall have a connection to a public water system if such system is within three hundred feet from any lot. Otherwise the owner’s water system shall be ADEC approved.

B.    Such connection shall be made entirely at the expense of the owner.

C.    The rearrangement or subdivision into smaller parcels of a lot which abuts and is served by a public water main shall not be deemed cause to permit the construction of a private water system, and all water systems on any such smaller parcel or parcels shall connect to the public water main.

D.    The public water system may be considered as not being available when such public water system is located more than three hundred feet from any lot.

E.    In case of existing buildings, such connection shall be made within ninety days after the public works director notifies the owner in writing of the availability of a public water system.

F.    In the case of buildings under construction, occupancy of such buildings is unlawful until such connection has been made.

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.430 Emergency maintenance.

Emergency maintenance and repair of owner’s water service lines will be performed by the CBS when it is in the best interest of the public health and welfare. The CBS will make necessary repairs and bill owner on a time and expenses basis at current rates. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.440 Meters—Installation and repair.

The CBS may require that a water meter be installed on any water service. Any property owner may elect to install a water meter on any connection to the public water system.

Installation of water meters shall be performed only by a licensed plumber retained by the owner or authorized employees or agents of the CBS and shall be undertaken at a time convenient to the CBS in terms of water system improvements, construction and extension. All meters shall be sealed at the time of installation, and no seal shall be altered or broken except by one of its authorized employees or agents. If a meter is damaged as a result of the owner’s actions, it shall be repaired and all costs borne by the owner. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.450 Meter accuracy standard designated.

All meters will be tested prior to installation. No meter will be placed in service or allowed to remain in service which is known to have an error of registration in excess of five percent under conditions of normal operation. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.460 Meters—Size and type.

The CBS reserves the right to determine the type of meter to be installed. An applicant may purchase any size meter regularly stocked by the CBS; provided, that the request is reasonable; and provided further, that the meter is not greatly oversized or undersized, as determined by the environmental superintendent. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.470 Meters—Changes in size or location.

If, for any reason, a change in size of a meter and service is required, the installation will be accomplished on the basis of a new connection, and the customer’s application shall be amended. Meters or services moved for the convenience of the customer will be relocated only at the customer’s expense. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.480 Meters—Joint use prohibited.

The joining of several customers to take advantage of the single minimum charge and large-quantity rates shall be prohibited. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.490 Meters—Control valves.

Customer shall install a suitable control valve in the customer service line as close to the meter as possible, the operation of which will control the entire water supply to the premises served. It shall be a violation of this chapter for the customer to operate or cause unauthorized operation of the curb stop or any other appurtenances on the water service line. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.500 Meter test on CBS request.

If, upon comparison of past water usage, it appears that a meter is not registering properly, the CBS may, at its option, test the meter and adjust the charges accordingly if the meter either over-registers or under-registers. No charge for meter testing will be made to the customer for the meter test under these conditions. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.510 Meter test on customer request.

A.    A customer may, giving not less than seven days’ notice, request the CBS to test the meter serving his premises.

B.    The CBS will require the customer to deposit the testing fee. This fee shall be an estimate of the cost of testing the meter as determined by the environmental superintendent.

C.    The deposit will be returned to the customer if the test reveals the meter over-registers more than five percent under conditions of normal operation. If the meter is operating satisfactorily or if the meter under-registers more than five percent under the standard test conditions, the deposit shall be forfeited to the CBS.

D.    Customers may, at their option, witness any meter tests which they request.

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.520 Service turnoff for nonpayment—Notice—Authorized.

A.    Notice. On or about forty days after an account becomes delinquent, a turnoff notice shall be sent to the customer. Said notice shall state a date on which water will be turned off if the delinquent account is not paid in full prior thereto.

B.    Authorized. A customer’s water service or other municipal utility service may be discontinued if any part of the utility bill is not paid in accordance with this chapter.

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.530 Cutoff of service and forfeiture of deposit for nonpayment.

If an account becomes delinquent and it is necessary to turn off the service, the deposit shall be applied to the unpaid balance due. Water service will not be restored to that customer at the same or different premises until all outstanding bills due the CBS have been paid and a new cash deposit paid. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.540 Service turnoff for nonpayment—Authorized.

A.    A customer’s water service may be discontinued if the water bill is not paid in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter.

B.    In cases of extreme hardship, the CBS finance director shall have the discretion of renewing service to a delinquent account upon receipt of a satisfactory installment plan for the payment of the overdue amount.

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.550 Service turnoff for nonpayment—Procedure.

A.    On the turnoff date, the environmental superintendent or his designee shall deliver a written notice to the customer stating that the water service is being turned off until all delinquent amounts have been paid.

B.    The environmental superintendent or his designee shall immediately thereafter turn off the service.

C.    A delivery to any person residing at the address served by the water service shall be considered a delivery to the customer.

D.    If there is no person present at the address served, then the notice may be left on the premises stating that water service will be discontinued on the following morning. If delinquent bills are not paid by the following morning, the environmental superintendent or his designee shall return to the premises, shut off the water service, and leave a notice that the water service has been turned off until all delinquent accounts have been paid. The CBS is not liable for damages resulting from this procedure.

(Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.560 Interest rate on delinquent accounts.

Amounts owed the CBS under this chapter shall be considered delinquent if not paid when due. Each bill shall indicate the due date for payment, which shall be the billing date of the following month. Any amount not paid when due shall be charged an interest rate of twelve percent per year until paid in full. (Ord. 07-22 § 4 (part), 2007: Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.570 Service turnoff for nonpayment—Restoration of service.

In all instances where water has been turned off because of account delinquency, service shall be restored after payment of current and past due charges and the reconnect fee as provided in Section 15.05.620. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.580 City to determine priority of service—Superior rights of CBS residents.

In case of shortage of supply, the CBS reserves the right to give preference in the matter of furnishing service to customers and interests of the CBS from the standpoint of public convenience or necessity. Water service to persons or entities not connected to the water utility shall, at all times, be subject to the prior and superior rights of the customers connected to the water system. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.590 Fire protection services.

A.    Purpose. Standby fire protection service connections of two inches to eight inches in size will be installed only if adequate provisions are made to prevent the use of water from such services for purposes other than fire extinguishing. Sealed fire sprinkler systems with water-operated alarms shall be considered as having such adequate provisions. The CBS may require that a suitable detector check or meter be installed in standby fire protection service connections to which hose lines or hydrants are connected.

B.    Charges for Service. No charge will be made for water used in routine testing of the fire protection system. The customer shall pay the full cost of the standby fire protection service connection, any required detector check or meter, and any special water mains installed solely for service to the standby connection.

C.    Fire Service Connection Other Than Standby. A service having fire protection facilities on the premises and water for other purposes flowing through the same service connection shall be considered as an ordinary service and shall be metered. All water used through that service, regardless of its use, may be charged at the regular rates; however, no additional charge will be made for the fire protection facilities on the premises.

D.    Violations of Regulations. If water is used from a standby fire protection service in violation of these regulations, an estimate of the amount used will be computed by the environmental superintendent, and the customer shall pay for the water used at the regular rates, including the minimum charge based on the size of the service connection. In addition, the CBS may require that a service meter be installed in the service connection and subsequent bills rendered on the basis of the regular water rates. Every person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and penalties assessed as prescribed in Title 1. 

E.    Pressure, Supply, and Quality. The CBS assumes no responsibility for loss or damage because of lack of water supply, water pressure, or water quality, and merely agrees to furnish such quantities and pressures as are available in its general distribution system. The service is subject to shutdowns and variations required by the operation of the system.

F.    Public Fire Hydrants.

1.    No person, corporation, or other association may open, attempt to draw water from, close, or tamper with a public fire hydrant except a firefighter or utility employee in the discharge of duties, or a person, corporation, or other association that has received specific written approval from the CBS.

2.    A written application for a permit to use a public fire hydrant shall be submitted to the CBS and shall be on a form supplied by the CBS and shall contain such information as may be required by the CBS.

3.    The permit may be issued after payment of a refundable security and damage deposit of one hundred dollars for any backflow prevention device, water meter, fire hoses or other equipment provided by the CBS. Upon presentation of the receipt given for the deposit, the applicant shall be entitled to a refund of the deposit less such amount as the CBS determines is appropriate for damage or loss of the backflow prevention device, meter, fire hoses or other equipment provided the applicant and less such amount as may be due for the hydrant use.

4.    The charge for water used from a public fire hydrant shall be fifty cents per one thousand gallons with a fifty-dollar minimum. If a meter is not available, the charge for unmetered use of a fire hydrant is fifty dollars per day or any part thereof.

(Ord. 15-20 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.600 Fire protection systems.

A.    There shall be no charge for water used in a metered or unmetered fire protection system for the extinguishment of a fire to which a municipal fire department has responded. The environmental superintendent shall make a good faith estimate of the amount of water used in the extinguishment of a fire and the customer’s water bill for that or a subsequent month shall be adjusted in accordance with that estimate.

B.    An unmetered fire protection service used in any manner as a domestic source shall be charged at the unmetered rate determined by the environmental superintendent to be most appropriate for the domestic uses involved for the period of time between the installation of the unmetered fire protection system service until the domestic use ceases or the fire protection system is metered. Every person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and penalties assessed as prescribed in Title 1.

C.    Fire hydrants on private property may not be connected to the municipal water system unless they meet requirements of the CBS with respect to location, color, fitting size and threads, feedline size and other requirements established for the purpose of ensuring the hydrant will be usable by the fire department in a fire emergency. Unmetered fire hydrants on private property may be used only for fire extinguishment.

(Ord. 15-20 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.610 Relocation of fire hydrants.

If a property owner or other party desires a change in the size, type or location of the hydrant, he shall bear all costs of such changes without refund. Any changes in the location of the fire hydrant shall be approved by the public works director. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.05.620 Rates and fees. 

A.    Unmetered Water. Base rate: forty-nine dollars and forty-five cents per unit.

	UNIT DESCRIPTION 	UNIT

	Residential/Dwelling Unit(1)	1.0(2)

	Commercial (General, Miscellaneous)(3)	1.0

	Clubs and lodges without bar or restaurant	 

	Garages, service stations	 

	Offices including medical (10 or less employees)	 

	Shops and stores without food processing	 

	Commercial Specifics(3) (1 Minimum) Plus	Per Each	 

	Bar, lounge, restaurant, snack bar	seat or stool	0.05

	Barber, beauty shop (one station = 1.0)	station	0.6

	Bowling alley	lane	1.0

	Church	10 seats	0.1

	Office/office space	over 10 employees	0.2

	Hospital	bed	0.8

	Meat market	 	3.0

	Supermarket, grocery store with food process	 	8.0

	Rest home	bed	0.2

	Hotel, motel(4)	room	0.3

	Dormitory, boardinghouse(4)	bed or room	0.3

	RV park(4)(6)	RV space	0.3

	Bed and breakfast(4)	room	0.15

	Commercial laundry	wet machine	8.0

	Launderette	wet machine	1.0

	Schools, college, day care(5)	10 students	0.4

	Theater	10 seats	0.2

	Car wash (no minimum)	stall	2.0

Notes:

(1) Including apartments and trailers, per each. (Apartments shall be assessed as if on a separate meter.)

(2) Base rate.

(3) Business in homes shall be assessed for the additional appropriate commercial rate.

(4) Hotel, motel, B&B may count rooms only. Dormitory or boardinghouse must count beds or rooms. RV parks count RV spaces with utility hookups.

(5) Approximate enrollment—may be reviewed annually.

(6) RV parks have all mobile units able to be underway on the road with a minimal amount of time and not require special permits to drive on the road. Underway can be under its own power, pulled by a vehicle or in the bed of a pickup. Rental rates are based on the day and utilities are included.

B.    Metered Water Service.

1.    General Metered Water Service.

	Meter Size	Allowance (GAL)	Minimum Charge

	Up to 1"	15,000	$70.50

	2"	50,000	$154.62

	3"	100,000	$231.92

	4"	250,000	$463.82

	6" and above	500,000	$927.66

    All over allowance charged at minimum charge plus one dollar and fifty-four cents per one thousand gallons. The over allowance charged at minimum charge plus seventy-two cents per one thousand gallons will apply to major fish processing plants (Seafood Producers Cooperative, Sitka Sound Seafoods, Inc., aka North Pacific Seafoods, and Stikine Holdings, LLC, aka Silver Bay Seafoods).

2.    Gary Paxton Industrial Park.

a.    Metered water: one hundred fifty-four dollars and sixty-two cents per month minimum.

i.    Treated water: three dollars and nine cents per one thousand gallons.

ii.    Treated water, fish processing use: two dollars and thirty-four cents per one thousand gallons.

iii.    Raw water for heating: ninety-eight cents per one thousand gallons.

iv.    Raw water for industrial processing: one dollar and thirty-nine cents per one thousand gallons.

v.    Raw water for water bottling at Gary Paxton industrial park: in container sizes of five gallons or less: two dollars and two cents per one thousand gallons.

vi.    Raw water for bottling at Gary Paxton industrial park in container sizes greater than five gallons: one cent per gallon.

C.    Curb Stop/Service Valve Operation Fee. Except for the initial turn-on that occurs when property is first connected to the municipal water system, each customer or applicant for service shall pay a fee of fifty-nine dollars and fifty cents for turning on or turning off the water service to the property. The fee shall be paid for each turn-on and turn-off whether at the customer’s or applicant’s request or due to nonpayment for water services. The water service to a property may not be turned on unless all water system fees associated with the property have been paid in full.

D.    Fire Hydrant Use Fee. Provided in Section 15.05.590.

E.    Connection Fee. Seven hundred sixty dollars per connection.

(Ord. 18-26 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 17-21 § 4 (part), 2017; Ord. 16-25 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 15-46 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 15-10 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 14-19 § 4 (part), 2014; Ord. 13-32 § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 13-30 § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 12-16 § 4 (part), 2012; Ord. 11-25 § 4 (part), 2011; Ord. 10-13S § 4 (part), 2010; Ord. 09-60 § 4 (part), 2009; Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


Chapter 15.06 SOLID WASTE TREATMENT AND REFUSE COLLECTION Revised 7/19

Sections:

15.06.005    Frequency of collection.

15.06.010    Preparation of refuse.

15.06.015    Refuse receptacle.

15.06.020    Solid waste disposal policy and rates. Revised 7/19

15.06.030    Receptacles available.

15.06.035    Rates for treatment and collection. Revised 7/19

15.06.040    Deposit required for smaller containers.

15.06.045    Transfer station drop-off charges and special refuse collection charges. Revised 7/19

15.06.050    Construction and demolition debris.

15.06.055    Restrictions on applicability of rates.

15.06.070    Definitions.


15.06.005 Frequency of collection.

Refuse shall be collected a minimum of once a week. Residences, hotels, restaurants, institutions, and commercial establishments may be required to have more frequent collection, if determined by the city and borough of Sitka to be essential or desirable to protect the public health. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.06.010 Preparation of refuse.

All refuse shall be drained free from liquids before disposal. Garbage shall be wrapped in paper or similar materials. All cans, bottles, or other food containers shall be rinsed free of food particles and drained before disposal. Toxic, volatile or other hazardous materials are prohibited. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.06.015 Refuse receptacle.

Every resident head of household and business located within the city and borough of Sitka shall keep and maintain a clean refuse receptacle provided by the refuse collection contractor. All receptacles shall be placed at a convenient location for collection. Convenient location shall be a point designated by the director of public works. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.06.020 Solid waste disposal policy and rates. Revised 7/19

A.    In order to promote public health and reduce littering and illegal dumping, every residential unit, business, and live aboard vessel within one mile of the Sitka road system shall be required to pay a waste disposal fee as set by the assembly. This requirement shall apply to each customer within a common structure and combined rental and nonrental spaces within a common structure. There are no exceptions to paying a waste fee under these classifications regardless of the amount of waste generated and/or disposed. Failure to pay any amount of user and/or utility fees owed to the city and borough shall be grounds for disconnection of any or all services and utilities such as electrical service as provided for in Section 15.01.030.

B.    Customers shall be permitted to dispose of acceptable waste in collection contractor-provided receptacles. “Acceptable waste” means all putrescible and nonputrescible waste including, but not limited to: garbage; refuse; ashes; paper and cardboard; and approved special waste. “Special waste” means any waste material which, because of its physical characteristics, chemical make-up, or biological nature, requires either special handling procedures and permitting, or poses an unusual threat to human health, equipment, property, or the environment. Customers shall not be permitted to dispose of unacceptable and/or special waste in collection contractor-provided receptacles. “Unacceptable waste” means waste that may not be disposed of at the disposal site under federal, state or local law, regulation, rule, code, permit or permit condition. Special waste shall be disposed of according to subsection (C)(10) of this section or at bi-annual city-sponsored collection events.

C.    Fees and Policies Applicable to Specific Solid Waste Categories.

1.    Junk automobiles and small trucks (three-quarter ton or smaller) may be delivered to Gary Paxton industrial park (GPIP) scrap yard at a rate of 4.1 cents per pound.

2.    Trucks larger than three-quarter ton, larger vehicles, heavy equipment, and old trailers shall be billed at a rate of 7.2 cents per pound.

3.    Mixed scrap metals including steel shall be billed at a rate of 10.25 cents per pound. Sorted scrap iron and other metals excluding steel shall be billed at a rate of six cents per pound. Inclusion of any amount of steel within an individual delivery of scrap metal to the municipal scrap yard shall deem it to be a mixed scrap metal delivery to be billed at the mixed scrap metal rate.

4.    Fuel tanks must be cleaned and cut into pieces less than five feet by twelve feet (if over five hundred gallons) prior to delivery to the GPIP scrap yard.

5.    Freezers, refrigerators, and air conditioning units shall be billed at a rate of twenty-two dollars and fifty-five cents each.

6.    All other appliances or white goods besides freezers, refrigerators, and air conditioning units shall be billed at a rate of 7.2 cents per pound.

7.    Tires off of large trucks and heavy equipment may be delivered to the transfer station or GPIP scrap yard and shall be billed at a rate of twenty-eight dollars and seventy cents each.

8.    No construction and demolition debris shall be disposed of at any Sitka landfill unless otherwise authorized by the director of public works.

9.    Household hazardous or special waste may be disposed of during normal business hours at the GPIP scrap yard. Commercially generated household hazardous waste will not be accepted at any time.

10.    Concrete and asphalt disposal shall be billed at a rate of thirteen dollars and thirty-three cents per cubic yard.

11.    Concrete and asphalt disposal is by appointment only with the public works superintendent.

12.    Asbestos disposal shall be billed at a rate of sixty dollars and forty-eight cents per cubic yard.

13.    Asbestos disposal is by appointment only with the public works superintendent.

(Ord. 19-21S § 4 (part), 2019; Ord. 18-28 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 17-21 § 4 (part), 2017: Ord. 15-59 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 14-21 § 4 (part), 2014; Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.06.030 Receptacles available.

The refuse collection contractor will provide three sizes for refuse collection:

A.    A forty-eight-gallon container;

B.    A ninety-six-gallon container; and

C.    A three-hundred-fifty-gallon container.

(Ord. 17-21 § 4 (part), 2017: Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.06.035 Rates for treatment and collection. Revised 7/19

A.    The following rates are effective on the day after the day a solid waste user fee ordinance containing such fees is passed:

	48-gallon container	$35.10 per month

	96-gallon container	$58.97 per month

	300-gallon container	$238.70 per month

B.    These rates are for one container that the refuse collection contractor picks up once a week. For customers that fall into one of the following three categories, the rates for treatment and collection will be:

	For those customers in apartment complexes or other unique situations identified on the list maintained by the finance director	$53.36 per month

	For those customers living within the harbor system	$53.36 per month

	For those customers living on an island other than Baranof or connected by bridge to Baranof who do not receive any service from the refuse collection contractor	$26.68 per month

C.    Rates shall be reviewed annually in January by the assembly.

(Ord. 19-21S § 4 (part), 2019; Ord. 18-28 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 17-21 § 4 (part), 2017; Ord. 15-59 § 4 (part), 2016; Ord. 05-44 § 4, 2005; Ord. 05-20 § 4, 2005; Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.06.040 Deposit required for smaller containers.

A fifty-dollar deposit is required before a smaller size container is delivered to a customer. Such deposit will earn interest at the rate paid on a one-year U.S. Treasury note. After one year of service using the smaller size container, the deposit and interest earned will be applied to the customer’s bill. If the customer switches back to a full size container within one year, the deposit and interest earned will be forfeited to the solid waste treatment fund. If the customer violates procedures for solid waste disposal as set forth in this chapter within the first year of use of the smaller size container, the customer will forfeit the deposit and interest earned to the solid waste treatment fund. (Ord. 15-59 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.06.045 Transfer station drop-off charges and special refuse collection charges. Revised 7/19

A.    Refuse may be dropped off directly at the municipal transfer station during operating hours by any individual or entity. Each residential solid waste utility customer receiving municipal solid waste collection and disposal services shall be entitled to dispose of up to two hundred pounds of solid waste per month at the transfer station free of charge. All other refuse disposed of directly at the municipal transfer station shall be billed the rate of 13.3 cents per pound.

B.    Customers desiring to have refuse in a quantity exceeding the capacity of their refuse containers collected and disposed of may call the collection contractor for a special collection. The collection contractor shall be obligated to collect this refuse as requested. It shall be the responsibility of the collection contractor to notify the customer of all charges prior to collection. All billing and collection for this service shall be administered by the refuse collection contractor and CBS will bill customers based on documentation provided by the contractor.

(Ord. 19-21S § 4 (part), 2019; Ord. 18-28 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 17-21 § 4 (part), 2017: Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.06.050 Construction and demolition debris.

Construction and demolition debris will be accepted at the Jarvis Street transfer station and, effective August 1, 2003, shall be billed at a rate equivalent to the current disposal rate. The rate shall be adjusted on an annual basis to be equivalent to the disposal contract rate. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.06.055 Restrictions on applicability of rates.

Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the rates established in the solid waste treatment and collection policy only apply to customers who have an active utility account with the city and borough of Sitka.

Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the rates for vehicles set out in Section 15.06.020 shall only apply to one vehicle per month for each customer who has an active utility account with the city and borough, with the rate for each additional vehicle in that month to be ten cents per pound. (Ord. 05-15 § 4(C) (part), 2005.)


15.06.070 Definitions.

A.    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

1.    “Residential unit” means any structure, portion of a structure, mobile home, or fifth wheel, which is not otherwise defined as a hotel, motel or other public accommodation per Section 4.24.010. If a structure contains a room or set of rooms which are occasionally rented to transient guests through a bed and breakfast or other similar arrangement, the structure shall be defined as a residential unit for purposes of this chapter.

2.    “Business” means any structure, or portion of a structure, or business location which is (a) not otherwise defined as a residential unit and (b) not defined as a vessel or a liveaboard per Chapter 13.04.

3.    “Liveaboard” shall have the same definition as set forth in Section 13.04.130.

B.    In instances involving ambiguities as to whether or not any structure, abode, or real property shall be defined as a residential unit, business, or liveaboard required to utilize the solid waste services provided by the city and borough of Sitka; or, whether such structure, abode, or real property shall be defined as a residential unit, business, or liveaboard, the administrator shall have the authority to make binding decisions as to the application of the regulations set forth in this chapter.

(Ord. 15-59 § 4 (part), 2016.)


Chapter 15.07 STORM DRAINAGE

Sections: 

15.07.010    Definitions.

15.07.020    Purpose.

15.07.030    Applicability.

15.07.040    Administration.

15.07.050    Design and construction standards.

15.07.060    Special drainage use zones.


15.07.010 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“CBS” means city and borough of Sitka.

“Design storm” means a rainfall event of chosen intensity and duration selected for a storm drainage analysis or system design, and is usually expressed as having a statistical probability of recurrence, such as once in every five, ten, fifty, or one hundred years on average. A one-hundred-year storm has a one percent probability of occurring in a given year.

“Designated special drainage use areas” means areas within the city which have been designated as critical to the passage of stormwater runoff from upland origins to salt water discharge.

“Development” means, but is not limited to, buildings, bridges, road building, grading, land-filling, excavations, utilities or other capital improvements and other land use changes that add impervious area.

“Director of public works” means either the director of the city’s department of public works or the director’s designee.

“Drainage basins” means those lands draining to a common watercourse or outlet including the headwaters of said watercourse.

“Drainage system” means the system of facilities for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff, including streams, pipelines, channels, ditches, lakes, wetlands, and other drainage structures and appurtenances, natural and manmade.

“Erosion” means the process by which stormwater dislodges and transports soil and other materials.

“Excavation” means the physical, manmade removal of earth material.

“Floodplain” means the low-lying area adjacent to a watercourse onto which excessive water flows during periods of prolonged and intensive precipitation. The floodplain for a particular watercourse is a geographical area flooded by a storm of specified recurrence interval.

“Grading” means any act which changes the elevation of the ground surface.

“Impervious” means impenetrable – completely resisting the entrance of liquids.

“Peak discharge” means the maximum rate of stormwater runoff at a particular point determined for the design storm.

“Public drainage system” means all drainage systems lying within dedicated public easements and rights-of-way or other public lands, and watercourses through private lands which serve as integral parts of drainage systems which convey surface water from streets or public lands, or which provide common drainage from more than one parcel.

“Recurrence interval” is the estimated interval of time between storms of a given intensity and duration.

“Sediment” means waterborne particles, graded or undefined, occurring by erosive action.

“Sedimentation” means the deposition of debris and soil sediment displaced by erosion and transported by runoff.

“Storm sewer” means an underground conduit to convey discharges to an outfall point.

“Stream” means a surface water route generally consisting of a channel with bed, banks, or sides, in which surface waters flow in draining from higher to lower land, both perennial and intervening; the channel and intervening artificial components, excluding flows which do not persist more than twenty-four hours after cessation of rainfall at some time of the year.

“Watercourse” means the course or route followed by waters draining from the land, generally formed by nature. (Ord. 15-07 § 4 (part), 2015.) 


15.07.020 Purpose.

A.    This chapter is established to promote, protect, and preserve the public interest by regulating the planning, construction, and maintenance of public and private storm drainage systems within the CBS.

B.    The specific objectives of this chapter include but are not limited to:

1.    The prevention and abatement of flooding and runoff-related property damage, nuisances, or hazards;

2.    The prevention of adverse effects of alterations in surface water quantities, locations, and flow patterns;

3.    The prevention of actions or practices which would reduce the ability of the public drainage system to convey storm drainage at its intended capacity;

4.    The establishment of minimum standards for planning, construction, and maintenance of storm drainage improvements within the CBS; and

5.    The establishment of administrative procedures for permits, plan reviews, and construction quality control for grading or drainage improvements significantly affecting the public drainage system.

C.    This chapter is intended to promote the health, safety and welfare of the public and nothing herein is intended to or shall be deemed to create a duty in the CBS to protect or promote the interests of any particular person or class of persons. The existence of these regulations or any failure, refusal or omission of the CBS to enforce any provision herein shall not prevent, supplant or affect the right of any person affected by the clearing, grading, or drainage operations of another to invoke such private remedies as may be available against such other person.

(Ord. 15-07 § 4 (part), 2015.)


15.07.030 Applicability.

A.    This chapter shall apply to all property within the CBS, both privately and publicly owned.

B.    To the extent permitted by law, governmental entities, including municipal corporations and their departments, government owned utilities, school districts, and agencies and departments of state and federal government, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.

C.    Other CBS, state and federal laws and regulations may apply to storm drainage related matters within the CBS. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter does not guarantee compliance with such other requirements. 

(Ord. 15-07 § 4 (part), 2015.)


15.07.040 Administration.

The director of public works is charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter. The director is empowered to establish such administrative procedures and guidelines as are required in the execution of this authority. (Ord. 15-07 § 4 (part), 2015.)


15.07.050 Design and construction standards.

A.    Design and construction standards for storm drainage improvements within the CBS shall be prepared, maintained, and revised from time to time by the director of public works and made available in written form to the general public upon request.

B.    Construction standards for storm drainage improvements are referred to as “City and Borough of Sitka Standard Specifications” and are hereby adopted as official CBS standards for design and construction of culverts, catch basins, drains, ditches, drainage inlets, and other ordinary drainage improvements.

C.    Design standards for storm drainage improvements are referred to as “City and Borough of Sitka Stormwater Design Standards” and are hereby adopted as official CBS standards for the hydrologic and hydraulic design and sizing of culverts, drains, ditches, drainage inlets, and other ordinary drainage improvements.

D.    Construction of drainage improvements in public rights-of-way, easements and areas for which drainage permits are required under the Sitka General Code shall be designed and constructed in compliance with standards adopted in this chapter.

E.    The director of public works may revise and update the “City and Borough of Sitka Standard Specifications” or the “City and Borough of Sitka Stormwater Design Standards” to reflect changes in technology, new information concerning hydrologic or meteorological assumptions, changes in the type and availability of construction materials, and standards guidance from other governmental entities.

F.    The director of public works may allow deviations from the “City and Borough of Sitka Standard Specifications” or the “City and Borough of Sitka Stormwater Design Standards” when he/she determines that drainage can be better accommodated by alternate design or construction methods, or when substitutions of alternate construction materials would not result in loss of essential function. A variance may also be granted by the director of public works when he/she finds that:

1.    Downstream facilities have sufficient capacity under design conditions to safely convey the proposed runoff;

2.    The quality of the receiving waters will be maintained;

3.    There is minimal potential for adverse effects from the proposed runoff;

4.    The proposed system can be maintained; and

5.    The proposed system does not compromise the structural integrity of abutting roadways, foundations, or structures. 

(Ord. 15-07 § 4 (part), 2015.) 


15.07.060 Special drainage use zones.

A.    Areas within the CBS which are critical or may reasonably become critical to the passage of stormwater runoff from upland origins are hereby established as “designated special drainage use areas.” Critical areas are those in which existing or potential flooding, drainage, erosion, water quality, and/or instability conditions present a reasonable likelihood of harm to the welfare and safety of surrounding property, or to the integrity of surface water systems and resources.

B.    Designated special drainage use areas may be identified and delineated on maps for purposes of this chapter. The director of public works shall be responsible for preparing, maintaining and updating maps of designated special drainage use area boundaries. 

(Ord. 15-07 § 4 (part), 2015.)


Chapter 15.08 UTILITY POLES

Sections:

15.08.010    Purpose.

15.08.020    General prohibition.

15.08.030    Exceptions by permit.

15.08.040    Permit.


15.08.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to promote the safety of linemen by prohibiting such display materials on utility poles as may impede penetration of pole climbers’ spikes, and to promote the general appearance, health, welfare, and neatness of the city and borough by prohibiting unsightly display material, particularly material placed by persons or organizations that historically have failed to remove their advertising after the time concerned was past. (S.C.C. § 4-2-52.)


15.08.020 General prohibition.

Except as otherwise specified herein, the use of utility poles for advertising purposes of any kind is prohibited. City and borough owned marine pilings are deemed utility poles for the purpose of this chapter. (S.C.C. § 4-2-53.)


15.08.030 Exceptions by permit.

Any person or organization wishing to use the utility poles for any publicity or advertising purposes may do so provided all the following requirements are met:

A.    The material wished to be placed thereon is tied onto the pole or attached in such a way that the spikes of the linemen’s pole climbers will not be impeded from penetrating the poles;

B.    A statement is filed with the municipal administrator giving the name of the person or organization who will be putting up the advertising material, the length of time it will be up, and that the organization concerned will be responsible for and will take the material down within three days of the end of the time stated for display;

C.    That no posters or cards advertising or promoting political candidates or parties will be displayed;

D.    That the municipal administrator has examined the material proposed to be displayed and has issued in his discretion a written permit giving consent for such display along with any reasonable restrictions he may deem proper. (S.C.C. § 4-2-54.)


15.08.040 Permit.

The permit shall be in the form of a simple statement signed by the municipal administrator stating the name of the person or organization to whom the permit is issued and the term of display along with any other reasonable conditions of display. There shall be no charge for the permit.

(S.C.C. § 4-2-55.)


Chapter 15.12 PRIVATE EXTENSIONS OF WATER, WASTEWATER, AND STORMWATER UTILITIES

Sections:

15.12.010    Applicability.

15.12.020    Requirements of connection and extension.

15.12.030    Construction of utility extensions and connections.

15.12.040    Maintenance.

15.12.050    Cost sharing.

15.12.060    Easements.


15.12.010 Applicability.

This chapter applies to private extensions of water and sewer utilities, including lines that carry water, wastewater and stormwater. This chapter does not apply to any development or subdivision in which the developer recovers the costs of such extensions in the price of lots sold by the developer. (Ord. 00-1595 § 4 (part), 2000.)


15.12.020 Requirements of connection and extension.

A.    Any application for extension of utility by water, wastewater or stormwater utility shall be executed in writing and delivered to the public works director. Such application shall be executed by the owner of the property or by a lessor or renter of the property who provides with the application a notarized statement of consent from the property owner. An application shall also include:

1.    Proof that officially placed survey markers exist on the property sufficient to locate the proposed new facilities, submitted with an acknowledgment of the public works director and power to require such additional surveying to located adequately the proposed new facilities;

2.    A site plan and engineered drawings that adequately depict the proposed new facilities; and

3.    Identification of the person, entity, or contractor who will perform the work under the permit.

B.    An application for any work proposed to be performed in a municipal right-of-way shall be designed to municipal standards by an engineer registered in the state of Alaska.

(Ord. 00-1595 § 4 (part), 2000.)


15.12.030 Construction of utility extensions and connections.

A.    No construction of an extension or connection of water, wastewater or stormwater utility shall commence without approval of an application for a permit as described in this chapter. No construction of an extension or connection of water, wastewater or stormwater utility shall commence without the approval of the state of Alaska’s Department of Environmental Conservation as evidenced by the issuance of a permit to construct.

B.    If performance of the work allowed by the permit or the construction of the utility extension or connection poses a hazard to life or safety, is in violation of the law, or interferes with the city and borough’s access to the city and borough’s facilities, the city and borough shall notify the permit holder of the deficiency. If the permit holder does not take prompt action to correct the identified deficiency, the city and borough may take the necessary action to correct the deficiency at the permit holder’s expense.

C.    The construction and the materials used in the construction shall meet the standards set out in the permit.

D.    The city and borough shall have the right to reject any contractor the city and borough does not believe qualified to perform the work. Any rejection of a contractor shall be accompanied by a written explanation. A contractor must be licensed and bonded in the state of Alaska before the city and borough shall issue any approval or rejection.

E.    The city and borough shall have the right to conduct inspections of the work on utility extensions or connections, to charge inspection fees for such work, and to assure that the facilities as constructed meet the city and borough’s standards.

F.    The permit holder shall provide to the city and borough a certified as-built survey of the installed facilities performed by a registered land surveyor.

(Ord. 00-1595 § 4 (part), 2000.)


15.12.040 Maintenance.

A.    If all other requirements set out in this chapter are met, the city and borough will assume responsibility for further maintenance of utility extensions and also assume title to such facilities if:

1.    The permit holder has provided the city and borough with a certified as-built survey of the installed facilities performed by a registered land surveyor;

2.    The permit holder has provided a performance guarantee equal to one hundred percent of the construct cost adequate to assure that the facilities will perform satisfactorily for one year after completion of construction; and

3.    The permit holder has provided the city and borough with a recorded plat or other legal document satisfactory to the city and borough that dedicates to the city and borough any easements necessary for the city and borough’s maintenance of such facilities.

B.    Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the city and borough shall not accept maintenance responsibilities for any private utility extension or connection that is constructed on, over, or under any body of water or tideland.

(Ord. 00-1595 § 4 (part), 2000.)


15.12.050 Cost sharing.

A.    The total project cost of each utility extension or connection shall be fully amortized over ten years beginning on the date of assumption of title and future maintenance responsibilities by the city and borough. The city and borough shall calculate amortization by reducing the total project cost by ten percent each year for ten years. The total project cost shall include only the sum of the cost of borrowing money; the cost of easement acquisition; the costs of surveying, design and construction; and an allowance for indirect costs of fifteen percent of the total of the sum of costs for surveying, design and construction.

B.    The city and borough shall collect and refund to the permit holder fees for connections made by others for a period of ten years after that date the city and borough assumes the title and future maintenance responsibilities. The city and borough shall deduct an administrative fee of five percent of the total project cost to cover the costs of such collections and refund. The total amount of fees collected by a utility extension or connection funded by a private permit holder shall not exceed the total project cost.

C.    Fees for connections to the facilities that are constructed during the amortization period of ten years shall be based upon the total number of connections to the utility extension in existence at the time of connection to the property most recently connected. Each lot shall be considered one property benefitting from the extension.

D.    If the primary extension to the subdivision, residence or commercial property connects to a previously constructed and privately funded extension no later than ten years after the date the earlier extension or connection was completed and there are still unfunded advances for construction of the earlier extension or connection, the responsibility for repayment of such advances shall be recalculated to include the property owner whose property has been more recently connected.

E.    Subject to the approval of the city and borough, an agreement for extending utility may be assumed by another person providing the person assuming the agreement is the owner of the property being connected to utility.

F.    The city and borough shall not hold a permit holder responsible for the cost of upgrading a utility system’s capacity if the permit holder’s utility requirements are comparable to those users in the area being served by the facilities requiring upgrading.

(Ord. 00-1595 § 4 (part), 2000.)


15.12.060 Easements.

A.    The city and borough shall make a reasonable effort to obtain from property owners easements necessary for construction of a utility extension. The city and borough shall not purchase property or easements for this purpose.

B.    A permit holder may enter into private agreements with property owners to purchase easements for a utility extension, but the city and borough shall not be a party to such agreements. However, the permit holder must dedicate all easements to the city and borough when the city and borough takes over ownership.

(Ord. 00-1595 § 4 (part), 2000.)


Chapter 15.15 UTILITY COST SUBSIDIZATION PROGRAM 

Sections:

15.15.010    Definitions. 

15.15.020    Policy and procedure. 

15.15.030    Eligibility for subsidization. 

15.15.040    Penalties for receiving subsidization under false pretenses. 


15.15.010 Definitions. 

A.    A “household” consists of all the people who occupy a “housing unit.” A house, an apartment or other group of rooms, or a single room, is regarded as a housing unit when it is occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters; that is, when the occupants do not live with any other persons in the structure and there is direct access from the outside or through a common hall. A previously designated live aboard vessel in the city and borough harbor system is also regarded as a housing unit. A household includes the related family members and all the unrelated people, if any, such as lodgers, foster children, wards, or employees who share the housing unit. A person living alone in a housing unit, or a group of unrelated people sharing a housing unit such as partners or roomers, is also counted as a household. The count of households excludes group quarters.

B.    “Obligation” or “debt” means any sum of money which a citizen of the city and borough, or customer of the city and borough in some capacity, is legally obligated to pay to the city and borough for any purpose.

C.    “Past-due” refers to any obligation or debt owed to the city and borough which has not been paid within thirty days of the date the payment was due. As an exception, debts owed for utility services consumed are considered overdue fifteen days after the date the payment was due.

D.    “Subsidization” refers to “utility cost subsidization.”

(Ord. 18-04S § 4 (part), 2018.)


15.15.020 Policy and procedure. 

A.    It shall be the policy of the city and borough that applicants meeting certain criteria shall be eligible for subsidization of their municipal utility costs from general governmental sources. This subsidization is intended as a social welfare payment.

B.    Subsidization shall be in the form of general governmental subsidy payments to municipal utility accounts for the benefit of eligible applicants. Under no circumstances may subsidization be in the form of reduced utility rates or the provision of free utility services.

C.    A separate utility cost subsidization fund shall be established at inception by a special appropriation of the assembly. That fund may be annually funded by a budgetary appropriation of the assembly. The total amount of annual utility cost subsidization by the city and borough shall be in the municipal administrator’s annual consolidated operating budget. Monies appropriated and used for utility cost subsidization shall be accounted for in a separate fund and shall be used for no other purpose than utility cost subsidization.

D.    Applications for subsidization shall be submitted to the finance department on forms provided by the finance department. Only one applicant per household is allowed, and only one subsidization per applicant is allowed. A subsidization period shall be for one year, starting January following the application period. If an applicant is deemed eligible for subsidization, that eligibility only extends for the upcoming subsidization period. Applications must be submitted during the application period, between August 1st and October 31st each year, for the upcoming subsidization period. Any applicant deemed eligible for a subsidization period must reapply for eligibility in any subsequent subsidization period.

E.    The finance department shall examine all applications, determine the eligibility of each applicant, and make a recommendation to the administrator as to the eligibility of each applicant.

F.    Upon receiving the finance department’s recommendations, the administrator, in his or her sole discretion and before the applicable subsidization period, shall accept and/or reject each recommendation and submit the applicants thereby determined eligible for a subsidy to the finance department for disbursement of the subsidy during the applicable subsidization period.

G.    Upon receiving the administrator’s declaration of applicants eligible for a subsidy during the upcoming subsidization period, the finance department shall credit those applicant utility accounts the applicable monthly subsidy each month during the upcoming subsidization period.

H.    The applicable monthly subsidy available for each eligible applicant during any subsidization period shall be calculated by taking the total subsidization appropriation for that subsidization period, divided by twelve (months), and, then divided by the number of eligible applicants for the upcoming subsidization period. The applicable monthly subsidy shall not exceed sixty-five dollars. The applicable monthly subsidy shall be credited before sales tax is applied.

(Ord. 18-04S § 4 (part), 2018.)


15.15.030 Eligibility for subsidization. 

A.    An applicant must be a customer receiving and responsible for paying electric utility services from the city and borough for the housing unit in which the applicant resides during the applicable subsidization period.

B.    Any applicant shall be eligible for subsidization if the applicant is receiving assistance, on the date of the application, from any of the following programs:

1.    Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) administered from the state of Alaska through the local Division of Public Assistance office in association with the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Food and Nutrition Services.

2.    Medicaid administered from the state of Alaska through the local Division of Public Assistance.

3.    Baranof Island Housing Authority (BIHA), the tribally designated housing entity for the Sitka Tribe of Alaska (STA) administered through the Sheet’iká X’áat’i Hitx’i” (Sitka Island Housing) office.

4.    National School Lunch Program (NSLP) administered through the Sitka School District (SSD), known as Free and Reduced School Lunch Program in association with the USDA.

    In order to be eligible for subsidization, the applicant must provide the finance department with satisfactory documentary evidence that he or she is currently receiving assistance from one of the programs.

C.    If assistance from the program identified by the applicant for eligibility is discontinued before or during the subsidization period, the applicant shall notify the finance department within thirty days of discontinuance of the assistance and the city and borough shall terminate the subsidization for the remainder of the subsidization period.

D.    An applicant will be deemed ineligible for a subsidy if the applicant has any past-due obligation owed to the city and borough other than utility-related obligations. These other obligations shall include all unpaid citations and billings for protective custody cases. On a case-by-case basis, the administrator may waive, reduce, or create a payment plan for past due obligations in order for an applicant to be eligible for subsidization.

(Ord. 18-04S § 4 (part), 2018.)


15.15.040 Penalties for receiving subsidization under false pretenses. 

A.    It will be unlawful for any citizen to receive subsidization under this chapter under false pretenses. It will also be unlawful for any citizen to continue to receive subsidization under this chapter if assistance from the program identified by the applicant for eligibility is discontinued before or during the subsidization period.

B.    Upon the determination that an unlawful act may have occurred in which subsidization was received under false pretenses, the city and borough may notify the appropriate law enforcement agency so that a criminal investigation may be initiated.

(Ord. 18-04S § 4 (part), 2018.)


Title 16 (RESERVED)


Title 17 LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS

Chapters:

17.04    Definitions and Authority

17.08    Procedures for Assembly-Initiated L.I.D.’s

17.12    Procedures for Petition-Initiated L.I.D.’s

17.16    Provisions Applicable to All L.I.D.’s

17.20    Assessments

17.24    Special Assessment District Bonds

17.28    Local Improvement Guarantee Fund

17.32    Local Improvement District Revolving Fund

NOTE:    Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this title.


Chapter 17.04 DEFINITIONS AND AUTHORITY

Sections:

17.04.010    Definitions.

17.04.020    Authority.


17.04.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this title, the following words shall have the following meanings:

A.    “Assessment” or “assessments” means the assessments appearing on each local improvement district assessment roll and shall include the installments thereof and any interest and penalties required to be paid thereon;

B.    “Cost or costs of improvement” includes all costs of the L.I.D. including but not limited to:

1.    The cost of acquisition of materials and the cost of construction of the improvements, and

2.    Reasonable allowance for contingencies, and

3.    Acquisition, overhead, engineering, surveying, costs of issuing bonds, costs of mailing and publishing notice, legal and all other incidental costs;”Actual costs of improvements” means the known costs of an L.I.D. after completion of construction and when all related costs have been ascertained;

C.    “Assembly-initiated improvement district” also known as “assembly-initiated L.I.D.” means an L.I.D. established and financed according to the provisions of AS Sections 29.46.010 through 29.46.030 (except without issuance of special assessment bonds), along with such modifications of the provisions applicable to the city and borough as the assembly-initiated L.I.D. may enact by ordinance under its home rule powers. Descriptively, an assembly-initiated L.I.D. is initiated by the assembly, with notice given to the owners of the property within such district of their opportunity to object to the creation of such L.I.D.;

D.    “Current assessed value of all property within the district” includes all property whether taxable or not. The value of property of the United States, the state of Alaska, the city and borough or any other public or private corporation, associate or individual whose property is not assessed for general taxes shall be computed according to the standards afforded by similarly situated property which is assessed for general taxes, and shall be included in determining the current assessed value of all the property within the district;

E.    “Local improvement district, also known as L.I.D.” means a specific area within the city and borough specially benefited by any public improvements as may be authorized by law and that is established and financed by any of the procedures specified herein for assembly-initiated L.I.D.’s, petitioned L.I.D.’s, and special assessment districts. The term “L.I.D.” is a general term and includes any of the specific types of improvement districts as further defined in this section;

F.    “Owner” means all owners of legal title of record in the district recorder’s office at Sitka, Alaska to each lot, tract, or parcel of land in any L.I.D., and in addition includes the purchasers of record of an equitable interest under a contract for deed, purchase contract or like instrument whereby legal title is delivered upon final payment. For the purposes of this title, trustees and beneficiaries of deeds of trust and real estate mortgages or leaseholders are not included in the definition of “owner”;

G.    “Petitioned local improvement district, also known as petitioned L.I.D.” means an L.I.D. established and financed according to the provisions of AS Sections 29.46.010 through AS 29.46.030, along with such modifications of the provisions applicable to the city and borough as the assembly may enact by ordinance under its home rule powers. Descriptively, a petitioned L.I.D. is initiated by a petition of the property owners within the proposed district requesting the acquisition, construction and/or installation of certain public improvements and containing a statement of the estimated cost thereof and the proposed payment terms, which is presented to the assembly for further action;

H.    “Property” means land and any improvements attached thereto;

I.    “Special assessment districts” means those assembly-initiated L.I.D.’s and petitioned L.I.D.’s for which the issuance of special assessment district bonds is authorized to pay part or all of the costs thereof.

A duly created assembly-initiated L.I.D. or petitioned L.I.D. may be changed to a special assessment district as provided in Section 17.04.020(C).

(Ord. 86-68 § 4 (part), 1986: Ord. 74-163 § 3 (part), 1974: S.C.C. § 3-9-1.)


17.04.020 Authority.

A.    L.I.D.’s. The assembly shall have the power to create and establish an L.I.D. for purposes of acquiring, installing, or constructing capital improvements, and to levy assessments against properties specially benefited thereby to pay part or all of the costs thereof according to the procedures set forth in AS Sections 29.45.010 through 29.46.120, and as the same may be modified by ordinance of the city and borough.

B.    Special Assessment District Bonds. To pay any part or all of the costs of improvements in any special assessment district, the assembly may include in the ordinance creating such special assessment district provisions authorizing the issuance and sale of bonds thereof. The principal of and interest on such bonds shall be payable solely from special assessments levied against the property in such district benefited by such improvements and from the local improvement guaranty fund of the city and borough, and the bonds and the ordinance authorizing them shall include (but not be limited to) provisions requiring the following:

1.    That the assessments levied therein shall constitute a sinking fund for the payment of the principal of and interest on such bonds;

2.    That the property benefited by such improvements may be pledged to secure such payment, and the lien so created thereon shall constitute a lien on such property junior only to real property taxes and any prior assessments.

C.    Change of an Existing L.I.D. to a Special Assessment District. At any time after an assembly-initiated or petitioned L.I.D. is created, if the assembly decides it is in the public interest to change the status of the existing district to a special assessment district and then issue special assessment district bonds, it may do so by ordinance; provided, however, that this may not be done in the case of petitioned L.I.D.’s where the petition provides that the assessments to be levied therein should all be paid in one payment due within six months of completion.

(Ord. 86-688 § 4 (part), 1986; S.C.C. § 3-9-2.)


Chapter 17.08 PROCEDURES FOR ASSEMBLY-INITIATED L.I.D.’S

Sections:

17.08.010    Resolution of intention.

17.08.020    Notice.

17.08.030    Hearing.

17.08.040    Objections.

17.08.050    Ordinance creating district.


17.08.010 Resolution of intention.

Upon the decision of the assembly to create an assembly-initiated L.I.D., it shall adopt a resolution of intention declaring its intention to order the improvements to be acquired, constructed, and installed therein, which resolution shall also set forth a general description of the improvements to be ordered, a description of the boundaries of the proposed L.I.D., and state whether or not the city and borough proposes to issue special assessment district bonds to pay such cost.

The resolution shall fix the time, date and place of a hearing thereon, and at such hearing there shall be on file and open to all persons attending the same a map or diagram showing thereon the lots, tracts and parcels of land which will be specially benefited by the proposed improvement and a statement setting forth:

A.    The estimated cost of such improvements;

B.    The estimated proportion of such costs to be borne by the property specially benefited by such improvements, and the source of any other money needed to pay the balance of such cost;

C.    The estimated amount of such cost to be borne by each lot, tract or parcel of land;

D.    A statement of the L.I.D. assessments outstanding and unpaid against the property in the proposed district;

E.    A statement of the current assessed value of the real property within the proposed district and a statement of the current assessed valuation of the improvements thereon according to the valuations last placed upon such property and improvements for the purposes of general taxation.

(S.C.C. § 3-9-3.)


17.08.020 Notice.

A.    Published Notice. Notice of such hearing shall be published at least once a week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation throughout the city and borough with the first publication to be at least sixty days prior to the date set for such hearing if special assessment bonds are to be issued. If special assessment bonds are not to be issued to pay the cost of improvements, then the date of first publication and mailing of such notice may be not less than ten days prior to such hearing date and such published notice need only be published once. The notice shall contain a statement of the following:

1.    A general description of the improvements to be ordered and a description of the boundaries of the proposed L.I.D.;

2.    A statement of the estimated cost of the proposed improvements and the estimated proportion of such cost to be borne by the property specially benefited thereby;

3.    That a map or plat showing thereon the lots, tracts and parcels of land which will be specially benefited by the proposed improvement, the proposed assessment schedule and the proposed assessment against each such lot, tract or parcel of land is on file for public inspection at the office of the finance director;

4.    Whether special assessment district bonds will be issued and sold to provide funds to pay the cost of improvements;

5.    The time, date and place of such hearing, and that owners of any property within the proposed district may file a written objection to the creation of such district and the ordering of the work to be done therein with the finance director up to the time of hearing.

B.    Mailed Notice. Notice of such hearing shall also be mailed to all owners within the proposed district according to the property tax roll of the city and borough at the last address shown thereon, at least sixty days prior to the date set forth such hearing if special assessment bonds are to be issued. If special assessment bonds are not to be issued to pay the cost of improvements, then the notice shall be mailed not less than ten days prior to such hearing date. Such notice shall contain, in addition to the items required to be set forth in the published notice:

1.    A description of each lot, tract or parcel of land owned by the owner and the estimated assessment to be levied against each such property;

2.    The estimated payment schedule of such assessment;

3.    A statement that the assessment proposed to be levied against each such lot, tract or parcel of land is an estimated amount and that when actual costs are known they will be assessed against all of the real property in the L.I.D. in accordance with the benefits received.

(Ord. 86-688 § 4 (part), 1986; S.C.C. § 3-9-4.)


17.08.030 Hearing.

At such hearing the assembly shall hear objections from any owner affected by the formation of such district, and may make such changes in the proposed boundaries thereof or such modifications in the plans for the proposed improvements to be constructed as shall be deemed necessary provided that the assembly may not change the boundaries of such district to include property not previously included therein without first passing a new resolution of intention and giving a new notice to owners in the manner and form and within the time herein provided for the original notice. (S.C.C. § 3-9-5.)


17.08.040 Objections.

After the hearing the assembly shall have jurisdiction to overrule protests and proceed with any such improvements, provided that the authority of the city and borough to so proceed shall cease if written objections are filed with the finance director at or prior to the time, date and place set for such hearing by the owners of property bearing fifty percent or more of the estimated assessments unless the assembly revises such plan of improvements. After the assembly revises the plan it shall, if it determines to proceed with the improvements under the revised plan, readvertise and renotice the proposed improvements and hold another hearing thereon, and be subjected to the same limitations as required in the first instance, and so on until the objections have been reduced to less than the fifty percent referred to above. Exception: If the owners of property bearing fifty percent or more of the estimated assessments agree in writing to any revised plan, there shall be no need to readvertise or hold further hearings and the assembly may proceed with the revised plan. (Ord. 86-688 § 4 (part), 1986: S.C.C. § 3-9-6.)


17.08.050 Ordinance creating district.

If, as, and when the assembly finds that the district should be formed, it shall by ordinance, or by resolution if special assessment district bonds are not to be issued, find that the creation of such L.I.D. is in the public interest, and create such district, describe the boundaries thereof, describe the improvements to be acquired, constructed and installed therein, declare the estimated cost thereof, declare the proportionate amount of the funds of the city and borough, if any, to be applied thereto and order such work to be done. If necessary, such ordinance or resolution shall authorize the acquisition of all land necessary for such improvements, the payment of all damages caused thereby and the commencement in the name of the city and borough of such eminent domain proceedings and assessment proceedings required to pay all eminent domain awards as may be necessary to enable the city and borough to proceed with the work. (S.C.C. § 3-9-7.)


Chapter 17.12 PROCEDURES FOR PETITION-INITIATED L.I.D.’S

Sections:

17.12.010    Petition.

17.12.020    Qualifying certificates.

17.12.030    Notice.

17.12.040    Time of notice.


17.12.010 Petition.

An L.I.D. may be initiated by a petition presented to and filed with the finance director. Such petition shall be signed by all the owners of at least fifty percent in current assessed valuation of the property to be specially benefited by the improvements petitioned for. No signatures may be withdrawn from such petition after passage of an ordinance authorizing the L.I.D. Names and addresses of owners of record within the proposed district not signing such petition shall be listed thereon. Such petition shall contain the following:

A.    A description of the specific improvements to be acquired, constructed or installed, with an estimate of the cost thereof;

B.    A description of the boundaries of such proposed district or a listing of all the lots, tracts and parcels of land to be included therein, and a map or diagram of the proposed district with an inset showing the location thereof with relation to the city and borough as a whole shall be attached to such petition;

C.    A statement of whether or not the proposed assessments should all be paid in one payment or be paid in installments (stating the installment plan proposed, but not to exceed twenty years), and if the latter, whether or not it is proposed that special assessment district bonds be issued. (Ord. 86-688 § 4 (part), 1986: S.C.C. § 3-9-8.)


17.12.020 Qualifying certificates.

A.    Certificate of Finance Director. Within five days (excluding Sundays) from the filing of such petition with the finance director, the finance director shall attach a certificate (to be known as the “qualifying certificate”) to the petition, stating the percentage in current assessed valuation of the property within the proposed district owned by the person or persons signing such petition.

If such qualifying certificate shows that the petition is signed by all the owners of at least fifty percent in current assessed valuation of the property to be specially benefited by such improvement, and if the assembly determines that the improvement requested is necessary, financially feasible, and in the public interest and should be made, it shall pass an ordinance or a resolution if special assessment district bonds are not to be issued, containing its findings on such questions, which ordinance or resolution shall also contain all of the provisions required for ordinances or resolutions creating assembly-initiated L.I.D.’s as set forth in Section 17.08.050 hereof.

B.    Engineers Certificate. Within ten days from the filing of such petition the municipal engineer shall attach a certificate stating his estimate of the total ultimate cost of the improvements contemplated.

(S.C.C. § 3-9-9.)


17.12.030 Notice.

Within ten days (excluding Sundays) after the adoption of such ordinance or resolution, the finance director shall mail a copy of the petition (omitting the signatures thereon if desirable) to each of the nonsigning property owners within the proposed district, together with a notice stating that a map or diagram of the proposed district and the improvements to be constructed therein and the proposed assessment schedule and the proposed assessment against each lot, tract or parcel of land which will be specially benefitted by the proposed improvement, are on file in his office and available for public inspection. (S.C.C. § 3-9-10.)


17.12.040 Time of notice.

Any period of time required to elapse between the time of giving notice of a hearing and the time of such hearing shall commence with the date such notice was published or mailed, and shall end on the day prior to the date of such hearing. Any publisher’s affidavit of publication of such notice and the affidavit or certificate of the finance director or any other municipal official or agent stating the date of mailing or such notice shall be conclusive as to such date of publication and mailing. (S.C.C. § 3-9-10.)


Chapter 17.16 PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL L.I.D.’S

Sections:

17.16.010    Area.

17.16.020    Change in district boundaries.

17.16.040    Extra costs.

17.16.050    Unanticipated costs.

17.16.060    L.I.D. funds.

17.16.070    Warrants.

17.16.080    Surplus moneys.


17.16.010 Area.

An L.I.D. may include adjoining, vicinal or neighboring streets, avenues and alleys even though the improvements thus made are not connected or continuous as long as there is no more than two thousand five hundred feet between continuous units; provided that the cost and expense of each continuous unit of the improvement may be ascertained separately as near as may be, and if so ascertained separately the assessment rates shall be computed on the basis of the cost and expense of each unit. (S.C.C. § 3-9-12.)


17.16.020 Change in district boundaries.

The assembly may at any time at its discretion, by ordinance, eliminate from the district any unit of the improvement which is not completed and may proceed with the construction of the balance of the improvements within the district as fully and completely as though the eliminated unit had not been included within the district; provided, however, that the assessments to be levied to pay part of all of the costs of the improvements actually constructed may be levied only against the properties within such district specially benefitted thereby.

A.    Notice of Hearing. The assembly shall by resolution fix a time, date and place for a hearing on the question of whether or not it should abandon the acquisition, construction and installation of a portion of the improvements. Notice of such hearing shall be published once, at least ten days prior to the date of hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation within the city and borough, and shall be mailed at or prior to the same time to all owners of property within such district. Such notice shall state the proposed assembly action and shall also require that any owner who objects thereto should file a written notice of that objection with the finance director at or prior to the hearing.

B.    Hearing. At the time of the hearing the assembly shall hear all such protests and all evidence material to the question of whether or not the completion of such improvements should be abandoned and after considering the same the assembly shall then decide whether or not to so abandon a portion of the improvements. In the event that written objections to such proposed abandonment are filed by the owners of property in the district bearing more than fifty percent of the current assessed valuation of all of the property within the district, as well as fifty percent of the owners of property within the area proposed to be abandoned, the assembly shall proceed to complete the construction of the improvements originally authorized in such district. In the event protests equalling such fifty percent are not filed and the assembly decides that the portion of such improvements should not be completed, the costs of improvement incurred to the time of such abandonment shall be assessed only against such property within such district specially benefitted by the improvements actually completed.

(S.C.C. § 3-9-13.)


17.16.040 Extra costs.

Any part of the cost of improvements not authorized by ordinance to be paid from assessments shall be paid by the city and borough or from any grants which it has or may later have on hand and available for such purpose. (S.C.C. § 3-9-15.)


17.16.050 Unanticipated costs.

A.    Construction by Contractor or Contractors.

1.    When the improvements in any L.I.D. are to be acquired, constructed and installed by a contractor or contractors, and if it appears after consideration of the contract cost plus all other costs of improvements that the total cost of improvements will exceed the estimated cost as it appears in the approving resolution or ordinance, by twenty percent or more, then at least fifteen days before the notice to proceed is given the contractor or contractors the finance director of the city and borough shall give notice of such estimated increased cost by certified mail to the owners of the lots, tracts and parcels of land within the district at their last known address, and shall also publish, on or before the same date, a similar notice at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and borough;

2.    The mailed and published notice shall state the amount, and percentage, of total cost of the expected additional charges over the last complete estimated cost, and shall further state that unless written objections to the city and borough’s ordering the contractor or contractors to proceed are filed with the finance director by the owners of property within the district bearing fifty percent or more of the estimated cost of the improvements to be paid from assessments within ten days from the date of the mailing and publishing of such notice, the contractor or contractors will be ordered to proceed, and that the estimate of costs as increased shall be the cost of improvements until all actual costs after completion are known;

3.    In the event such written objections are so filed by the owners of property within the district bearing fifty percent or more of the estimated cost of the improvements to be paid from assessments, then no notice to proceed shall be given the contractor and further work on the project shall cease. The city and borough shall bear the costs of the project to date of termination;

4.    There shall be no liability on the part of the city and borough to the contractor until a notice to proceed is given; but once given, the project shall proceed regardless of unforeseen costs (all of which shall be deemed costs of improvements) subject to the provisions of subsection (3).

B.    Construction by Force Account.

1.    When the improvements in any L.I.D. are to be acquired, constructed and installed by a crew of the city and borough or by city and borough force account, then within thirty days after the commencement of the work the director of public works of the city and borough shall file with the finance director a certificate stating whether in his estimation the total cost of improvements will be twenty percent or more in excess of the last complete estimate of cost. If he determines that the new estimate of cost is twenty percent or more over such last complete estimate, then a similar notice as required in subsection (A) shall be given to the owners of the lots, tracts and parcels of land within the district at the same time and in the same manner as provided in subsection (A).

2.    In the event written objections are so filed by the owners of property within the district bearing fifty percent or more of the estimated cost of the improvements to be paid from assessments, work on the project shall cease until one of the following alternatives shall be undertaken by the assembly:

a.    The assembly by resolution determines that the city and borough shall pay any additional costs of the improvements greater than twenty percent over the previous estimate of the assessments,

b.    The improvement work performed to date of cessation shall be continued only to such extent as to put the area under construction in no worse condition than it was before construction started, with all costs of such continuance of work to be paid for by the city and borough, but costs prior to date of the filing of such objections from owners of property bearing fifty percent or more of the estimated costs of improvements shall be considered L.I.D. costs and assessed according to the original resolution or ordinance creating such L.I.D.,

c.    Should at any time under either force account projects or projects constructed under contract it appear to the city and borough’s director of public works that the total cost of the improvements will exceed by more than fifty percent the estimated costs of improvements as estimated at the time the force account work was begun or at the time the notice to proceed was given, then further work shall cease until notice and opportunity to object are given the property owners as provided in subsection (A) above. The procedures for proceeding with the project, the payment of costs to date of cessation and the obligation to put the area under construction in no worse condition than it was before construction started shall also be as stated in subsections (a) and (b) above.

(Ord. 86-688 § 4 (part), 1986; S.C.C. § 3-9-16.)


17.16.060 L.I.D. funds.

Each L.I.D. of the city and borough shall be given a number in the ordinance or resolution creating the district and each such ordinance or resolution shall create an L.I.D. No. ______ fund. Into such fund shall be paid all receipts pertaining to the L.I.D. including but not limited to proceeds from the sale of warrants, notes and/or bonds, transfers from the city and borough general fund and assessments as paid.

Such fund shall be drawn upon for the purpose of paying construction costs of such L.I.D., redemption of warrants, notes and bonds and the payment of interest thereon.

Within such fund, accounts such as may be necessary, such as construction revenue, bond or note redemption and sinking fund accounts, may be set up. (Ord. 86-688 § 4 (part), 1986: S.C.C. § 3-9-17.)


17.16.070 Warrants.

The city and borough may provide by resolution or ordinance for the issuance of warrants payable out of such L.I.D. fund in payment of the cost and expense of any L.I.D. improvements. The warrants shall bear interest at a rate to be determined by the assembly and shall be redeemed either in cash or by exchange for special assessment district bonds or notes of such district. Such warrants shall be redeemed in order of their number whenever there is enough money in such fund to redeem such lowest number warrant or warrants.

Warrants may be issued to the city and borough general fund when the general fund advances the costs of improvements. (Ord. 86-688 § 4 (part), 1986: S.C.C. § 3-9-18.)


17.16.080 Surplus moneys.

A.    If special assessment bonds or notes have been issued and assessments levied in any L.I.D. based on the estimated cost of the improvements, and if, after actual costs have been ascertained, the total amount of assessments levied exceeds the property owners’ share of the actual costs, plus any delinquency charge to be included in the assessments, by more than one percent, the amount of excess proceeds on hand in such L.I.D. fund shall be utilized to call and redeem as many outstanding bonds or notes of such L.I.D. as possible out of such excess on the next date on which such bonds or notes may be redeemed.

Credit in the amount of the excess shall be given on assessments due, or refunded on assessments previously paid in full, pro rata according to the original principal amounts of such assessments.

B.    If special assessment bonds have been issued for the construction of a L.I.D., all moneys remaining in that L.I.D. fund after all costs of improvements in such district, including the redemption of all warrants, notes and bonds of such district have been paid, shall be paid into the guaranty fund of the city and borough as provided in Section 17.28.020 of this title.

C.    If no special assessment bonds or notes have been issued for the construction of an L.I.D., all moneys remaining in that L.I.D. fund after all costs of improvements in such district, including the redemption of all warrants have been paid, shall be paid into the L.I.D. revolving fund of the city and borough.

(Ord. 86-688 § 4 (part), 1986: Ord. 74-163 § 3 (part), 1974: S.C.C. § 3-9-19.)


Chapter 17.20 ASSESSMENTS

Sections:

17.20.010    Percentage of assessment.

17.20.020    Computation of assessments.

17.20.030    Notice of hearing on computations.

17.20.040    Hearing on computations.

17.20.050    Amendment of assessment roll.

17.20.060    Objections to assessment roll— Timeliness.

17.20.070    Proceedings conclusive— Exceptions.

17.20.080    Procedure on appeal.

17.20.085    New subdivision lots to share L.I.D. assessments.

17.20.090    Reassessments.

17.20.100    Assessments constitute a lien.

17.20.110    Deposit and use of collected assessments.

17.20.120    Notice of assessment.

17.20.130    Payment without interest or penalty.

17.20.140    Payable in installments.

17.20.150    Prepayment of installments.

17.20.160    Assessments against city and borough lots.

17.20.170    Enforcement.


17.20.010 Percentage of assessment.

The assembly may assess up to one hundred percent of the cost of improvements against the property specially benefitted by the improvements acquired, constructed and installed under any L.I.D. (S.C.C. § 3-9-20.)


17.20.020 Computation of assessments.

A.    Assessments against individual lots, tracts and parcels of land shall be in proportion to the benefits received.

B.    All assessments in any L.I.D. shall be uniform for each lot, tract or parcel of land within such district similarly situated.

C.    In the event all the lots, tracts, or parcels of land in any L.I.D. are substantially equal in size and are substantially equal in distance from the improvements constructed therein and the benefits derived by each such lot, tract or parcel of land are substantially equal to the benefits derived by every other lot, tract or parcel of land within the district, then the total assessment roll may be apportioned equally among all such lots, tracts and parcels of land; otherwise, the assembly shall determine the amount of the individual assessments fixed in any assessment roll on such basis as may be legal, equitable and proper under all the circumstances and the provisions of subsections A and B of this section.

D.    In anticipation of delinquent assessments, there may be added to each separate assessment appearing on each assessment roll a sum not less than three percent nor greater than ten percent of such assessment. The charge shall constitute a reserve to be used only if payment of assessments becomes delinquent to the extent that any amount due on debt incurred by the city and borough for financing the property owners’ share of the L.I.D. in question cannot be met as they become due. Any balance remaining in the reserve after all debt incurred relative to the L.I.D. in question has been repaid shall be refunded pro rata to the then owner of the lot as shown on the property tax roll for the year in which the refund is declared. No such refund shall be in an amount greater than the original charge assessed to that lot.

E.    Assessments levied in any L.I.D. may be levied against properties of the United States of America, the state of Alaska, and the city and borough, and the assessments levied against all properties of the city and borough shall have a lien thereon and shall be collectible as assessments levied against properties of owners except where prohibited by law. Should it appear for any reason that the assessments levied against properties of the United States of America, the state of Alaska or the city and borough are uncollectible, such assessments shall not be counted in the computation of the final assessment roll of any L.I.D., and if any such assessments are collected the same shall be paid into the fund of such L.I.D. as are all other assessments.

F.    The total assessment thus ascertained against each separate lot, tract or parcel of land in each L.I.D. shall be entered upon the assessment roll or rolls of the district as the amount to be levied and assessed against each such separate lot, tract or parcel of land.

G.    A leasehold interest of the United States of America, the state of Alaska, or the city and borough shall be deemed real property for the purpose of L.I.D. assessments; provided, in the case of the leasehold interest of the city and borough, such lease must have at least twenty years remaining. In the event there should be less than twenty years of the lease remaining the lessee shall be liable for one-twentieth of the assessment against the property so leased per year of the remaining leasehold term, and the lessor shall be liable for the balance of such assessment.

(Ord. 86-688 § 4 (part), 1986; Ord. 81-495 § 4(B), 1981; S.C.C. § 3-9-21.)


17.20.030 Notice of hearing on computations.

When the assessment roll or rolls for any L.I.D. has or have been prepared as provided by law and herein, the same shall be filed with the finance director. The assembly shall then fix a date for a hearing thereon. A notice of such hearing shall be published at least once a week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation throughout the city and borough and the date of the first publication thereof shall be at least fifteen days prior to the day on which the hearing will be held. Notice of such hearing shall also be mailed by certified mail at least fifteen days prior to such hearing date to each owner or owners of the lots, tracts or parcels of land listed on the assessment roll at the address last shown on the property tax rolls of the city and borough.

A.    Contents of Published Notice. The published notice of such hearing shall specify the number of the L.I.D. and a short statement of the nature of the improvements therein and shall contain any other information deemed relevant by the assembly or the finance director, and shall notify all persons who may desire to object to such assessment roll or any of the separate assessments appearing thereon:

1.    To make their objections in writing and to file them with the finance director at or prior to the time fixed for the hearing.

2.    That at the time and place fixed for such hearing and at times to which the hearing may be adjourned the assembly will sit as a board of equalization for the purpose of considering the roll and the separate assessments appearing thereon, and

3.    That at the hearing or the times to which it may be adjourned the assembly will consider the objections made and will correct, revise, raise, lower, change or modify the roll or any part thereof, or set aside the roll and order the assessment to be made de novo, and at the conclusion of such hearing or hearings will confirm the roll by ordinance or resolution;

B.    Contents of Mailed Notice. The mailed notice of such hearing shall contain all of the statements and information required for the published notice and in addition thereto shall also contain a description of each lot, tract or parcel of land owned by the owner to which it is addressed being assessed, and the amount of the proposed assessment against each such property;

C.    Proof of Mailing. Proof of mailing of the notice shall be made by the finance director filing a certificate with the assembly to the effect that on the date in question he mailed by certified mail notices of such hearing. Such certificate shall be conclusive as to the date of mailing.

(Ord. 86-688 § 4 (part), 1986; Ord. 74-163 § 3 (part), 1974: S.C.C. § 3-9-22.)


17.20.040 Hearing on computations.

At the time fixed for hearing objections to the confirmation of the assessment roll and the separate assessments appearing thereon and at the times to which the hearing may be adjourned, the assembly may correct, revise, raise, lower, change or modify the roll or any part thereof, or set aside the roll and order the assessments to be made de novo, and at the conclusion thereof confirm the roll by ordinance or resolution. (S.C.C. § 3-9-23.)


17.20.050 Amendment of assessment roll.

If any assessment roll is amended so as to raise any separate assessment appearing thereon or to include omitted property, a new time, date and place for hearing shall be fixed and new notices of hearing on the roll shall be given as in the case of an original hearing; provided, that as to any property originally entered upon the roll the assessment upon which has not been raised, no objections to confirmation of the assessment roll shall be considered by the assembly or by any court on appeal unless the objections were made in writing at or prior to the time fixed for the original hearing upon the assessment roll. A new hearing and notice is not required if all record owners of property subject to the increased assessment consent in writing to the increase. (Ord. 86-688 § 4 (part), 1986: S.C.C. § 3-9-24.)


17.20.060 Objections to assessment roll— Timeliness.

All objections to the confirmation of the assessment roll or any of the separate assessments appearing thereon shall be in writing and shall state clearly the grounds of objections. Objections not made in writing and not filed with the finance director at or prior to the time of the original hearing shall be conclusively presumed to have been waived. (S.C.C. § 3-9-25.)


17.20.070 Proceedings conclusive— Exceptions.

Whenever any assessment roll for local improvements in any L.I.D. has been confirmed by the assembly, the regularity, validity and correctness of the proceedings relating to the improvements therein and to the assessments therefor including the action of the assembly upon the assessment roll and the confirmation thereof shall be conclusive in all things upon all parties. They cannot in any manner be contested or questioned in any proceeding by any owner unless he filed written objections to the assessments roll or any separate assessment appearing thereon in the manner and within the time required by the preceding provisions of this chapter and unless he prosecutes his appeal in the manner and within the time hereinafter required. (S.C.C. § 3-9-26.)


17.20.080 Procedure on appeal.

A.    Perfecting Appeal. The decision of the assembly upon any objections made in the manner and within the time herein prescribed shall be final and conclusive, subject, however, to review by the Superior Court of the state of Alaska in an appropriate action brought by the owner in the judicial district in which the city and borough is located.

Such action must be commenced within sixty days of the effective date of the ordinance or resolution confirming the assessment roll or shall be barred.

B.    Bond. At the time of filing the action with the clerk of the Superior Court the owner shall execute and also file with him as cash or property a bond for costs and attorneys’ fees in an amount of not less than one thousand dollars. If the matter is decided against the appellant, the bond shall be used to cover the city and borough’s costs and attorneys’ fees. A copy of the bond shall be filed with the finance director. The municipal attorney shall have ten days from such filing to object to the adequacy of the bond either as to form or sureties.

(Ord. 86-688 § 4 (part),1986: S.C.C. § 3-9-27.)


17.20.085 New subdivision lots to share L.I.D. assessments.

A.    If during the period set for paying assessments, a lot within a local improvement district is subdivided, the lots created by the new subdivision will be reassessed in proportion to the benefits received reduced proportionately by the number of years in which the original assessment has been in effect. If the reassessed obligation exceeds the amount owed by the original parcel, all assessments for the improvement district shall be adjusted accordingly. The assessment of newly created lots will be based upon their proportionate benefit calculated against the entire number of lots in the local improvement district.

B.    The reassessment of the lots to be created shall be a condition of any proposed subdivision in any local improvement district for which the payment period has not concluded.

C.    Zero lot line subdivisions, as defined and regulated in Title 21 of the Sitka General Code, are specifically included from the requirements of this section.

(Ord. 97-1453 § 4, 1997.)


17.20.090 Reassessments.

Whenever an assessment authorized as provided herein is set aside, annulled or declared void, or its enforcement refused by a court of competent jurisdiction, whether directly or by virtue of a decision of such court, the assembly may by ordinance or resolution make a new assessment or reassessment upon the lots, tracts or parcels of land benefited by the improvement for which such assessment was levied, in the manner provided by AS 29.46.060 through 29.46.120, and along with such modifications of the provisions applicable to the city and borough as the assembly has provided herein or may later provide by ordinance under its home rule powers. (Ord. 86-688 § 4 (part), 1986: S.C.C. § 3-9-28.)


17.20.100 Assessments constitute a lien.

Each assessment shall be a lien upon the lot, tract or parcel of land assessed from the time such assessment roll is confirmed. Such lien shall be paramount and superior to any other lien created before or after such date except liens for real property taxes and any prior special assessments. (Ord. 86-688 § 4 (part), 1986: S.C.C. 3-9-29.)


17.20.110 Deposit and use of collected assessments.

All assessments for any improvements acquired, constructed or installed in any L.I.D. shall be collected by the finance director, shall be deposited to the credit of the fund of that L.I.D. thereinbefore required to be created, and shall be used for no other purpose than the redemption of warrants drawn upon and the bonds and notes issued against such fund to provide payment of the cost of improvements of such L.I.D.

In the event the city and borough issues and sells any general obligation bonds for the purpose of acquiring, constructing, installing or making any specific public improvements for which such bonds may be issued and assessments are levied against properties benefited by such improvements, such special assessments shall be used in payment of the principal of and interest on such general obligation bonds. (Ord. 86-688 § 4 (part), 1986: S.C.C. 3-9-30.)


17.20.120 Notice of assessment.

As soon as the assessment roll has been placed in the hands of the finance director for collection, he shall publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation throughout the city and borough once a week for two consecutive weeks, stating that the roll is in his hands for collection and that all or any portion of any assessment appearing thereon may be paid within thirty days from the date of the first publication of the notice without penalty or interest. The finance director shall also mail a notice to each owner of property that has been assessed in such L.I.D., on or before the second date of such publication, which notice shall designate the property, the assessment amount, the method of payment, the rate of interest on the unpaid balance of assessments, the time of delinquency, and the penalties on delinquent payments.

The finance director shall also mail a similar notice to each such owner of the due date of any annual or semiannual installment approximately ten days prior to such due date. (Ord. 86-688 § 4 (part), 1986: S.C.C. § 3-9-31.)


17.20.130 Payment without interest or penalty.

The owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land charged with an L.I.D. assessment may redeem it from all or any portion of the lien of such assessment by paying to the finance director all or any portion thereof without interest within thirty days after the first publication by the finance director of notice that the assessment roll is in his hands for collection. If payment of assessments is to be made in one sum, payment may not be required sooner than sixty days after mailing notice of the assessments to the property owners. (Ord. 86-688 § 4 (part), 1986: S.C.C. § 3-9-32.)


17.20.140 Payable in installments.

In all cases where assessments are to be paid in installments the ordinance or resolution confirming the assessment roll and the separate assessments appearing thereon and levying such assessments shall provide that the sum charged against any lot, tract or parcel of land or any portion of such sum may be paid during the thirty day period allowed for the payment of assessments without penalty or interest, and that thereafter the sum remaining unpaid may be paid in equal annual or semiannual installments over the period of years fixed in such ordinance or resolution. Such period of years may never exceed twenty years. The number of installments shall be less by two than the number of years which any bonds issued to pay for the improvement are to run. Such ordinance or resolution shall fix the annual or semiannual dates on which such installments or portions thereof become due. Interest on the whole amount of the assessment unpaid, at the rate fixed by such ordinance or resolution, shall be due on the annual or semiannual dates fixed for payment of such installments. Such ordinance or resolution shall also provide that assessments or installments thereof when delinquent, in addition to such interest, shall bear a penalty of not more than a rate to be determined by the assembly. (Ord. 86-688 § 4 (part), 1986: Ord. 81-495 § 4(A), 1981; S.C.C. § 3-9-33.)


17.20.150 Prepayment of installments.

The owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land charged with an L.I.D. assessment may redeem it from the lien of the unpaid amount of the assessment at any time after such thirty-day period by paying the remaining balance thereof to the finance director with interest thereon to the date that the next installment of such assessment becomes due. (S.C.C. § 3-9-34.)


17.20.160 Assessments against city and borough lots.

The city and borough shall include in its annual budget an amount sufficient to pay when due assessments levied against all lands belonging to the city and borough. (S.C.C. § 3-9-35.)


17.20.170 Enforcement.

When an assessment is payable in installments the enforcement of the lien of any installment shall not prevent the enforcement of the lien of any subsequent installment. Assessment or installments thereof shall become delinquent the day after they were due, and the enforcement of the collection thereof shall be made in the same manner as the enforcement of collection of real property taxes.

(S.C.C. § 3-9-36.)


Chapter 17.24 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT DISTRICT BONDS

Sections:

17.24.010    Authority.

17.24.020    Form, content, payment.

17.24.030    Sale.

17.24.040    Redemption.

17.24.050    Nonliability of the city and borough.

17.24.060    Remedy of bondholders and noteholders.

17.24.070    Investment for surplus city and borough funds.

17.24.080    Payment by city and borough for city and borough owned lots.

17.24.090    Interim notes.

17.24.100    Registration.


17.24.010 Authority.

Bonds to be entitled “L.I.D. No. ______, City and Borough of Sitka, Alaska, Bonds” may be issued to provide funds to pay any part or all of the costs of improvements in any special assessment district, provided that such bonds shall not be issued in a total principal amount in excess of such costs of improvement, nor shall they be issued prior to twenty days after the thirty days allowed for the payment of assessments without penalty or interest.

Such bonds shall be issued pursuant to ordinance and shall be made payable on a date not sooner than two years later than the date upon which the last installment of the assessments securing such bonds becomes due and not later than two years six months after the date upon which the last installment of the assessments securing such bonds becomes due. (S.C.C. § 3-9-37.)


17.24.020 Form, content, payment.

Such bonds shall bear interest at a rate per year to be determined by the assembly, payable annually or semiannually, shall be in such denominations as may be provided in the ordinance authorizing their issuance, and shall be numbered from one up consecutively.

Each bond shall:

A.    Be signed by the manual or facsimile signature of the mayor of the city and borough and attested by the manual or facsimile signature of the municipal clerk;

B.    Shall have the seal of the city and borough impressed or reproduced thereon;

C.    Refer to the improvement for which it is issued and the ordinance ordering it;

D.    Provide that the principal amount thereof and the interest thereon shall be payable out of the L.I.D. fund of such district or out of the local improvement guaranty fund of the city and borough and not otherwise;

E.    Provide that the bondholders’ remedy in case of any nonpayment shall be confined to the enforcement of the special assessments levied for the improvements in such L.I.D. and to such guaranty fund.

(Ord. 86-688 § 4 (part), 1986: S.C.C. 3-9-38.)


17.24.030 Sale.

L.I.D. bonds and notes may be issued to the contractor or contractors constructing and installing the improvements in such district, or may be sold by the city and borough at public or private sale, but at a price to be determined by the assembly plus accrued interest. The proceeds of sale of such bonds or notes shall be deposited in the applicable L.I.D. fund and be applied in payment of the costs of improvement either in cash or by the redemption of warrants or other obligations of the city and borough issued to pay such costs. (Ord. 86-688 § 4 (part), 1986: S.C.C. § 3-9-39.)


17.24.040 Redemption.

The finance director shall call in and redeem the principal of one or more bonds of any issue in their numerical order whenever there is sufficient money in the L.I.D. fund against which the bonds have been issued, over and above the amount needed for the payment of current annual interest and the annual interest next to fall due on all unpaid bonds of that issue. Such call shall be made by publication of a notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation throughout the city and borough as soon as practicable after the day of delinquency of any assessment installments, and in any other manner as may be deemed necessary to advise the holder of the bonds being called of such call. The notice of call shall state the serial number or numbers of the bonds being called, that they will be paid on the next interest payment date, and that interest thereon will cease on such call date. (Ord. 87-757 § 4, 1987; S.C.C. § 3-9-40.)


17.24.050 Nonliability of the city and borough.

Neither the holder nor the owner of any L.I.D. bond, note or warrant issued against an L.I.D. fund, shall have any claim therefor against the city and borough except for payment from the special assessments made for the improvement for which such bond, note or warrant was issued and except for payment from the local improvement guaranty fund of the city and borough as to bonds and notes issued the payment of which is secured by such fund. The city and borough shall not be liable to the holder or owner of any such bond, note or warrant for any loss to the local guaranty fund occurring in the lawful operation thereof. A copy of the foregoing part of this section shall be plainly written, printed or engraved on each L.I.D. bond and note. (Ord. 86-688 § 4 (part), 1986: S.C.C. § 3-9-41.)


17.24.060 Remedy of bondholders and noteholders.

If the city and borough fails to pay any bonds, notes or warrants issued against an L.I.D. fund or to promptly collect any assessments when due, the owner or holder of any bond or note may enforce payment of the principal thereof or interest thereon and costs of collection in a civil action in the same manner and with the same effect as actions for the foreclosure of mortgages on real property. Foreclosure shall be against all property on which assessments are in default. The period for redemption shall be the same as in the case of a mortgage foreclosure on real property. Any number of owners or holders of bonds and notes of any single L.I.D. may joint as plaintiffs, and any number of owners of property upon which the delinquent assessments are liens may be joined as defendants in the same suit. Such owners and holders shall also have recourse against the local improvement guaranty fund. (Ord. 86-688 § 4 (part), 1986: S.C.C § 3-9-42.)


17.24.070 Investment for surplus city and borough funds.

L.I.D. bonds and notes which are within the protection of the local improvement guaranty fund of the city and borough shall be considered legal investments for any available surplus funds of the city and borough which now or hereafter may be authorized by the assembly to be invested in such bonds. (Ord. 86-688 § 4 (part), 1986: S.C.C. § 3-9-43.)


17.24.080 Payment by city and borough for city and borough owned lots.

Where city and borough owned lots are included in a special assessment district, the city and borough shall levy and collect taxes sufficient to pay the assessments against the city and borough owned lots when due. (Ord. 86-688 § 4 (part), 1986: S.C.C. § 3-9-44.)


17.24.090 Interim notes.

Notes to be entitled “L.I.D. No. _________, City and Borough of Sitka, Alaska, Notes” may be issued to provide funds to pay any part or all of the costs of improvements in any special assessment district; provided, that such notes may only be issued in anticipation of the receipt of cash or the issuance of bonds sufficient to redeem such notes.

Such notes shall be issued pursuant to ordinance and shall be made payable within a number of years to be determined by the assembly.

The provisions of Section 17.24.020 shall apply to such notes.

Notes issued shall be claims against the assessments that are prior and superior to a right, lien or claim of a surety on a bond given to the city and borough to secure the performance of its contracts for a local improvement project, or to secure the payment of persons who have performed work or furnished materials under the contract.

The finance director may accept notes against special assessments on conditions prescribed by resolution of the assembly in payment of:

A.    Assessments against which the notes were issued in order of priority;

B.    Judgments rendered against property owners who have become delinquent in the payment of assessments; and

C.    Certificates of purchase when property has been sold under execution or at tax sale for failure to pay assessments.

(Ord. 86-688 § 4 (part), 1986.)


17.24.100 Registration.

Special assessment bonds and notes may be issued in registered form in accordance with procedures determined by the assembly. (Ord. 86-688 § 4 (part), 1986.)


Chapter 17.28 LOCAL IMPROVEMENT GUARANTY FUND

Sections:

17.28.010    Fund established.

17.28.020    Use of fund.


17.28.010 Fund established.

The assembly shall establish a local improvement guaranty fund of the city and borough (herein at times called the “guaranty fund”) for the purpose of guaranteeing the payment of the principal of all special assessment bonds, notes, and warrants issued upon any special assessment district funds. The money in the guaranty fund shall be accounted for separately from all other money and funds of the city and borough in the central treasury and shall be held in trust for the uses and purposes herein provided.

Prior to the issuance of any special assessment fund warrants, notes or bonds, the city and borough shall acknowledge the moneys in the guaranty fund shall not be less than ten percent of the principal amount of all physical assessment fund warrants and bonds. The city and borough shall always maintain in the guaranty fund an amount not less than ten percent of the principal amount of all outstanding special assessment fund warrants, notes and bonds then outstanding. Any moneys paid out of the guaranty fund to redeem special assessment district bonds, notes or warrants shall be replaced by the city and borough as soon as possible out of any legally available sources. (Ord. 96-1386 § 4, 1996: Ord. 86-688 § 4 (part), 1986: S.C.C. § 3-9-45.)


17.28.020 Use of fund.

Defaulted special assessments bonds, notes, and special assessment fund warrants shall be purchased out of the guaranty fund, and as between the several issues of bonds, notes or warrants no preference shall exist, but they shall be purchased in the order of their presentation.

Whenever any sum is paid out of the guaranty fund on account of principal or interest on a special assessment district bond, note or warrant, the city and borough as trustee of such fund shall be subrogated to all the rights of the holder of such bond, note or warrant so paid, and the proceeds thereof or of the underlying assessment shall become a part of the guaranty fund.

All interest and earnings derived from the investment of moneys in the guaranty fund shall be credited to such fund.

Money received from actions taken against property for nonpayment of assessments shall be credited to the guaranty fund.

As provided in Section 17.16.080 hereof, if special assessment district bonds or notes have been issued all moneys remaining in any L.I.D. fund or of any special assessment district fund after all costs of improvements in such district including the redemption of all warrants, notes and bonds of such district have been paid shall also be paid into the guaranty fund.

Should the assembly, after determining that the amount in the guaranty fund meets all required guaranty requirements plus foreseeable future requirements, find there are excess moneys in the guaranty fund, it may authorize transfer of the excess to the revolving fund. (Ord. 86-688 § 4 (part), 1986: S.C.C. § 3-9-46.)


Chapter 17.32 LOCAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT REVOLVING FUND

Sections:

17.32.010    Purpose.

17.32.020    Sources.

17.32.030    Repayments into fund.


17.32.010 Purpose.

There is created a local improvement district revolving fund of the city and borough which shall be used for the purpose of:

A.    Financing the property owners’ share of the cost of improvements of an L.I.D, not available from other moneys of the municipality or where the sale of special assessment bonds is not feasible;

B.    Finance the municipal share of the cost of improvements of an L.I.D. not available from other moneys of the municipality;

C.    Making payments into the guaranty fund;

D.    One hundred twenty-five thousand dollars in general obligation bonds were issued on May 1, 1967, to finance the municipal share of L.I.D.s and to make payments into the guaranty fund. In order to safeguard the use of these funds, the amount of money in the revolving fund plus that due it from other funds for the municipal share of L.I.D.s and from the guaranty fund for any loans made to it, shall not be allowed to fall below one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars.

(Ord. 74-155 § 3(a), 1974: S.C.C. § 3-9-47.)


17.32.020 Sources.

Moneys to be paid into this revolving fund may be provided from general taxes, from the sale of general obligation bonds of the city and borough, or from any other legal sources as determined by the assembly.

As provided in Section 17.16.080 hereof, if special assessment district bonds have not been issued, all moneys remaining in any L.I.D. fund after all costs of improvements in such district including the redemption of all warrants and bonds of such district have been paid shall also be paid into the revolving fund. (S.C.C. § 3-9-48.)


17.32.030 Repayments into fund.

A.    When any disbursements are made from the revolving fund to pay the property owners’ portion of the cost of improvements in any L.I.D., any assessments paid by owners in such L.I.D. shall be repaid to the revolving fund to the extent of moneys disbursed by such fund to such L.I.D.

B.    When any disbursements are made from the revolving fund to pay the municipality’s portion of the cost of improvements in any L.I.D., the appropriate fund shall repay the revolving fund in equal installments over a period of years not to exceed the number of years allowed the property owners to repay their portion of the costs.

C.    When any disbursements are made from the revolving fund into the guaranty fund, as the amount of outstanding bonds issued for that L.I.D. are reduced, the revolving fund shall be repaid proportionately.

(Ord. 74-155 § 3(b), 1974: S.C.C. § 3-9-49.)


TITLE 17 FOOTNOTES

1    For the Charter provisions regarding special assessment receipts, see § 15.08; for the provisions regarding finance generally, see §§ 11.01 § 11.16.


Title 18 PROPERTY ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL 

Chapters:

18.04    General Provisions

18.08    Personal Property Acquisition and Disposal

18.12    Real Property Disposal 

18.16    Tideland Lease Procedure 

18.20    Tideland Permits

18.24    Abandoned Property

18.32    Public Improvements Bonding Requirements

Note: Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this title.


Chapter 18.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

18.04.010    Definitions.


18.04.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this title, unless the context otherwise requires,

A.    “Abandoned property” means those objects which no one claims and which after a reasonable search and notice the chief of police can find no one to claim, or can find definite evidence some person has abandoned.

B.    “Building inspector” means the officer of the municipality charged with the enforcement of municipal building and construction codes.

C.    “Fair market value” means the highest price, described in terms of money, which the property would bring if exposed for sale for a reasonable time in the open market, with a seller, willing but not forced to sell, and a buyer, willing but not forced to buy, both being fully informed of all the purposes for which the property is best adapted or could be used.

D.    “Land” includes all real property and all rights in real property of whatever kind or nature and tide and submerged lands under the jurisdiction of the municipality.

E.    “Mean high tide” means the tidal datum plane of the average of all the high tides as would be established by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and which in Sitka is nine and one-tenth.

F.    “Mean high tide line” means the intersection of the datum plane of mean high tide with the shore.

G.    “Mean low tide” means the tidal datum plane of the average of the low tides as established by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, which in Sitka is one and four-tenths.

H.    Mean Lower Low Tide. At any place subject to tidal influence shall be interpreted as the tidal datum plane of the average of the lower of the two low tides of each day as established by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, which in Sitka is zero tide. 

I.    “Personal property” means only tangible personal property and that property which is not land or permanently attached to land and more particularly as defined in AS 29.71.800(16). However, for purposes of sale, items and fixtures attached to land shall be deemed personal property if intended to be removed from the land and items intended to become fixtures shall be considered personal property until so affixed.

J.    Public Nuisance. Whatever annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, comfort, or repose of the public; offends public decency; interferes with, obstructs, or renders dangerous any street, highway, navigable lake or stream; or in any way renders the public insecure in life or property, is declared to be a “public nuisance.” Public nuisances shall include, but not be limited to, whatever is forbidden by any provision of this title.

K.    “Reclaimed or constructed tide or contiguous submerged lands” mean those lands resulting by purposeful filling of tide or contiguous submerged lands to an elevation above the extreme high tide line.

L.    Singular number includes the plural.

M.    “Submerged lands” mean those lands covered by tidal waters between the line of mean low tide and seaward to a distance of three geographic miles or as may hereafter be properly claimed by the municipality.

N.    “Tidelands” means those lands which are periodically covered by tidal waters between the elevation of mean high tide and mean low tides.

O.    “Tract of land” means those parcels of land combined for convenience of survey or sale.

P.    “Upland owner” is the person who owns, or holds a long term lease to property immediately upland of the tideland’s parcel to be leased. For purposes of this definition, uplands may include other tideland upland of the parcel to be leased.

(Ord. 15-14 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 83-556 § 4 (part), 1983.)


Chapter 18.08 PERSONAL PROPERTY ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL

Sections:

18.08.020    Disposal.


18.08.020 Disposal.

A.    Personal property valued at twenty-five thousand dollars or less, as determined by the administrator or his designee, may be disposed of upon such notice and terms considered reasonable by the administrator, taking into consideration the value of the article, the reason for disposal, and the general preference of disposal by competitive bid. The administrator shall report disposals to the assembly.

B.    Personal property valued at more than twenty-five thousand dollars shall be disposed of only with prior assembly approval and after competitive bid.

(Ord. 06-18 § 4, 2006: Ord. 83-556 § 4 (part), 1983.)


Chapter 18.12 REAL PROPERTY DISPOSAL 

Sections:

18.12.010    Real property disposal. 

18.12.014    Advisory vote and disclosure of information for land disposals related to a dock or vessel transfer facility that could be used by large cruise ships. 

18.12.015    Street and public area vacations.


18.12.010 Real property disposal. 

A.    Real property, including tidelands, and land acquired from the state, may be sold or leased only when authorized by ordinance. Lease of space within municipal buildings that are of a value of less than one thousand dollars shall be treated as disposals of personal property without ordinance. All other leases of space within a municipal building shall be treated as disposal of real property under this chapter.

    Note: The value of a lease shall be determined by multiplying the monthly or annual rent by the term of the lease.

B.    Upon sale or disposal of real property valued over five million dollars, or upon lease of real property, including tidelands, of a value of more than seven million five hundred thousand dollars, the ordinance authorizing the sale, lease, or disposition may provide that the ordinance receive an advisory vote at a general or special election. The assembly shall stay its decision on any such sale, lease, or disposition pending the outcome of the election. This subsection shall not apply to leases at the former Alaska Pulp Corporation mill site, now known as the Gary Paxton Industrial Park, and the property leased under Ordinance 99-1539.

C.    No advisory vote or competitive bid is required for exchange of municipal property, both real and personal, including tidelands, or any interest in property, with the United States, the state of Alaska, or a political subdivision.

    Such disposals to other governmental units shall be done by ordinance.

    All leases of real property and tidelands approved by the assembly and signed by the lessee prior to the date of enactment of the ordinance codified in this title are confirmed and ratified and voter ratification required under the former ordinance is waived. (Enactment date September 27, 1983).

D.    The lease of any municipal property on a temporary basis may be made by the administrator upon motion of the assembly without ordinance. Temporary shall be defined as any lease terminable at the will of the municipality where no more than thirty days prior notice of intent to terminate is required.

E.    Sale or lease of municipal real property, including tidelands, shall be by competitive bid, unless the assembly finds that competitive bidding is inappropriate, due to the size, shape, or location of the parcel, rendering it of true usefulness to only one party, or is waived by subsection C of this section. The assembly may also find that competitive bidding is inappropriate due to the nature of the property or the circumstances surrounding its disposal to include possible unjust results with regard to the existing lessee, or adjacent or neighboring property owners.

F.    When it is deemed advantageous to the municipality, it may trade uplands or tidelands for other land of approximately equal size or value. Should the municipal property in question be of such value as to permit an advisory vote, an advisory vote may be authorized by the assembly, and the requirements and procedures concerning such election shall apply.

G.    The administrator is authorized to sign all municipal lease and conveyance documents.

(Ord. 18-29 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 99-1545 § 4 (part), 1999; Ord. 93-1141 § 4, 1993; Ord. 92-1110 § 4, 1992; Ord. 92-1026 § 4, 1992; Ord. 83-556 4 (part), 1983.)


18.12.014 Advisory vote and disclosure of information for land disposals related to a dock or vessel transfer facility that could be used by large cruise ships. 

A.    Notwithstanding Sections 2.38.080(A)(7) and 2.38.090 or any other provision of law, the assembly may authorize an advisory vote for any ordinance authorizing the sale, lease or disposal of any real property of the city and borough for a dock or vessel transfer facility that could be used by cruise ships exceeding three hundred feet in length. The assembly shall stay its decision on any such sale, lease, or disposition pending the outcome of the election. If an advisory vote is authorized, not less than thirty days prior to the election, the city and borough shall make available to the electorate the terms of the proposed sale, lease or disposal of real property and a summary of the direct anticipated costs to the city and borough.

B.    This section applies to tidelands and other real property owned by the city and borough, including any real property in Sawmill Cove.

(Ord. 18-29 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 06-39 § 3, 2006.)


18.12.015 Street and public area vacations.

A.    Petition. No street, alley or public thoroughfare or any part thereof shall be vacated except upon petition of the owners of the majority of the front feet of the land fronting upon the part of the street, alley or public thoroughfare sought to be vacated.

B.    Title to Vacated Area. Title to the street or other public area vacated on a plat, attaches to the lot or lands bordering the area in equal proportions; except that if the area was originally dedicated by different persons, original boundary lines shall be adhered to so that the street area that lies on one side of the boundary line shall attach to the abutting property on that side. The portion of a vacated street that lies inside the limits of a platted addition attaches to the lots of the platted addition bordering on the area. If a public square is vacated, the title to it vests in the municipality. If the property vacated is a lot, title vests in the rightful owner.

C.    Payment.

1.    If the municipality acquired the street or other public area vacated for legal consideration or by express dedication to the municipality, other than as a subdivision platting requirement, before the final act of vacation, the fair market value, as required by AS 29.40.160(b), shall be deposited by the petitioner or petitioners with municipality to be paid to the permanent fund upon vacation.

2.    If the person or persons petitioning for vacation is, or are, the original subdividers who established the street, alley, or public thoroughfare, or portion thereof, sought to be vacated, then the municipality may vacate the same without payment of any kind being acquired from the petitioner or petitioners or the property owner or owners who receive the property by virtue of vacation.

3.    If the person or persons petitioning for the vacation are not the original subdividers, but the municipality acquired the street, alley, or public thoroughfare or portion thereof as a result of a subdivision platting requirement, before the final act of vacation, the petitioner or petitioners or the owners of the land fronting upon that part of the street, alley, or public thoroughfare sought to be vacated shall be required to pay the amount determined by the assembly. (Ord. 93-1130 § 4(2), 1993.)


Chapter 18.16 TIDELAND LEASE PROCEDURE 

Sections:

18.16.010    Generally.

18.16.020    Leases and permits.

18.16.030    Government leases and permits. 

18.16.040    Classes of approval for permits and leases.

18.16.050    Procedures and fees for Class I, Class II, and Class III approvals.

18.16.060    Class IIA, Class IIB, and Class IIC approvals – Application requirements.

18.16.070    Class IIA, Class IIB, and Class IIC – Notification requirements.

18.16.080    Class IIA, Class IIB, and Class IIC review – Planning commission.

18.16.090    Class IIA and Class IIB review – Assembly.

18.16.100    Class III – Pre-application advice.

18.16.110    Class III – Formal application.

18.16.120    Class III – Plat requirements.

18.16.130    Class III – Lease preference rights and nonpreference rights.

18.16.140    Class III – Notification of upland owner.

18.16.150    Class III – Preliminary approval.

18.16.160    Class III – Notice of auction and intended lease.

18.16.170    Class III – Advisory vote by the voters.

18.16.180    Class III – Protest.

18.16.190    Class III – Determination of lease price.

18.16.200    Class III – Lease by ordinance. 

18.16.210    Class III – Annual lease payments and terms.

18.16.220    Class III – Direct lease by municipality. 

18.16.230    Execution of permit and lease documents.


18.16.010 Generally.

When in the best interests of the municipality, the city and borough may grant leases to tidelands, filled tidelands, tidelands in the intertidal area, submerged tidelands, submerged lands, and reclaimed lands as outlined below. (Ord. 03-1751 § 4 (part), 2003.)


18.16.020 Leases and permits.

The municipality may grant leases or permits for the use of Sitka-owned tidelands, filled tidelands, tidelands in the intertidal area, submerged tidelands, submerged lands, and reclaimed lands under such policy directions and conditions as the assembly shall set from time to time. Leases and permits shall be subject to all other applicable municipal, state, and federal regulations. (Ord. 03-1751 § 4 (part), 2003.)


18.16.030 Government leases and permits. 

When leases or permits are issued to other local, state, or federal governmental units or a corporation or agency through which the governmental unit acts, there is no limit to the front footage obtainable, or valuation limit and no permitted advisory election as set out by Section 18.12.010, and no consideration for such a lease shall necessarily be required. (Ord. 18-29 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 03-1751 § 4 (part), 2003.)


18.16.040 Classes of approval for permits and leases.

A.    There shall be three classes of approvals for permits and leases.

B.    Class I approvals which are for permits for use of tidelands that are cancelable by the municipality on thirty days’ notice.

C.    Class II approvals are for personal use docks and facilities that are immediately seaward of deeded lands and deeded tidelands.

D.    The approval of Class IIA facilities shall grant the owner exclusive use of a personal use dock with a perimeter that does not exceed three hundred linear feet and the tidelands that are immediately adjacent to the facility.

E.    Class IIB approvals are for exclusive use of personal use docks with a perimeter of more than three hundred linear feet.

F.    Class IIC approvals are for mooring buoys.

G.    Class III approvals, which are for leases for commercial docks and facilities and/or personal docks that include the lease of space and facilities. The approval of Class III facilities shall grant the facility owner exclusive use of the facility. The area required for the berthing of all vessels shall be included in the lease area. Class III facilities include community use docks or docks constructed and owned by individuals other than the upland property owner.

(Ord. 03-1751 § 4 (part), 2003.)


18.16.050 Procedures and fees for Class I, Class II, and Class III approvals.

A.    Class I approvals may be made by the administrator with or without the approval of the assembly. It shall follow the submittal of a completed application on the form prepared by the municipality and detailed sketch. The fee for the permit shall be a monthly charge established by the administrator.

B.    Class II approvals shall be made by the assembly by motion following the procedures outlined in Sections 18.16.060 through 18.16.090. The assembly may, at its discretion, require that a Class II facility follow the procedures required for a Class III facility.

C.    Class III approvals shall be made in accordance with the procedures outlined in Sections 18.16.100 through 18.16.220.

(Ord. 03-1751 § 4 (part), 2003.)


18.16.060 Class IIA, Class IIB, and Class IIC approvals – Application requirements.

A.    Class II approvals for permits for personal noncommercial docks and facilities and mooring buoys that are immediately seaward of deeded lands and deeded tidelands. Application forms for Class II approvals shall be obtained from and returned to the municipal clerk and each form shall include the information required by the municipality. The application shall be accompanied by full dimensioned vertical and horizontal drawings of the facility with an approximate scale. These drawings are in lieu of a plat prepared by a registered surveyor that is required of Class III facilities. These drawings shall show all environmentally sensitive areas. An approved corps of engineers permit shall be submitted with the application for a Class IIA and Class IIB facility.

B.    The application shall be accompanied by a two hundred fifty dollar application fee for a Class IIA and Class IIB personal use dock, which is intended to offset the municipality’s processing costs. There shall be a one hundred fifty dollar application fee for a Class IIC mooring buoy.

C.    Only the upland property owner shall have the ability of applying for a Class II permit.

D.    The Class II permit shall only be valid for two years unless construction of the dock is actively underway. Any request for extension of the permit must be filed prior to the end of the approval period. Only one single one-year extension may be granted.

(Ord. 03-1751 § 4 (part), 2003.)


18.16.070 Class IIA, Class IIB, and Class IIC – Notification requirements.

Notices of public meetings for Class II facilities shall be sent to all property owners of record according to the municipal assessor that are within one hundred feet of the exterior of the proposed project. (Ord. 03-1751 § 4 (part), 2003.)


18.16.080 Class IIA, Class IIB, and Class IIC review – Planning commission.

A.    The planning commission shall consider an application for a Class II facility during at least one meeting. The role of the planning commission is to provide comments to the applicant and the assembly on the proposal. Formal recommendations and approvals are not required.

B.    The planning commission shall review and may approve Class IIC mooring buoy applications subject to appeal to the assembly. The planning commission shall attach any conditions that are considered appropriate. The approval may be for a term not to exceed ten years. No annual permit fees shall be charged for mooring buoys.

(Ord. 03-1751 § 4 (part), 2003.)


18.16.090 Class IIA and Class IIB review – Assembly.

A.    Following the planning commission review, the assembly shall consider the request. The information provided to the assembly shall include all application materials, minutes from the planning commission meeting(s), and an estimate from the assessor of the value of the tidelands.

B.    The assembly, by simple motion, may give an approval of an exclusive transferable permit for a period of ten years for Class IIA and Class IIB facilities. The permit shall carry two automatic five-year renewals that may be exercised at the applicant’s discretion.

C.    There shall not be an annual permit fee for a Class IIA personal use dock.

D.    Since a Class IIB facility involves large personal use docks, the annual permit fee shall be two hundred dollars a year. It shall be adjusted every five years based on the aggregate rate of inflation for the previous five-year period. The annual permit fee shall be higher than these amounts only in the event that the assembly finds that higher fees are justified by area of the tidelands that are involved.

E.    The assembly may place conditions on any approval, and, the assembly may withhold approval if it finds the granting of the permit is not within the public interest. Any denial of a Class II application may be followed by the issuance of specific findings.

(Ord. 03-1751 § 4 (part), 2003.)


18.16.100 Class III – Pre-application advice.

Prior to making formal application, a potential applicant may request the assembly to give its advice concerning whether or not the assembly will consider leasing the property. The request may be considered by the planning commission and the port and harbors commission before the assembly considers the matter. Any preliminary advice shall not be binding upon the assembly, but is designed to give an applicant some idea of his or her chances and to avoid unproductive efforts. (Ord. 03-1751 § 4 (part), 2003.)


18.16.110 Class III – Formal application.

A.    Application forms shall be obtained from and returned to the municipal clerk and each form shall include the information required by the municipality and be accompanied by a filing fee of three hundred dollars unless otherwise directed by the applicable sections. The filing fee will not be refunded, including cases in which the application is rejected. All checks and/or money orders shall be made payable to the city and borough of Sitka.

B.    Deposit. In addition to the filing fee the municipal clerk shall require applicants to deposit with the finance director a sum sufficient to cover all anticipated costs of advertisement and notice mailing of the area under application. In the event the land applied for is disposed to other than the applicant, then within twenty days after the auction, the successful bidder shall be required to pay advertising costs including reimbursing the applicant a reasonable amount for the plat. The original deposit will be returned to the depositor. If the depositor cancels his application or fails to accept the lease within thirty days of being offered by the municipality, the deposited moneys shall be forfeited.

(Ord. 03-1751 § 4 (part), 2003.)


18.16.120 Class III – Plat requirements.

Along with the application, a plat of the area applied for shall be included. Should additional surveying be necessary it shall be done at the cost of the applicant. All plats shall be the responsibility of the applicant and shall be stamped by a land surveyor registered in Alaska. The municipality may prepare the plat and shall be reimbursed by the applicant for all reasonable costs. Mailings shall be sent to property owners within five hundred feet of exterior property lines for the notifications required by this chapter by first class mail unless otherwise specified in this chapter. (Ord. 03-1751 § 4 (part), 2003.)


18.16.130 Class III – Lease preference rights and nonpreference rights.

A.    Under prior code, six types of preference rights were recognized. The time for applying for preference rights, except for upland owners (former Class VI), has long passed (December 1, 1967) and any such other unasserted rights are declared void.

B.    Preference shall be granted to upland owners (formerly called Class VI preference right holders) over other nonpreference applicants for the same tract, for the use of tidelands and contiguous submerged land seaward of the upland property. It shall not be required that Sitka offer tidelands for lease should the assembly determine that it will be of greatest benefit to Sitka not to lease the tidelands. The municipality may itself make such use of tidelands as it may consider in the public interest without offering the tidelands to a preference right holder.

    	The preference right shall be limited to allowing the preference right holder to lease the property for the minimum price established by the assembly, if the right holder shall so bid at the auction, even though a nonpreference right holder may bid more.

C.    Any lease made to a preference holder shall require that any sublease or sale of lease rights shall require prior assembly approval and possible lease rental adjustment. Separation of ownership of the tidelands lease from the abutting uplands will not normally be approved.

D.    If owners of more than one upland parcel claim a preference right to the same tidelands, the assembly shall determine which party is entitled to the preference. In making its determination, the assembly may consider the totality of the circumstances, including proposed uses, size and shape of the tracts, water access, and equitable consideration.

(Ord. 03-1751 § 4 (part), 2003.)


18.16.140 Class III – Notification of upland owner.

Before the application is preliminarily approved by the assembly and a minimum bid price set, the municipality shall advise by certified mail each of the abutting upland property owners of the nature of use proposed on tidelands seaward of their property. Each upland property owner may protest issuance of the lease and such protest must be filed with the municipal clerk within fifteen working days of mailing of notice. Each protest submitted shall conform substantially to Section 18.16.130. (Ord. 03-1751 § 4 (part), 2003.)


18.16.150 Class III – Preliminary approval.

No sooner than fifteen working days following the mailing of the notice to abutting upland property owners, the assembly may give preliminary consideration to the application and may hear objections, and settle disputes between claimants as to preference status, boundaries, and any other matter related to the tidelands and set a minimum bid price. (Ord. 03-1751 § 4 (part), 2003.)


18.16.160 Class III – Notice of auction and intended lease.

Notice of auction and of the application for lease shall be contained in one notice and shall be made substantially as follows:

The municipal clerk shall publish three times over a three-week period at the expense of the applicant, a notice in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the vicinity in which the land, property, or interest therein is to be leased; and provided, that the lease of lands be held after the end of the three-week advertisement period. Copies of this notice shall be served on adjacent property owners by a copy being sent to them by first class mail.

The notice shall set forth the following:

A.    A general description of the request;

B.    The date, if any, time and place, and the general terms, including the minimum bid, if any, of the sale, lease, or other disposal;

C.    The location and description of the lands or interest therein and the improvements thereon; and

D.    The preference or preference rights claimed, if any.

(Ord. 03-1751 § 4 (part), 2003.)


18.16.170 Class III – Advisory vote by the voters.

Lease of tidelands to other than preference right holders for areas which have more than two hundred fifty feet of frontage along the upland meander line, or lease of any tidelands valued above seven million five hundred thousand dollars, may be submitted to the voters for an advisory vote. The assembly shall stay its decision on any such sale, lease, or disposition pending the outcome of the election. This section shall not apply to leases at the former Alaska Pulp Corporation mill site, now known as Gary Paxton Industrial Park, and the property leased under Ordinance 99-1539. (Ord. 18-29 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 03-1751 § 4 (part), 2003.)


18.16.180 Class III – Protest.

Anyone may file a protest with respect to the grant, sale, lease, or other disposal of tidelands or materials thereon or therein. Such protest shall be in writing and contain a statement as to the nature and reason for the protest. Each protest so made shall be filed with the municipal clerk during the period of publication. Failure to protest shall constitute a waiver. (Ord. 03-1751 § 4 (part), 2003.)


18.16.190 Class III – Determination of lease price.

Lease price shall finally be determined by open auction. The assembly shall set the upset price for the auction and advertise the minimum price. In determining the minimum price, the assembly may rely on the municipal assessor’s advice as to value and consider such additional input, as it may desire. The minimum price shall be no less than the value established by the municipal assessor.

In addition to a minimum bid, the assembly may require a development plan from each bidder and may evaluate such plans for acceptability prior to auction. Acceptability shall be based upon a determination that the plan would enhance the long range development of the municipality and benefit the public. (Ord. 03-1751 § 4 (part), 2003.)


18.16.200 Class III – Lease by ordinance. 

Should the auction be held and a bid accepted by the assembly, the lease shall be executed subject to passage of an ordinance authorizing the lease. If the lease is subject to an advisory vote and the assembly authorizes an advisory vote, the assembly shall stay its decision on the ordinance authorizing the lease pending the outcome of the election. (Ord. 18-29 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 03-1751 § 4 (part), 2003.)


18.16.210 Class III – Annual lease payments and terms.

A.    The annual lease payment to the municipality shall be four and one half percent of the price established at the auction plus sales tax for new leases and lease renewals.

B.    On the seventh anniversary of each lease, and each seven years thereafter the annual lease payment shall be adjusted as follows: The annual lease payment shall be designed to approximate the national inflation or deflation rate using the Consumer Price Index – U.S. City Average – All Items (base period 1984 = 100). Each lease shall state the base figure and tax year on which it was calculated. The term shall be thirty years unless otherwise determined by the assembly.

C.    The assembly may require such other terms and conditions as it may desire to be included in the lease at its commencement.

(Ord. 13-22 § 4, 2013; Ord. 03-1751 § 4 (part), 2003.)


18.16.220 Class III – Direct lease by municipality. 

By ordinance the municipality may elect to lease tidelands upon its own initiative upon such terms as are set out in the ordinance.

Tidelands leased by the direct lease procedure may be subject to an advisory vote if approved by the assembly when applicable by other sections of the Sitka General Code. (Ord. 18-29 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 03-1751 § 4 (part), 2003.)


18.16.230 Execution of permit and lease documents.

Following any approval the administrator shall prepare and execute lease documents. Those documents shall include clauses covering termination of leases for nonpayment and ownership of facilities involving terminated or expired leases. (Ord. 03-1751 § 4 (part), 2003.)


Chapter 18.20 TIDELAND PERMITS

Sections:

18.20.010    Generally.


18.20.010 Generally.

A.    Granted by Assembly. Permits for tidelands from which fill or other materials are to be removed, or for any use, may be granted by the assembly under such terms as it deems advisable, after notice of such application is given as stated in Section 18.16.100.

B.    Terms. A permit shall not constitute a preference to lease any resulting reclaimed lands, nor shall the permit allow permanent development or occupancy. The permits shall not exceed one year in duration, but are renewable at the discretion of the assembly. The permits shall be subject to any special conditions or requirements that the assembly deems in the best interest of the municipality and are revocable by the assembly at will.

C.    Tideland Right-of-way and/or Easement Permits. Permits may be issued by the assembly for trails, ditches, pipelines, telephone and transmission lines, log storage, and production facilities for the purposes of recovering minerals from adjacent lands under valid lease and other similar uses or improvements. In the granting, suspension, or revocation of any permit or easement of lands, the assembly shall give preference to such use of the land as will be of the greatest benefit to the city and borough and the development of its resources; provided, however, that subject to the city and borough’s use, preference shall be given to upland owners, giving such preference right holder twenty days to exercise his preference according to the procedure provided in Section 18.16.090.

(Ord. 83-556 § 4 (part), 1983.)


Chapter 18.24 ABANDONED PROPERTY

Sections:

18.24.010    Abandoned property.


18.24.010 Abandoned property.

A.    Abandoned or lost property may be received by the police department for storage in the lost and found section. The department is not required to search for the true owner:

1.    If property is not claimed within six months, it may be sold at public auction with the proceeds to go to the municipal general fund, unless the person who deposited it with the police indicates at the time of deposit in writing that they would wish the item.

2.    If an unredeemed item is to be returned to the finder, the finder must execute an instrument agreeing to surrender the item or its apparent value to the true owner should the true owner make application for the item within two years of original deposit with the police department.

3.    All knives, firearms, and items of apparent value of two hundred dollars or more shall be approved by the administrator or assembly prior to being released to a finder.

B.    An exception to this rule is abandoned bicycles. Any bicycle received by the police which does not have a current bicycle license may be disposed of at public auction after being held no less than thirty days, or may be donated to a charity for distribution to needy children. Bicycles may not be given to the finder.

C.    If a person claims ownership of an item in police custody and cannot conclusively establish ownership, the police chief may use his discretion in deciding if ownership is sufficiently established. Such a decision shall be in writing. Any party wishing to dispute the decision shall have the right to appeal to the assembly within ten days of the election.

D.    Any property of little or no value may be destroyed without any waiting period, but a written list of such destroyed property shall be kept by the department.

(Ord. 84-625 § 4, 1984; Ord. 83-556 § 4 (part), 1983.)


Chapter 18.32 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS BONDING REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

18.32.010    Public improvements under fifty thousand dollars.

18.32.020    Bonding on contracts up to four hundred thousand dollars.


18.32.010 Public improvements under fifty thousand dollars.

The municipality may, but is not required to require performance and payment bonding on any public improvement contracts totaling fifty thousand dollars or less per contract. (Ord. 83-556 § 4 (part), 1983: Ord. 79-403 § 4 (part), 1979.)


18.32.020 Bonding on contracts up to four hundred thousand dollars.

On public works contracts of more than fifty thousand dollars, but not exceeding four hundred thousand dollars, the municipality may require less than the amounts of required performance and payment bonds, as required by AS 36.25.010, provided the contractor meets the requirements and supplies the information required by AS 36.25.025. (Ord. 83-556 § 4 (part), 1983: Ord. 79-403 § 4 (part), 1979.) 


TITLE 18 FOOTNOTES

1    For the charter provisions requiring the conveyance of city land be by ordinance, see § 3.01(7).

2    For the statutory provisions regarding eminent domain powers of home rule municipalities, see AS 29.35.030 and 9.55.250—9.55.460. 

3    For statutory provisions regarding tidelands, see AS Ch. 38.10.


Title 19 BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION  

Chapters: 

19.01    Building Code 

19.02    Electrical Code 

19.03    Plumbing Code 

19.04    Mechanical Code 

19.05    Fire Code 

19.06    Uniform Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings 

19.07    Excavation and Grading Code 

19.08    Energy Conservation Code 

19.09    Residential Code 

19.10    Plumbing Code for Islands 

19.11    Mechanical Code for Islands 

19.12    Fire Code for Islands 

19.13    Electrical Code for Islands 

19.14    Building Code for Islands 

19.15    Building Code for Float Homes 

19.16    Electrical Code for Float Homes 

19.17    Plumbing Code for Float Homes 

19.18    Code Applicability 

19.19    Demolition or Removal of Municipally Owned Buildings  

19.20    Fire Marshal Deferral Standards


Chapter 19.01 BUILDING CODE 

Sections:

19.01.010    International Building Code (IBC) adoption by reference. 

19.01.015    Power of assembly to grant a variance or waiver by motion.

19.01.016    International Building Code Chapter 1—Administration amended. 

19.01.018    International Building Code Chapter 2 amended. 

19.01.020    Permit fees.

19.01.021    International Building Code Section 109.4.

19.01.030    International Building Code Section 110.3.7, Energy Efficiency Inspections, is deleted. 

19.01.040    Table 509 amended—Incidental use areas. 

19.01.041    International Building Code Section 708.3 amended—Fire resistance rating. 

19.01.065    International Building Code amended to add new Section 111.2.1. 

19.01.070    International Building Code Section 903.2 amended—Automatic fire suppression systems—Where required.

19.01.071    Waivers to Section 19.01.070. 

19.01.072    Administrative waivers for minor additions or structures.

19.01.088    International Building Code Section 1003 amended—General means of egress.

19.01.092    Certificates of occupancy.

19.01.095    The International Building Code Chapter 11 amended. 

19.01.096    Under-floor space ventilation, IBC Section 1203.3 modified. 

19.01.100    Chapter 17 amended—Earth support and danger trees. 

19.01.110    Chapter 23, Section 2303.1.4, Wood structural panels, amended. 

19.01.125    Chapter 31, Section 3102, Membrane Structures, modified.

19.01.150    Chapter 34, Section 3401, Scope, modified.

19.01.155    Chapter 34, Section 3411, Accessibility for existing buildings, modified. 

19.01.200    Chapter 35, Referenced Standards, modified. 


19.01.010 International Building Code (IBC) adoption by reference. 

The 2012 International Building Code, written by the International Code Council, Chapters 1 through 12, 14 through 28, and 30 through 35, is adopted and included by reference, including the following appendices:

Appendix B—Board of appeals, modified as follows:

B101.2(1) is modified to read, “One for 3 years, one for 2 years, and one for 1 year.”

B101.2(2) is modified to read, “Thereafter, each new member shall serve for 3 years or until a successor has been appointed.”

B101.2.1 is modified as follows: The last sentence shall read, “Alternate members shall possess the qualifications required for board membership and shall be appointed for three years, or until a successor has been appointed.”

B101.2.2, sentence one, is modified to read, “The board of appeals shall consist of three individuals, one from any of the following five professions or disciplines:”

B101.3.3 is modified to read, “When three members are not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the appellant’s representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the hearing.”

A new Section B101.3.4 is added to read as follows: “The cost of filing an appeal case to be considered by the Appeals Board is $100.00 and must accompany the filing of the appeal. If the appeal is granted the application fee shall be refunded.”

Appendix C—Group U agricultural buildings.

(Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 12-43A § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 08-02 § 4 (part), 2008: Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002: Ord. 97-1446 § 4 (part), 1997.)


19.01.015 Power of assembly to grant a variance or waiver by motion.

The assembly shall have the power to grant by motion a variance or waiver from the requirements of the codes adopted in this chapter, provided such variance or waiver is not in conflict with Alaska state adopted codes. The assembly shall take into consideration the recommendations of the building official and the fire chief in making the decision to grant such a variance or waiver. (Ord. 08-02 § 4 (part), 2008: Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002: Ord. 00-1580 § 4A, 2000.)


19.01.016 International Building Code Chapter 1—Administration amended. 

A.    International Building Code Section 101.4 is deleted.

B.    International Building Code Section 103.2 is amended to read: “The Building Official shall be appointed by the Municipal Administrator.”

C.    International Building Code Section 103.3 is amended by deleting the last sentence of the section.

D.    International Building Code Section 104.1 is amended as follows:

1.    By adding the following phrase to the end of sentence two: “... and to rule on applicability in the event of conflicting provisions with other codes.”

2.    By amending sentence three to read, “Such interpretations, rulings, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this and related code.”

E.    International Building Code Sections 105.1.1 and 105.1.2 are deleted.

F.    International Building Code Section 105.2, Work Exempt from Permit, is modified as follows:

1.    105.2 Item 2 is amended to read: “Fences not over 8 feet high.”

2.    105.2 Item 10 is amended to have an additional sentence which reads: “Private membrane structures used as ‘U’ occupancies which are not in excess of 240 square feet and have no electrical service. Such structures must be anchored in an approved manner.”

G.    International Building Code Section 107.5 is deleted.

H.    International Building Code Section 102.6 is amended by deleting the words, “International Property Maintenance Code.”

I.    International Building Code Section 110.3.3 is amended to read: “In flood hazard area, prior to issuing the Certificate of Occupancy required in Section 111, the elevation certification required in Section 1612.5 shall be submitted to the Building Official.”

(Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018: amended during 3/15 supplement; Ord. 12-43A § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 08-02 § 4 (part), 2008: Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002.)


19.01.018 International Building Code Chapter 2 amended. 

International Building Code Section 201.3 is amended by deleting the references to “International Fuel Gas Code” and “International Plumbing Code” and replacing with “Uniform Plumbing Code.” (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004.) 


19.01.020 Permit fees.

International Building Code Section 109.2, Schedule of Permit Fees, is amended by adding a second sentence to read:

The following schedule is established:

Permit fees for A, B, E, F, H, I, M, R-l, R-2, R-4 and S occupancies shall be calculated using Table 1-A of the 1997 Uniform Building Code, and plan review fees shall be calculated as 65% of the permit fee. Permit fees for R-3 and U occupancies shall be calculated using the following table; plan review fees shall be calculated as 33% of the permit fee. 

 

BUILDING PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE FOR R-3 AND U OCCUPANCIES  

	TOTAL VALUATION	FEE

	$1.00 to $2,000.00	$46.35

	$2,000.01 to $25,000.00	$46.35 for the first $2,000.00 plus $9.27 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $25,000.00

	$25,000.01 to $50,000.00	$259.56 for the first $25,000.00 plus $6.70 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $50,000.00

	$50,000.01 to $100,000.00	$426.94 for the first $50,000.00 plus $4.64 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00

	$100,000.01 to $500,000.00	$658.69 for the first $100,000.00 plus $3.61 for each additional $1,000.000 or fraction thereof, to and including $500,000.00

	$500,000.01 to $1,000,000.00	$2,100.69 for the first $500,000.00 plus $3.10 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $1,000,000.00

	$1,000,000.01 and up	$3,645.69 for the first $1,000,000.00 plus $2.10 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof 

	Other Inspections and Fees:

	1.    Inspections outside of normal business hours (Minimum charge – two hours) 	$55.00 per hour*

	2.    Reinspection fees as determined by the building official 	55.00 per hour*

	3.    Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated  	(Minimum charge – one half hour) 	55.00 per hour*

	4.    Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revisions to approved plans  	(Minimum charge – one half hour) 	55.00 per hour*

	5.     For use of outside consultants for plan checking, inspections, or professional assistance 	Actual costs**

	*Or the total cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is the greatest. This cost shall include supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly wages and fringe benefits of the employees involved.

	**Actual costs include administrative, overhead, and handling charges.

(Ord. 15-14 § 4 (part), 2015; amended during 3/15 supplement; Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002: Ord. 99-1524 § 4, 1999; Ord. 97-1446 § 4 (part), 1997.)


19.01.021 International Building Code Section 109.4.

International Building Code Section 109.4 is amended to read:

Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits may be subject to a fee established by the Building Official that shall be in addition to the required permit fees. The additional fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by this code, whether or not a permit is subsequently issued. A person who commences grading without a required permit shall be subject to, in addition to the regular grading permit fee, an additional permit fee of one hundred dollars for the first occurrence, two hundred fifty dollars for a second occurrence, and five hundred dollars for subsequent occurrences in any three-year period.

(Ord. 12-43A § 4 (part), 2013: Ord. 08-02 § 4 (part), 2008: Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002.)


19.01.030 International Building Code Section 110.3.7, Energy Efficiency Inspections, is deleted. 

International Building Code Section 110.3.7, Energy Efficiency Inspections, is deleted. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


19.01.040 Table 509 amended—Incidental use areas. 

International Building Code Table 509 Amended—Incidental Use Areas. Cell one in the table is amended to read, “All furnace or boiler rooms.” Cell two in the table is amended to read, “1 hour.” (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 12-43A § 4 (part), 2013: Ord. 08-02 § 4 (part), 2008: Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002: Ord. 97-1446 § 4 (part), 1997.)


19.01.041 International Building Code Section 708.3 amended—Fire resistance rating. 

International Building Code Section 708.3, Fire resistance rating, is amended by deleting exception 2. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 12-43A § 4 (part), 2013: Ord. 08-02 § 4 (part), 2008: Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004.)


19.01.065 International Building Code amended to add new Section 111.2.1. 

The International Building Code is amended by adding a new Section 111.2.1 which reads:

Before a Certificate of Occupancy is issued, approved numbers or addresses shall be provided in such a position as to be plainly visible and legible from the street or road fronting the property.

(Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 08-02 § 4 (part), 2008: Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002.)


19.01.070 International Building Code Section 903.2 amended—Automatic fire suppression systems—Where required.

International Building Code Section 903.2, Automatic Fire Suppression Systems, is modified by deleting the exception and adding the following paragraph(s) which read:

A.    All new buildings, and additions, having a new or existing fire area designated by the building official as occupancy classification A, B, Group E (excluding day-cares with an occupant load less than 50), Group F, H, I, M, R-l, and R-2’s which are 5-plex or larger or which have an occupant load greater than 10, R-4, or S occupancies and all new buildings over thirty-five (35) feet in height, shall be equipped throughout with an approved automatic fire suppression system.

B.    Automatic sprinkler systems required by this section, but which are not required by other provisions of the State or City and Borough building codes, do not require remote electric supervision or monitoring provided the system has fewer than 100 sprinkler heads.

(Ord. 12-43A § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 08-02 § 4 (part), 2008: Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1704 § 4, 2003; Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002: Ord. 97-1446 § 4 (part), 1997.)


19.01.071 Waivers to Section 19.01.070. 

If IBC Section 903.2 as amended results in a required automatic fire extinguishing system which would not otherwise have been required under the unamended building code, a waiver may be applied for. An application for such waiver shall be made in a form and manner as prescribed by the building department. The applicant must pay a fifty dollar fee for waiver applications to cover advertisement of the meeting. Application for waiver shall be considered by a committee consisting of the fire chief or designee, the building official or designee, and the chair of the police and fire commission or designee. The committee shall grant or deny the application for waiver. The committee’s decision shall be reviewed, and affirmed or rejected, by the municipal administrator. If the administrator fails to affirm the committee’s decision, the application for waiver shall go to the assembly for consideration. Decisions of the committee and administrator are appealable to the assembly under Section 19.01.015. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002.)


19.01.072 Administrative waivers for minor additions or structures.

The building official may administratively grant waivers to Section 19.01.070 for minor additions or structures under three hundred square feet which in the building official’s judgment present negligible hazard to persons or property. Records of such waivers shall be permanently maintained in the building department. (Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004.)


19.01.088 International Building Code Section 1003 amended—General means of egress.

International Building Code Section 1003 is amended to include the following section: “1003.8 Hazards from sliding snow from roofs. Means of egress discharge paths shall be protected from sliding snow from roofs by the use of snow stops or in an approved manner.” (Ord. 12-43A § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 08-02 § 4 (part), 2008.)


19.01.092 Certificates of occupancy.

In new subdivisions, a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for a dwelling or a building with water and sanitary plumbing facilities, unless that dwelling or building is connected to a city and borough accepted and Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation approved water and sanitary sewer system. In new subdivisions, a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for a dwelling or a building unless all streets within the municipal right-of-way that serve the dwelling or building have been accepted by the city and borough. (Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002.)


19.01.095 The International Building Code Chapter 11 amended. 

The International Building Code is amended by adding to Chapter 11, Section 1101.1 of the IBC the following three sentences:

This chapter is adopted as a design reference for accessibility and is not reviewed by the Sitka Building Department for compliance. Compliance with the requirements of this chapter and other provisions within this code for accessibility of physically disabled persons is the exclusive responsibility of the owner of the structure. An advisory plan review may be obtained regarding the design for accessibility of a structure from the Alaska State ADA Coordinator’s Office located at 801 West 10th Ave, Juneau, AK 99801, phone number 907-375-7705.

(Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002.)


19.01.096 Under-floor space ventilation, IBC Section 1203.3 modified. 

International Building Code Section 1203.3, Ventilation, is modified by removing the reference to openings of one square foot per one thousand five hundred square feet of floor area. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


19.01.100 Chapter 17 amended—Earth support and danger trees. 

International Building Code Chapter 17, Special Inspections, is modified by adding a new item Section 1712 to read as follows:

1712. The Building Official may cause to be inspected, any clearing, excavation or fill or construction project regulated by this code to identify risks to subject or adjacent property caused by damage to trees, their support systems, or disruption of the “forest canopy.”

The Building Official may revoke or withhold development permits until dangers identified by special inspection have been satisfactorily mitigated.

It is the intent of the Assembly that matters of concern under this subsection be handled as expeditiously as possible and that the Building Official handle them in-house whenever possible to avoid delay from frivolous complaints or concerns.

(Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 12-43A § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002: Ord. 97-1446 § 4 (part), 1997.)


19.01.110 Chapter 23, Section 2303.1.4, Wood structural panels, amended. 

Amend IBC Section 2303.1.4. Oriented strand board (OSB) is not acceptable as sheathing for roofs, exterior walls, shear walls or floors. OSB is acceptable as a component in engineered joists. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


19.01.125 Chapter 31, Section 3102, Membrane Structures, modified.

IBC 3102.1 is amended by adding a sentence:

Membrane structures installed as of the date of the enactment of this ordinance are “grandfathered” and need meet no additional requirements or standards as a result of adoption of this code. If such a membrane structure undergoes a change in occupancy designation, it must meet requirements as for a new installation.

An additional Section 3102.1.2 is added which reads:

All non-heated, open on the interior, non-hazardous occupancies are exempt from the requirements to install an automatic sprinkler system, provided they are used for storage of non-hazardous materials only.

(Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002.)


19.01.150 Chapter 34, Section 3401, Scope, modified.

IBC 3401.3 is amended to read:

Compliance with other codes. Alterations, repairs, additions, and changes of occupancy to existing structures must comply with the provisions for alterations, repairs, additions, and changes of occupancy in the International Fire Code as adopted; the International Mechanical Code as adopted; the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted; and the National Electrical Code as adopted.

(Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004.)


19.01.155 Chapter 34, Section 3411, Accessibility for existing buildings, modified. 

IBC 3411.1, Scope, is amended to read:

This section is adopted as a design reference for accessibility and is not reviewed by the office of the state fire marshal for compliance. Compliance with the requirements of this chapter is the exclusive responsibility of the owner of the structure. An advisory plan review may be obtained regarding the design for accessibility of a structure from the office of the state coordinator for Americans with Disabilities Act at 801 West 10th Avenue, Suite A, Juneau, Alaska 99801, phone (907) 375-7705.

(Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004.)


19.01.200 Chapter 35, Referenced Standards, modified. 

Chapter 35, Referenced Standards, of the IBC is revised by changing or adding the referenced standards from the publication date listed to the following edition, and the standards are adopted by reference:

N.F.P.A. 10-2013, Portable Fire Extinguishers;

N.F.P.A. 13-2016, Installation of Sprinkler Systems;

N.F.P.A. 13D-2016, Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes;

N.F.P.A. 13R-2016, Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Residential Occupancies Up to and Including Four Stories in Height;

N.F.P.A. 14-2016, Standpipe and Hose System;

N.F.P.A. 20-2016, Installation of Stationary Pumps for Fire Protection;

N.F.P.A. 72-2016, National Fire Alarm Code;

N.F.P.A. 750-2015, Standards on Water Mist Fire Protection Systems. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 12-43A § 4 (part), 2013: Ord. 08-02 § 4 (part), 2008: Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004.)


Chapter 19.02 ELECTRICAL CODE 

Sections:

19.02.010    National Electrical Code (NEC) adoption by reference. 

19.02.020    Application for permit.

19.02.030    Section 230-70(A)(1) amended—Service disconnecting means—Location. 


19.02.010 National Electrical Code (NEC) adoption by reference. 

The 2014 Edition of the National Electrical Code, copyrighted by the National Fire Protection Association, is adopted and incorporated by reference. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 12-43A § 4 (part), 2013: Ord. 12-12 § 4 (part), 2012: Ord. 08-02 § 4 (part), 2008: Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002: Ord. 97-1446 § 4 (part), 1997.)


19.02.020 Application for permit.

Fees for electrical permits shall be calculated using Section 19.01.020. Separate electrical permits and fees are not required for work authorized by a valid building permit. (Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002: Ord. 97-1446 § 4 (part), 1997.)


19.02.030 Section 230-70(A)(1) amended—Service disconnecting means—Location. 

National Electrical Code Article 230-VI, Service Equipment Disconnecting Means, Section 230-70(A)(1), Location, is amended by revising the wording to read as follows:

The service disconnecting means shall be installed outside of a building or other structure at a location approved by the Building Official.

EXCEPTION: The Building Official may approve an interior disconnect means, provided a shunt trip or other approved equivalent device or method is used.

(Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 08-02 § 4 (part), 2008: Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002: Ord. 97-1446 § 4 (part), 1997.)


Chapter 19.03 PLUMBING CODE 

Sections:

19.03.010    Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC) adoption by reference. 

19.03.020    Application for permit.

19.03.025    Minimum fixture requirements.

19.03.026    Backflow prevention devices. 

19.03.027    Roof drainage.

19.03.030    Amendments to cross references. 


19.03.010 Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC) adoption by reference. 

The 2015 Edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code, promulgated by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (IAPMO), is adopted and incorporated by reference, including the following appendices:

Appendix A, Recommended Rules for Sizing the Water Supply System.

Appendix B, Explanatory Notes on Combination Waste and Vent Systems.

Appendix E, Manufactured/Mobile Home Parks and Recreational Vehicle Parks.

Appendix I, Installation Standards.

Appendix H, Private Sewage Disposal Systems. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018: amended during 3/15 supplement; Ord. 12-12 § 4 (part), 2012; Ord. 08-02 § 4 (part), 2008: Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002: Ord. 97-1446 § 4 (part), 1997.)


19.03.020 Application for permit.

Fees for plumbing permits shall be calculated using Section 19.01.020. Separate plumbing permits and fees are not required for work authorized by a valid building permit. (Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002: Ord. 97-1446 § 4 (part), 1997.)


19.03.025 Minimum fixture requirements.

1997 Uniform Building Code Appendix Chapter 29 Table A-29-A is adopted as the minimum plumbing fixture requirements for new construction. (Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002.)


19.03.026 Backflow prevention devices. 

2015 Uniform Plumbing Code Section 603.4.2, requiring annual testing and certification of backflow prevention devices, is deleted. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 12-12 § 4 (part), 2012: Ord. 08-02 § 4 (part), 2008: Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002.)


19.03.027 Roof drainage.

1997 Uniform Building Code Section 1506, Roof Drainage, is adopted and incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002.)


19.03.030 Amendments to cross references. 

“The Uniform Plumbing Code,” adopted in Section 19.03.010, replaces all references to the “International Plumbing Code” in any of the adopted building codes. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


Chapter 19.04 MECHANICAL CODE 

Sections:

19.04.010    International Mechanical Code (IMC) adoption by reference. 

19.04.020    Application for permit.

19.04.030    Heat pump appliances.


19.04.010 International Mechanical Code (IMC) adoption by reference. 

The 2012 Edition of the International Mechanical Code promulgated by the International Code Council is adopted and included by reference, including the following appendices:

Appendix A, Chimney Connector Pass-Throughs. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 12-43A § 4 (part), 2013: Ord. 08-02 § 4 (part), 2008: Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002: Ord. 97-1446 § 4 (part), 1997.)


19.04.020 Application for permit.

Fees for mechanical permits shall be calculated using Section 19.01.020. Separate mechanical permits and fees are not required for work authorized by a valid building permit. (Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002: Ord. 97-1446 § 4 (part), 1997.)


19.04.030 Heat pump appliances.

The International Mechanical Code is modified by including a new Section 313:

Prohibited Equipment. The installation and use of open loop heat pumps connected to the municipal water system is prohibited.

a) No open loop heat pump installed after June 1, 1997 will be provided municipal water.

(Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002: Ord. 98-1477 § 4, 1998.)


Chapter 19.05 FIRE CODE 

Sections:

19.05.010    International Fire Code (IFC) adoption by reference. 

19.05.050    Fire alarm design summary, IFC Section 907.1.2 amended. 


19.05.010 International Fire Code (IFC) adoption by reference. 

The 2012 Edition of the International Fire Code, as promulgated by the International Code Council, is adopted and included by reference. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 12-43A § 4 (part), 2013: Ord. 08-02 § 4 (part), 2008: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002: Ord. 97-1446 § 4 (part), 1997.)


19.05.050 Fire alarm design summary, IFC Section 907.1.2 amended. 

IFC Section 907.1.2 is amended to include:

Item 14. A design summary including the following information: a) N.F.P.A. 72 edition under which the system is designed, b) the standard of coverage the system is designed to meet under N.F.P.A. 72 Chapter 5, whether total, partial, selective, or non-required, c) if associated with a preaction system, type of preaction system.

(Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004.)


Chapter 19.06 UNIFORM CODE FOR ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 

Sections:

19.06.010    Adoption by reference.

19.06.020    Section 205 amended—Board of appeals.

19.06.030    Section 205 amended—Board of appeals.

19.06.040    Section 302 amended—Dangerous building.

19.06.050    Amendments to cross references. 


19.06.010 Adoption by reference.

The 1994 Edition of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, as promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials, is adopted and included herein by reference. (Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 97-1446 § 4 (part), 1997.)


19.06.020 Section 205 amended—Board of appeals.

Sentence 1 is amended to read as follows:

In order to provide for final interpretation of the provisions of this code and to hear appeals hereunder, there is established a board of appeals consisting of the municipal assembly members and the ex officio, non-voting building official.

(Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 97-1446 § 4 (part), 1997.)


19.06.030 Section 205 amended—Board of appeals.

Sentences two and three are deleted. (Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 97-1446 § 4 (part), 1997.)


19.06.040 Section 302 amended—Dangerous building.

The first sentence is amended to read as follows:

For the purpose of this code, any building, structure, or site which has any or all of the conditions or defects hereinafter described shall be deemed to be a dangerous building, provided that such conditions or defects exist to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or its occupants are endangered, or there exists a public nuisance as defined in section 18.04.010(J) of the Sitka General Code.

(Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 97-1446 § 4 (part), 1997.)


19.06.050 Amendments to cross references. 

“The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings,” as adopted in Section 19.06.010, replaces all references to the “International Property Maintenance Code.” (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


Chapter 19.07 EXCAVATION AND GRADING CODE 

Sections:

19.07.010    Excavation and grading standards, adoption by reference. 

19.07.020    Geotechnical reporting required for “pit run” fill material. 


19.07.010 Excavation and grading standards, adoption by reference. 

1997 Uniform Building Code (UBC) Appendix Chapter 33, Excavation and Grading, as modified by the published building department policy, is adopted and included in the building code by reference. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


19.07.020 Geotechnical reporting required for “pit run” fill material. 

Where unclassified fill material (such as “pit run”) is proposed as structural fill, geotechnical investigations per IBC Chapter 18 are required. Special inspections must be completed during excavation and grading according to IBC Chapter 17. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


Chapter 19.08 ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE 

Sections:

19.08.010    Energy Conservation Code adoption by reference. 


19.08.010 Energy Conservation Code adoption by reference. 

The energy code as defined by Alaska Housing Finance Corporation (AHFC) is adopted and included by reference. This is outlined in the 2014 Building Energy Efficiency Standards (BEES). Thermal efficiency is defined by the 2012 International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) and AHFC provides regionally appropriate Alaska-specific amendments. Ventilation standards are defined by the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) Section 62.2-2010 and AHFC provides regionally appropriate Alaska-specific amendments. This standard is only adopted as a design reference for energy efficiency and is not reviewed by the Sitka building department for compliance. Compliance with the requirements of this standard is the exclusive responsibility of the owner of the structure. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


Chapter 19.09 RESIDENTIAL CODE 

Sections:

19.09.010    International Residential Code (IRC) adoption by reference. 

19.09.015    Scope and administration, IRC Chapter 1 amended. 

19.09.020    Dwelling/garage separation, IRC Table R302.6 amended. 

19.09.025    Grinder pumps to be accessible, IRC Section R306.3 modified. 

19.09.030    Stairways, IRC Section 311 amended. 

19.09.035    Automatic fire sprinkler systems, IRC Section R313 deleted. 

19.09.040    Garage smoke detector, IRC Section R314.3 amended. 

19.09.045    Accessibility, IRC Section R320 deleted. 

19.09.050    Under-floor space ventilation, IRC Section R408 modified. 

19.09.060    Seismic engineering not required, IRC Section R601.1 amended. 

19.09.065    Gutters required, IRC Section R903 modified. 

19.09.070    Service disconnect, IRC Section E3601.6.2 modified. 


19.09.010 International Residential Code (IRC) adoption by reference. 

The 2012 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings by the International Code Council, Chapters 1 through 10, 12 through 19, and 34 through 43, is adopted and included by reference. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


19.09.015 Scope and administration, IRC Chapter 1 amended. 

A.    International Residential Code Section 104.1 is amended by adding the following phrase to the end of sentence two: “...and to rule on applicability in the event of conflicting provisions with other codes.”

B.    International Residential Code Section 104.1 sentence three is amended to read: “Such interpretations, rulings, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this and related codes.”

C.    International Residential Code Section 105 is amended as follows:

1.    R105.2 number 1 is amended to read: “One-story detached accessory structures, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet.”

2.    R105.2 number 2 is amended to read: “Fences not over 8 feet high.”

3.    R105.2 number 9 is deleted. 

(Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


19.09.020 Dwelling/garage separation, IRC Table R302.6 amended.  

International Residential Code Table R302.6, column two, is amended by deleting all references to “1/2 inch gypsum wall board” and replacing them with “5/8 inch type “x” gypsum board.” (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


19.09.025 Grinder pumps to be accessible, IRC Section R306.3 modified. 

International Residential Code Section R306.3 is amended by adding the following sentence: “Grinder pumps shall be installed outside the foundation perimeter of the structure or at an alternate accessible location approved by the building official.” (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


19.09.030 Stairways, IRC Section 311 amended. 

A new Section R311.9 is added which reads: “For cupolas and similar small, one-room spaces not more than 50 square feet in size and not to be used as sleeping spaces, the Building Official may approve permanent ladders as a means of access and egress.” (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


19.09.035 Automatic fire sprinkler systems, IRC Section R313 deleted. 

International Residential Code Section R313, Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems, is deleted. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


19.09.040 Garage smoke detector, IRC Section R314.3 amended. 

International Residential Code Section R314.3 is amended to include:

4. Private garages and shops attached to residential structures and having heated or tempered interior spaces shall be equipped with smoke detectors hard wired with battery backup. The building official may require the garage detector(s) to be intertwined with the dwellings’ smoke detection system.

(Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


19.09.045 Accessibility, IRC Section R320 deleted. 

International Residential Code Section R320, Accessibility, is deleted. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


19.09.050 Under-floor space ventilation, IRC Section R408 modified. 

International Residential Code Section R408, Ventilation, is modified by removing the reference to openings of one square foot per one thousand five hundred square feet of floor area. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


19.09.060 Seismic engineering not required, IRC Section R601.1 amended. 

International Residential Code Section R601.1 is modified by adding an additional sentence which reads: “One and two family dwellings of conventional light frame construction are exempt from the seismic design requirements of this code.” (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


19.09.065 Gutters required, IRC Section R903 modified. 

International Residential Code Section R903 is modified by adding the following section: “R903.5 Gutters. Roofs shall be provided with gutters which discharge in an approved manner.” (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


19.09.070 Service disconnect, IRC Section E3601.6.2 modified. 

The International Residential Code Section E3601.6.2 is modified by revising the first sentence to read as follows:

The service disconnecting means shall be installed outside of a building or other structure at a location approved by the Building Official.

(Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


Chapter 19.10 PLUMBING CODE FOR ISLANDS 

Sections:

19.10.010    Uniform Plumbing Code adoption by reference. 

19.10.020    Application for permit.


19.10.010 Uniform Plumbing Code adoption by reference. 

Certain portions of the 2012 Uniform Plumbing Code are adopted and included by reference. Adopted portions are: Chapters 1 (Administration), 2 (Definitions), 3 (General Regulations (as modified)), 12 (Fuel Piping), Appendix H (Private Sewage Disposal Systems). (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 12-12 § 4 (part), 2012: Ord. 08-02 § 4 (part), 2008: Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002: Ord. 98-1478 § 4 (part), 1998.)


19.10.020 Application for permit.

Fees for plumbing permits shall be calculated as defined in Section 19.01.020. Separate plumbing permits and fees are not required for work authorized by a valid building permit. (Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002: Ord. 98-1478 § 4 (part), 1998.)


Chapter 19.11 MECHANICAL CODE FOR ISLANDS 

Sections:

19.11.010    International Mechanical Code (IMC) adoption by reference. 

19.11.020    Application for permit.


19.11.010 International Mechanical Code (IMC) adoption by reference. 

Certain portions of the 2012 International Mechanical Code are adopted and included by reference. Adopted portions are: Chapters 1 (Administration), 2 (Definitions), 3 (General Regulations), 4 (Ventilation), 7 (Combustion Air), 8 (Chimneys and Vents), 9 (Specific Appliances, Fireplaces, and Solid Fuel Burning Equipment), 10 (Boilers, Water Heaters, and Pressure Vessels), and 13 (Fuel Oil Piping and Storage). (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 12-43A § 4 (part), 2013: Ord. 08-02 § 4 (part), 2008: Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002: Ord. 98-1478 § 4 (part), 1998.)


19.11.020 Application for permit.

Fees for mechanical permits shall be calculated as defined in Section 19.01.020. Separate mechanical permits and fees are not required for work authorized by a valid building permit. (Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002: Ord. 98-1478 § 4 (part), 1998.)


Chapter 19.12 FIRE CODE FOR ISLANDS 

Sections:

19.12.010    International Fire Code (IFC) adoption by reference. 


19.12.010 International Fire Code (IFC) adoption by reference. 

Certain portions of the 2012 International Fire Code are adopted and included by reference. Adopted portions are: Chapter 1 (Administration), Chapter 2 (Definitions and Abbreviations), Chapter 3 (General Precautions Against Fire), excluding Section 307 (Open and Recreational Fires). (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 12-43A § 4 (part), 2013: Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002: Ord. 98-1478 § 4 (part), 1998.)


Chapter 19.13 ELECTRICAL CODE FOR ISLANDS 

Sections:

19.13.010    National Electrical Code adoption by reference. 

19.13.020    Application for permit. 

19.13.030    Article 220, Branch-circuit, feeder and service calculations, Section 220.1, Scope. 


19.13.010 National Electrical Code adoption by reference. 

The 2014 Edition of the National Electrical Code, copyrighted by the National Fire Protection Association, is adopted and incorporated by reference. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


19.13.020 Application for permit. 

Fees for electrical permits shall be calculated as defined in Section 19.01.020. Separate electrical permits and fees are not required for work authorized by a valid building permit. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


19.13.030 Article 220, Branch-circuit, feeder and service calculations, Section 220.1, Scope. 

The mandatory provisions of Article 220, as they apply to residential construction, are modified to be elective by adding a first paragraph as follows:

The residential provisions of this article are elective rather than mandatory. The portions of this article that mandate branch-circuit numbers, sizes, or locations are modified to become optional. In dwellings or their accessory buildings supplied with branch-circuits, feeders, or services, those installations shall be designed and installed in compliance with the provisions of this article.

(Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


Chapter 19.14 BUILDING CODE FOR ISLANDS 

Sections:

19.14.010    Adoption by reference of certain portions of International Building Code as modified. 

19.14.012    Adoption by reference of International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings. 

19.14.013    Adoption of excavation and grading standards.


19.14.010 Adoption by reference of certain portions of International Building Code as modified. 

Certain portions of the 2012 International Building Code published by the International Code Council, and as modified in other sections of this title, are adopted and included by reference. Adopted portions are: Chapters 1 (Administration), 2 (Definitions), 3 (Use and Occupancy Classification), 5 (General Building Heights and Areas), 6 (Types of Construction), 7 (Fire and Smoke Protection Features), 8 (Interior Finishes), 10 (Means of Egress), 14 (Exterior Walls), 15 (Roof Assemblies and Rooftop Structures), 16 (Structural Design), 18 (Soil and Foundations), 19 (Concrete), 22 (Steel), 23 (Wood), 24 (Glass and Glazing), 25 (Gypsum Board and Plaster), 33 (Safeguards During Construction), including Appendix B, Board of Appeals, and Appendix C, Group U Agricultural Buildings. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 12-43A § 4 (part), 2013: Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002: Ord. 98-1478 § 4 (part), 1998.)


19.14.012 Adoption by reference of International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings. 

The 2012 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings by the International Code Council, as modified in other sections of this title, is adopted and included by reference. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 12-43A § 4 (part), 2013: Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002.)


19.14.013 Adoption of excavation and grading standards.

1997 UBC Appendix Chapter 33, Excavation and Grading, as modified by published building department policy, is adopted and included in the building code by reference. (Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 02-1676 § 4, 2002.)


Chapter 19.15 BUILDING CODE FOR FLOAT HOMES 

Sections:

19.15.010    Adoption by reference of certain portions of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings. 

19.15.020    Size of flotation system.

19.15.030    Flotation and stability.

19.15.040    Reserve buoyancy criteria.

19.15.050    Exiting and emergency egress.

19.15.060    Mooring.

19.15.070    Fire separation.


19.15.010 Adoption by reference of certain portions of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings. 

The 2012 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, published by the International Code Council, as amended in Chapter 19.09, is adopted and included by reference, with the following exceptions:

A.    Amend Chapter 2 and add new definition: 

Float home – A single family dwelling unit attached to a flotation device, built to the minimum standards of the IRC and of this ordinance. Float homes are not boats and are subject to all the laws and regulations governing private dwelling units. 

B.    Chapter 4 of the IRC is deleted.

C.    All references to garages are deleted.

D.    Stairs providing a required means of egress from an area of not more than two hundred square feet shall have a minimum clear width of thirty inches. Maximum riser height shall be not more than eight inches and minimum tread depth shall be not less than nine and one-quarter inches.

E.    Guards are not required where open decks, balconies, and walkways do not exceed thirty-six inches in height above the water line.

F.    Fastenings in areas exposed to the elements shall be hot dipped galvanized steel, marine grade bronze, copper, stainless steel, or other corrosion resistant material suitable for marine use.

G.    Boat wells under floating structures shall be separated from the dwelling unit, and from structural members supporting the dwelling unit, by a minimum of one layer of five-eighths-inch Type X, water resistant, gypsum wall board, or equivalent approved fire rated assembly. Boat wells shall provide adequate natural ventilation to prevent the buildup of flammable vapors.

H.    All framing lumber in contact with the flotation device and all framing lumber within twelve inches of the water surface shall be factory preservative treated in accordance with AWPA- U1. Plywood shall be exterior grade and all plywood below the deck level shall be marine grade. Any other decay resistant materials shall be approved by the building official.

I.    Roof coverings shall be fire-resistant or noncombustible.

J.    The building official shall have the authority to rule on the applicability of this code as it applies to residential floating structures.

(Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 14-23A § 4 (part), 2014.)


19.15.020 Size of flotation system.

The dimensions of the flotation system shall be not larger than twenty feet by forty feet. (Ord. 14-23A § 4 (part), 2014.)


19.15.030 Flotation and stability.

A.    The flotation system shall be designed according to accepted marine engineering and naval architectural principles. The flotation devices shall be structurally sound and securely integrated with the framing for the attached structure. The design shall be approved and sealed by an appropriately licensed professional engineer qualified in such design and shall be submitted to the building official for approval.

B.    The flotation device shall be watertight, durable and protected from deterioration by water, impact damage due to floating debris, electrolytic action, corrosion, water-borne solvents, organic infestation, chafing or physical abuse. Logs and unprotected plastic foam insulation are not approved flotation devices.

C.    Where solid flotation devices are not used, hulls shall be fitted with longitudinal and/or transverse watertight bulkheads sufficient to keep the loaded hull afloat with positive stability with any one compartment flooded. No compartment shall compromise more than twenty percent of the total available flotation volume. 

D.    Where solid flotation devices are not used the flotation devices shall be constructed so that access to each compartment is readily available from the first floor level of the completed floating structure.

E.    A float home with a flotation device other than solid flotation shall be equipped with bilge pumps and a bilge alarm system with detectors in each compartment with audible and visual alarm indicators in the float home. At least one visual indicator shall be located outside the float home in a place visible to passersby.

F.    The overall buoyancy and stability of the flotation device and attached structure shall be designed to accommodate moving and launching, wave action, loads imposed by mooring, vessels and walkways moored to the structure, live and dead loads, and the design snow loads and wind loads in effect in the city and borough of Sitka.

G.    The flotation device shall have sufficient stability in both the longitudinal and transverse directions to limit the amount of heel from the horizontal resulting from off-of-center live loading to a maximum of four degrees.

H.    The flotation system and decking shall provide access to, and protection for, the sewage holding tank. 

(Ord. 14-23A § 4 (part), 2014.)


19.15.040 Reserve buoyancy criteria.

The flotation system shall have sufficient buoyancy to support the design weight of the float home plus the maximum combined weight of deadweight items and design snow load and maintain a minimum freeboard of fourteen inches. When design wind load is applied to the superstructure the amount of heel shall be not more than four degrees from horizontal or one half the freeboard, whichever is less. Freeboard is measured from the surface of the water to the bottom of the lowest floor or deck framing members. (Ord. 14-23A § 4 (part), 2014.)


19.15.050 Exiting and emergency egress.

In addition to the requirements of the IRC, including but not limited to Chapter 3, Section R311, floating homes shall have a twenty-four-inch minimum width open deck on all sides. Decks shall be constructed so as to prevent the ponding of water. (Ord. 14-23A § 4 (part), 2014.)


19.15.060 Mooring.

Cleats, bollards, bull rails or other such devices shall be sufficient in number and attached to the floating structure in such a way as to provide adequate mooring points to secure the float home in the highest design wind load. Mooring lines shall be kept in good condition, kept free of chafing, and shall be removable without the use of tools. (Ord. 14-23A § 4 (part), 2014.)


19.15.070 Fire separation.

A.    A clear space of at least eight feet shall be provided between adjacent structures measured from building wall line horizontal to adjacent building wall line. Roof eave projections shall be no closer than six feet. Table 302.1 of the IRC shall not apply.

B.    Where floating homes are placed closer than eight feet from building wall line horizontal to building wall line, walls, eaves and roofs shall be constructed in accordance with Table 302.1 of the IRC.

C.    A clear space of four feet shall be provided between adjacent floats.

(Ord. 14-23A § 4 (part), 2014.)


Chapter 19.16 ELECTRICAL CODE FOR FLOAT HOMES 

Sections:

19.16.070    National Electrical Code adoption by reference. 


19.16.070 National Electrical Code adoption by reference. 

The 2014 Edition of the National Electrical Code, copyrighted by the National Fire Protection Association, is adopted and incorporated by reference. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 14-23A § 4 (part), 2014.)


Chapter 19.17 PLUMBING CODE FOR FLOAT HOMES 

Sections:

19.17.010    Uniform Plumbing Code adoption by reference. 

19.17.020    Sewage holding tank. 

19.17.030    Sewage treatment.

19.17.040    Potable water.


19.17.010 Uniform Plumbing Code adoption by reference. 

The 2012 Edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code, promulgated by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, is adopted and incorporated by reference, including the following appendices:

Appendix A, Recommended Rules for Sizing the Water Supply System.

Appendix B, Explanatory Notes on Combination Waste and Vent Systems.

Appendix I, Installation Standards.

Appendix H, Private Sewage Disposal Systems. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 14-23A § 4 (part), 2014.)


19.17.020 Sewage holding tank. 

A.    Sewage holding tanks for float homes shall be sized in accordance with Table H2.1, Appendix H of the Uniform Plumbing Code. 

B.    Sewage holding tanks shall be constructed of materials not subject to corrosion or decay and shall be watertight.

(Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 14-23A § 4 (part), 2014.)


19.17.030 Sewage treatment.

Sewage, including greywater, shall be disposed of by pumping to a portable holding tank and delivering to an approved sewage pump-out facility. Alternatively, sewage may be treated with an approved sewage treatment system and discharged into the water. The owner is responsible for securing appropriate state and federal permits for such systems. Untreated sewage or greywater shall not be discharged into the water. (Ord. 14-23A § 4 (part), 2014.)


19.17.040 Potable water.

Connections to the municipal water system shall be of an approved method, shall include backflow prevention and shall be approved by the building official. (Ord. 14-23A § 4 (part), 2014.)


Chapter 19.18 CODE APPLICABILITY 

Sections:

19.18.010    Geographical limits. 

19.18.020    Sitka road system. 

19.18.025    Docks and floating buildings. 

19.18.030    Islands. 

19.18.040    Definition of “islands” for purposes of this title and Title 22. 


19.18.010 Geographical limits. 

Except for the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings (which shall apply throughout the entire municipality), the provisions of this title apply as construction standards for the areas of the municipality served by the Sitka road system only, except as modified by Chapters 19.10 through 19.17 (codes for islands and codes for float homes). (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


19.18.020 Sitka road system. 

The Sitka road system shall be considered to include Halibut Point Road, Sawmill Creek Road, Harbor Drive, and all of their connecting roads, collectors, access roadways and easements. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


19.18.025 Docks and floating buildings. 

Docks and floating buildings, with the exception of float homes as allowed in the Sitka harbor system and regulated by Chapters 13.15 and 19.15 through 19.17, require permitting and plan review for nonstructural fire and life safety project components only. Section 19.01.070 does not apply to docks and floating buildings. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


19.18.030 Islands. 

A.    Application of Code to Islands. Chapters 19.10, 19.11, 19.12, 19.13 and 19.14 shall apply to structures on islands in the general island, large island and open space districts.

B.    Site Plan and As-Built Requirements for Island Properties. To ensure compliance with this code, site plans are required for all structures and docks on islands within the open general and open residential low density zoning districts. Site plans and surveys shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of the administrative official charged with the enforcement of Title 22.

C.    Building codes apply to island construction projects as set out in this chapter irrespective of the start date of the island project, unless:

1.    A person applies to the building department prior to March 1, 2005, to register the project as “grandfathered”; and

2.    The applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the building official that substantial progress had been made on the project prior to the effective date of the island codes ordinance in July 1999.

D.    Exemption for Private Recreational Cabins on Islands. The chapters of this code made applicable to structures on islands by this section shall not apply to private recreational cabins (as defined in this subsection) on islands (as defined in Section 19.18.040). The cabin must have no electrical system and any wastewater system must be approved by the State Department of Environmental Conservation. A building permit application shall be submitted for the cabin, but no fee shall be charged and no permit shall be issued. For the purpose of this section only, a “private recreational cabin” means a residential structure used for intermittent or temporary occupancy by nonpaying occupants, with a maximum total of four hundred square feet of living and sleeping areas.

(Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


19.18.040 Definition of “islands” for purposes of this title and Title 22. 

For purposes of this title and Title 22, the definition of “islands” will be the islands in Sitka Sound from the Siginaka Islands to Cape Burunof which are not on the Sitka road system. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


Chapter 19.19 DEMOLITION OR REMOVAL OF MUNICIPALLY OWNED BUILDINGS  

Sections:

19.19.010    Assembly authority. 

19.19.020    Bidding. 

19.19.030    Buildings considered personal property. 

19.19.040    Authorization by ordinance.  

19.19.050    Value determination. 

19.19.060    Scope. 


19.19.010 Assembly authority. 

The assembly may by resolution or ordinance provide for the demolition or removal of municipally owned buildings. The assembly may use its discretion in deciding to demolish or remove any building. It may consider such facts and hire such experts as it may see fit. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


19.19.020 Bidding. 

Demolition or removal shall be by competitive bidding, or the assembly may authorize the administrator to have the building demolished or removed by municipal employees. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


19.19.030 Buildings considered personal property. 

For all purposes, any building being considered for demolition or removal from its site shall be considered to be personal property and not real property. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


19.19.040 Authorization by ordinance.  

If the value of the building exceeds twenty-five thousand dollars, its removal or demolition shall be authorized by ordinance. If the value is more than one hundred thousand dollars, the assembly may authorize an advisory vote at a general or special election and the assembly shall stay its decision pending outcome of the election. (Ord. 18-29 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


19.19.050 Value determination. 

Value shall be determined as the amount by which the salvage value of the building after removal, or the materials in it after removal, exceed the estimated cost of removal or demolition. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


19.19.060 Scope. 

This chapter and the procedures contained herein shall take precedence to and prevail over any other ordinances of the municipality passed prior to the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 18-15 § 4 (part), 2018.)


Chapter 19.20 FIRE MARSHAL DEFERRAL STANDARDS

Sections:

19.20.010    Plan review and state building code enforcement.

19.20.020    Enforcement of state fire statutes and regulations.

19.20.030    Fire and life safety inspection program.


19.20.010 Plan review and state building code enforcement.

As required by an exemption granted to the city and borough from the state fire marshal under the authority of 13AAC50.075, the city will perform nonstructural plan reviews and will approve construction plans and specifications as stipulated in 13AAC50.027. At a minimum, the municipality will enforce the State Building Code, (13AAC50.010 and 13AAC50.020). (Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-1518 § 4, 1999.)


19.20.020 Enforcement of state fire statutes and regulations.

As required by an exemption granted to the city and borough from the state fire marshal under the authority of 13AAC50.075, the city will enforce applicable sections of AS 18.70 and 13AAC50, 51, and 55. (Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-1518 § 4, 1999.)


19.20.030 Fire and life safety inspection program.

As required by an exemption granted to the city and borough from the state fire marshal under the authority of 13AAC50.075, the city will conduct a building fire safety inspection program which meets or exceeds the standards of the program which would be conducted by the state fire marshal. (Ord. 04-64 § 4 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-1518 § 4, 1999.)


Title 20 ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS Revised 7/19

Chapters:

20.01    Landslide Area Management

20.04    Floodplain Management Revised 7/19

20.05    Coastal Management


Chapter 20.01 LANDSLIDE AREA MANAGEMENT 

Sections:

20.01.010    Purpose. 

20.01.020    Definitions. 

20.01.030    Special requirements and limitations. 

20.01.040    Waiver of geotechnical evaluation. 


20.01.010 Purpose. 

A.    The city has a fundamental public duty and desire to provide for and afford to its citizens the opportunity to develop and enjoy the limited land that is available to it. The city also recognizes that its desire to develop the available land is concurrent with the desires and expectations of its citizens.

B.    Based on the immunity provided by AS 09.65.070(d) and common law, the city has sufficient authority, and sufficient protection from liability, to adopt land use regulations, and grant and deny permits, in a manner that supports the development of the various available lots in Sitka, while assuring maximum practicable safety for residents of those lots, given the unusual topographical characteristics and extreme meteorological conditions found throughout the borough.

C.    To best balance the goals of public safety and the ability of its citizens to develop homes and livelihoods, the city requires property owners that are seeking to conduct any major construction activities on any lot in a restricted landslide area, to address that restriction pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

D.    The requirements of this chapter are in addition to, not in lieu of, any other requirements of the Sitka General Code.

(Ord. 17-14 § 4 (part), 2017.)


20.01.020 Definitions. 

A.    “Restricted landslide area” means:

1.    Any portion of any lot which has been identified as a moderate or high risk zone in any city geotechnical risk mapping commissioned and received by the city.

2.    For areas not mapped, properties damaged by previous landslides or within one hundred fifty feet of locations damaged by previous landslides.

B.    “Major construction activity” means:

1.    Construction of infrastructure, grading, roadways, utility corridors;

2.    Building construction, placement of a pre-manufactured structure, or any occupancy increase in an existing building;

3.    The term “major construction activity” does not include:

a.    Construction of residential accessory buildings, such as a garage or shed, which is not occupied as a dwelling unit and is not attached to a principal structure.

b.    Any project or improvement of a structure to correct an existing violation of a state or local health, sanitary, or safety code regulation, where such violation has been previously identified by the building official and where such activity is the minimum necessary to achieve compliance and safety.

c.    An addition to structures which adds less than one hundred twenty square feet of new floor area or foundation footprint.

d.    A boundary lot line adjustment or other minor subdivision alterations, as approved by the planning director.

e.    Replacement or rehabilitation of existing publicly owned infrastructure, public roadways, or utility corridors.

C.    “High occupancy commercial use” includes International Building Code occupancy classifications Group A, B, E, F (with employees), H, I, M, R-1, R-2, R-4, S (with employees), or U (with employees). It does not include occupancy classification R-3 (single-family dwelling and duplex), except that a day-care facility with any number of children is considered a high occupancy commercial use for the purposes of this chapter.

D.    “Geotechnical evaluation” means a report completed by a licensed professional engineer specializing in geotechnical practice or a professional geologist with experience with debris flows, assessing the geological hazards of a proposed activity and making recommendations for hazard mitigation. All designs, reports, and calculations associated with mitigation must be stamped by a civil engineer licensed in the state of Alaska. Such an evaluation shall include, at a minimum:

1.    A copy of the proposed site plan and proposed development plans;

2.    The site’s topography and the type and extent of geologic hazards;

3.    A review of the site history of landslides and other significant soil movement;

4.    Analysis of the project’s relationship to the geologic hazards and its potential impacts upon the subject property and adjacent properties;

5.    Recommendation for mitigation of hazards, including any no-disturbance buffer, building setbacks, siting requirements, erosion controls, and sewer and drainage restrictions, as well as recommendations for any protective improvements. The mitigation recommendations shall address how the activity maintains or reduces the preexisting level of risk to the site and affected properties on a long-term basis.

(Ord. 17-14 § 4 (part), 2017.)


20.01.030 Special requirements and limitations. 

A.    Prior to issuance of any city permit, approval, or certificate of occupancy for any major construction activity within a restricted landslide area, the following requirements must be met:

1.    Submission and city approval of a geotechnical evaluation, the cost of which shall be borne by the applicant.

2.    Where preliminary approval by the planning commission is necessary, such geotechnical evaluation shall be submitted to the planning department thirty days prior to submission to the planning commission.

B.    Prior to the start of any major construction activity within a restricted landslide area, construction of all protective improvements must be completed and approved by the city. Also, an as-built construction report must be approved by the professional designer of record for the applicant and stamped by a civil engineer licensed in the state of Alaska.

C.    All design principles and standards for subdivisions as outlined in Section 21.40.010 shall also apply. In addition, there shall be a plat note stating that approved subdivisions have submitted a geotechnical evaluation and completed all associated mitigation requirements under this section.

D.    The restricted landslide area designation may be removed from a lot or a portion of a lot if the owner(s) submits to the city a geotechnical evaluation which demonstrates to the satisfaction of the municipal administrator that such property is not subject to a moderate or high risk from landslide or other significant soil movement.

    Removal of the restricted landslide area designation does not mean that the given land is not at risk for landslide-related damage. Removal recognizes there is sufficient analysis and/or mitigation to allow lifting the special requirements and limitations of this chapter.

E.    A geotechnical evaluation shall not be required for a commercial use project where major foundation construction work, properly permitted, had begun on the site prior to the site being designated to be in a restricted landslide area, provided:

1.    Such major foundation’s construction was essential to the project’s structural integrity;

2.    Designation of the site as within a restricted landslide area was based solely on city geotechnical risk mapping under Section 20.01.020(A)(1); and

3.    A certificate of occupancy for the project is issued within two years of initial foundation permit approval.

(Ord. 17-14 § 4 (part), 2017.)


20.01.040 Waiver of geotechnical evaluation. 

A.    Owner(s) of property located in a restricted landslide area will be eligible for waiver of the requirement for a geotechnical evaluation under this chapter. A waiver approved by the city under this section requires execution of a land-use covenant as provided in this section.

B.    High occupancy commercial use projects shall not be eligible for a waiver of the requirement for a geotechnical evaluation.

C.    A land-use covenant required under this section shall be executed prior to the commencement of construction or site alteration, shall be signed by the owner(s) of the property, shall be notarized, and shall be a covenant running with the land. The terms of the covenant shall be tailored to reflect specific site conditions, project features, and commitments, but shall include at least the following:

1.    A legal description of the property;

2.    A copy of any relevant geotechnical data;

3.    A commitment by the owner(s) to maintain the site in such condition and such manner as will prevent harm to the public, to residents of the property, to nearby property, to streets, alleys and drainage facilities;

4.    The application date, type, and number of the permit or approval for which the covenant is required;

5.    Acknowledgment that the owner(s) understand and assume the risk of development and release the city from any claim for losses that are not caused by the city’s own negligence;

6.    Indemnification of the city and its officers, employees, contractors, and agents from any claims arising from landslide hazards or failure of the owner(s) to comply with the covenant;

7.    A waiver and release of any right of the owner(s), the owner’s heirs, successors and assigns to assert any claim against the city and its officers, employees, contractors and agents by reason of or arising out of issuance of the permit or approval by the city for the development on the property, or arising out of any inspection, statement, assurance, delay, act or omission by or on behalf of the city related to the permit or approval of the work done thereunder, and agreeing to defend and indemnify the city and its officers, employees, contractors and agents for any liability, claim or demand arising out of any of the foregoing or out of work done or omitted by or for the owner(s), except in each case only for such losses, claims or demands that directly result from the sole negligence of the city; and

8.    By way of the land-use covenant, inform future purchasers and other successors and assignees of the risks and of the advisability of obtaining insurance in addition to standard homeowner’s insurance to specifically cover the risks posed by development in a restricted landslide area, including risk of damage from loss of use, personal injury and death resulting from soil and water movement.

D.    The land-use covenant shall be recorded by the city at the State Recorder’s Office within the Department of Natural Resources for the Sitka Recording District, at the expense of the owner(s), so as to become part of the state of Alaska’s real property records.

(Ord. 17-14 § 4 (part), 2017.)


Chapter 20.04 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT Revised 7/19

Sections:

20.04.005    Statutory authorization. Revised 7/19

20.04.010    Purpose. Revised 7/19

20.04.020    Definitions. Revised 7/19

20.04.030    Reference to other codes. Revised 7/19

20.04.035    Interpretation—Disclaimer of liability. Revised 7/19

20.04.040    Implementation. Revised 7/19

20.04.050    Flood hazard district. Revised 7/19

20.04.060    Regulations. Revised 7/19


20.04.005 Statutory authorization. Revised 7/19

In AS Title 26, the Alaska State Legislature has delegated the responsibility to each community to adopt floodplain management regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry; therefore, the assembly of the city and borough of Sitka does ordain as follows. (Ord. 19-32 § 4 (part), 2019.)


20.04.010 Purpose. Revised 7/19

A.    Flood hazard areas within the city and borough of Sitka are subject to periodic floodwater inundation which may result in a loss of life and property, pose health and safety hazards, commerce and governmental services disruption, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base. All of these consequences adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. It is the purpose of this chapter to minimize loss due to flooding conditions by:

1.    Restricting or prohibiting structures and uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or property when flooding occurs, or which increase erosion, flood heights or flow velocities;

2.     Requiring structures vulnerable to floods to be consistent with flood protection or floodproofing, including public facilities;

3.     Controlling fill, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage;

4.     Reducing the financial burdens imposed on the community, government, and individuals by rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding by providing sound development of areas of special flood hazard;

5.     Ensuring potential buyers of real property are notified if property is in a special flood hazard area; and

6.     Ensuring those who occupy the areas of special flood hazards assume responsibilities for their actions.

B.     Areas within the city and borough of Sitka have been found to be potentially flood prone, as defined by Section 201 of the Federal Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973. Therefore, the municipality chooses to join the National Flood Insurance Program to make flood insurance and federal and federally regulated financial assistance available to the residents within the flood hazard areas. To do so, the municipality must meet the requirements for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.

(Ord. 19-32 § 4 (part), 2019: Ord. 10-23 § 4 (part), 2010: Ord. 82-507 § 4 (part), 1982.)


20.04.020 Definitions. Revised 7/19

A.    “Area of special flood hazard” means the land in the floodplain within the jurisdiction of the city and borough of Sitka subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Such an area is designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map for the city and borough of Sitka (FIRM) as including the letter “A” or “V.” The term “special flood hazard” for the purposes of this chapter is synonymous with the phrase “area of special flood hazard.”

B.    “Coastal high hazard area” means the area subject to high velocity waters due to wind, tidal action, storm, seismic, tsunami or any similar force, acting singly or in any combination resulting in a wave or series of waves of sufficient magnitude, velocity or frequency to endanger property and lives. These areas are designated on the FIRM by including the letter “V.”

C.    “Flood hazard area” includes all the area within the city and borough of Sitka subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year as delineated on the FIRM. “Flood hazard area” includes the coastal high hazard area, where applicable. The municipality makes no guarantee that structures located outside the flood hazard area will not be subjected to flooding.

D.    “Flood Insurance Rate Map” or “FIRM” means the official map of the Federal Insurance Administration that has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the city and borough of Sitka.

E.    “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.

F.    “Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. The term is also referred to as the “regulatory floodway.”

G.    “NAVD 88” means the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, the vertical control datum established in 1991 by the minimum-constraint adjustment of the Canadian-Mexican-United States leveling observations. 

H.    “Structure” for floodplain management purposes means a walled and roofed building, and includes mobile homes, manufactured homes, and gas and liquid storage tanks or containers that are principally above ground.

I.    “Substantially improved” means any remodeling, repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the fair market value of the structure either: (1) as such value exists before the improvement is started, or (2) as such value existed before the damage occurred.

(Ord. 19-32 § 4 (part), 2019: Ord. 10-23 § 4 (part), 2010: Ord. 82-520 § 4 (part), 1982; Ord. 82-507 § 4 (part), 1982.)


20.04.030 Reference to other codes. Revised 7/19

Applicants requesting permits subject to this chapter are cautioned to refer to Chapter 6.12, Mobile and Manufactured Homes and Mobile and Manufactured Home Parks; Title 19, Building and Construction; and Title 21, Subdivision code; in the Sitka General Code for other specific applicable provisions and regulations. (Ord. 19-32 § 4 (part), 2019: Ord. 10-23 § 4 (part), 2010: Ord. 82-507 § 4 (part), 1982.)


20.04.035 Interpretation—Disclaimer of liability. Revised 7/19

A.    In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be liberally construed in favor of enforcement and considered minimum requirements.

B.    In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be deemed as not limiting nor repealing any other powers granted under municipal, state or federal laws.

C.    This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, if the provisions of this chapter and another provision of the Sitka General Code, ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.

D.    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city and borough of Sitka or FIMA officials or employees, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made under its provisions.

(Ord. 19-32 § 4 (part), 2019: amended during 3/15 supplement; Ord. 10-23 § 4 (part), 2010.)


20.04.040 Implementation. Revised 7/19

A.    The building official or designee shall administer and implement the provisions of this chapter, and shall be responsible for maintaining for public use and inspection appropriate records and information relevant to implementation of this chapter. Such records and information shall include, but not be limited to:

1.    Actual elevations, in relation to NAVD 88, of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures located in the flood hazard area, and whether or not such structures have basements;

2.    Actual elevations, in relation to NAVD 88, of all new and substantially improved floodproofed structures and the required floodproofing certifications;

3.    Flood insurance studies;

4.     Flood Insurance Rate Maps;

5.     Any reports or studies on flood hazards in the community, such as written by the Corps of Engineers, U.S. Geological Survey or private firms;

6.     A file of all permit and variance applications, supporting documentation and any related city and borough assembly action.

B.    Other duties and responsibilities of the building official shall be:

1.    Review all permit applications for development in the flood hazard area for compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from local, state or federal governmental agencies.

2.    Interpret the exact locations of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard and regulatory floodway. If there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the building official shall determine and interpret the documents. A person contesting the interpretation shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation, as provided for in the Sitka floodplain regulations. When base flood elevation data has not been provided, the building official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from any federal, state, municipal, or any other source in order to administer the provisions of this chapter.

(Ord. 19-32 § 4 (part), 2019: Ord. 10-23 § 4 (part), 2010: Ord. 82-507 § 4 (part), 1982.)


20.04.050 Flood hazard district. Revised 7/19

A.     The special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Insurance Administrator in a scientific and engineering report titled “Flood Insurance Study (FIS), City and Borough of Sitka, Alaska” dated August 1, 2019, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated August 1, 2019, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The FIS and FIRM panels are on file at City Hall, 100 Lincoln Street, Sitka, Alaska, in the building department office.

B.    Current editions of each of the maps and reports listed above are made a part of this chapter, incorporated by reference. Subsequent maps and reports prepared by the FIMA or the city and borough of Sitka delineating the flood hazard district, floodway and floodplain areas within the city and borough of Sitka shall become part of this chapter upon publication. A copy of the maps and reports cited in this subsection are available at the public works department.

C.    Sitka floodplain regulations, adopted under Section 20.04.060, shall govern construction and development within the areas of special flood hazard, and are incorporated by reference under this chapter.

D.    In case any structure is constructed or substantially improved in violation of this chapter, the city and borough of Sitka, in addition to other remedies, may institute any proper actions or proceedings necessary, including enjoining of connections to public utilities, to restrain, correct or abate such violations.

E.    The municipal administrator of the city and borough of Sitka is authorized to enter into contracts and agreements with other government entities for the purpose of implementing the provisions of this chapter.

F.    The municipality must notify the state coordinating agency and FIMA prior to altering or relocating any watercourse. Any such alteration or relocation must maintain the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse.

G.    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as applying to any structure existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, unless they are substantially improved after the effective date.

(Ord. 19-32 § 4 (part), 2019: amended during 3/15 supplement; Ord. 10-23 § 4 (part), 2010.)


20.04.060 Regulations. Revised 7/19

Sitka floodplain regulations shall be adopted by the assembly to implement the provisions of this chapter, and shall be incorporated by reference under this chapter. A copy of these regulations shall be available at the public works department, and shall be posted on the city and borough of Sitka webpage under the building department section. (Ord. 19-32 § 4 (part), 2019: Ord. 10-23 § 4 (part), 2010.)


Chapter 20.05 COASTAL MANAGEMENT

Sections:

20.05.010    Adoption by reference—City and Borough of Sitka Coastal Management Plan (CMP) enforceable policies.


20.05.010 Adoption by reference—City and Borough of Sitka Coastal Management Plan (CMP) enforceable policies.

The 2007 City and Borough of Sitka Coastal Management Plan enforceable policies (as numbered in the Sitka Coastal Plan), pages A-3 through A-13 and related boundaries and definitions, are adopted by reference, including the policies and map references. The complete 2007 City and Borough of Sitka Coastal Management Plan, which was approved at the local, state, and federal levels, is available on the city and borough of Sitka website and in hard cover upon request. The City and Borough of Sitka Coastal Management Plan is the official planning document addressing uses and activities in the Sitka coastal zone. (Ord. 11-22 § 4, 2011.)


Title 21 SUBDIVISION CODE 

Chapters:

21.04    Introduction and General Provisions

21.08    Definitions

21.12    Minor Subdivisions  

21.16    Boundary Line Adjustments

21.20    Replats and Plat Modifications

21.24    Zero Lot Line Subdivisions

21.28    Planned Unit Development and Cluster Subdivisions

21.32    Major Subdivisions  

21.36    Hybrid Subdivisions

21.40    Design and Construction Requirements and Monumentation  

21.44    Required Plat Certificates and Plat Notes

21.48    Platting Variances

21.52    Administration


Chapter 21.04 INTRODUCTION AND GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

21.04.010    Title.

21.04.020    Purpose.

21.04.030    Scope and jurisdiction.

21.04.040    Interpretation, conflict, and separability.

21.04.050    Severability.

21.04.060    Users’ guide—Chapters.


21.04.010 Title.

This title may be referred to as the subdivision ordinance of the city and borough of Sitka. (Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.04.020 Purpose.

Subdivision of land becomes a public responsibility in that properly constructed roads and streets must be maintained and various public services customary to urban areas must be provided. The welfare of the entire community is thereby affected in many important aspects. It is therefore in the interest of the public, developers and the owners that subdivisions be conceived, designed, and constructed in accordance with sound rules and proper standards. The purposes of this title are:

A.    To promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare;

B.    To provide for the proper arrangement of roads and streets in relation to existing or proposed roads and streets;

C.    To provide for adequate, useful and convenient open spaces;

D.    To provide for the efficient movement of vehicular, pedestrian, and other modes of transportation;

E.    To assure adequate and properly placed utilities;

F.    To provide for access for firefighting apparatus;

G.    To provide recreation, light, and air;

H.    To avoid population congestion;

I.    To facilitate the orderly and efficient layout and use of the land in light of the constantly changing conditions;

J.    To provide for the accurate surveying of land; and

K.    To ensure orderly growth and development consistent with the comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance, official map and the capital budget.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.04.030 Scope and jurisdiction.

This title governs all subdivision of land within the city and borough of Sitka. Except as otherwise provided by law, this title governs subdivision of land owned by the federal government, the state and its instrumentalities and the municipality in the same manner as it governs subdivisions of land owned by private persons.

The types of subdivisions regulated by this title are described below. Persons desiring to apply for approval of a subdivision plat should familiarize themselves with the various options to determine which best fits their situation.

The following are the various types of subdivisions or plats. The planning commission has the authority to be flexible within the limits of this title. Requirements and standards are outlined in this title. The municipality shall strive to apply these standards reasonably. The variance process is available to facilitate flexibility in land development.

A.    Minor Subdivisions (Chapter 21.12). A subdivision that creates no more than four additional lots or tracts and does not require any dedications including:

1.    A subdivision involving the movement or creation of lot lines that do not increase the density of an area;

2.    A subdivision involving the vacation of a street or alley; and

3.    A subdivision created for the acquisition of right-of-way.

B.    Major Subdivisions (Chapter 21.32). A subdivision of more than four lots or tracts.

C.    Zero Lot Line Subdivisions (Chapter 21.24). A subdivision creating lots for residential units with common walls or for building residences on the side lot lines.

D.    Planned Unit Development and Cluster Subdivisions (Chapter 21.28). A subdivision designed to encourage imaginative and innovative design with regard to which the concept of good planning and utilization is more important than the technical requirements of normal subdivision plats as more fully stated in Chapter 21.16. Limited examples may include cluster developments, industrial parks, condominium developments, and shopping centers.

E.    Use Restrictions. The planning commission, with the available appeal to the assembly, may place restrictions on the use of lots through the plat process so long as those restrictions are tied to the clearly identified development constraints, such as topography or road access. In limiting any uses, a finding shall be made that the restriction is necessary to promote public health, safety, and welfare. There shall be a full and complete discussion with the applicant on the ramifications of any use restriction prior to its imposition.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.04.040 Interpretation, conflict, and separability.

In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be the minimum requirements. More stringent requirements may be required if it is demonstrated that different standards are necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.

A.    This title is not intended to interfere with or revoke or invalidate any easement, covenant, or other agreement between parties.

B.    When the provisions of this title impose greater restrictions than are imposed by other applicable city, state, and federal regulations, the provisions of this title shall control.

C.    In case of any ambiguity or difference of meaning or inconsistencies between the text and any illustrations or other graphics, the text throughout this title shall apply.

D.    Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, words in the present tense can include the future tense, and words in the singular can include the plural, or vice versa. Except for words and terms defined in the beginning of each chapter of this title and in Chapter 21.08, all words and terms used in this title shall have their customary meanings.

E.    The words “shall” and “should” are always mandatory and not discretionary. The word “may” is discretionary.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.04.050 Severability.

Should any word, phrase, paragraph, subsection or provision of this title be found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such finding shall not affect the validity of this title as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the part so found to be invalid. (Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.04.060 Users’ guide—Chapters.

The Sitka Subdivision Code, Title 21, contains thirteen chapters:

21.04    Introduction and General Provisions—Establishes the purpose, title and basic rules for using the code.

21.08    Definitions—Provides definitions for words used throughout the title. Words or terms used in only one chapter may be defined in that chapter.

21.12    Minor Subdivisions—Governs the subdivision of land into four or fewer lots.

21.16    Boundary Line Adjustments—Governs lot line adjustments involving up to three lots.

21.20    Replats and Plat Modifications—Governs lot line adjustments involving four lots or more, elimination of lot lines, and alley or right-of-way vacations.

21.24    Zero Lot Line Subdivisions—Governs the creation of lots which provide for construction of buildings on common property lines.

21.28    Planned Unit Development and Cluster Subdivisions—Governs the subdivision of land as part of planned developments.

21.32    Major Subdivisions—Governs the subdivision of land into more than four lots. 

21.36    Hybrid Subdivisions.

21.40    Design and Construction Requirements and Monumentation—Governs development standards for all subdivisions.

21.44    Required Plat Certificates and Plat Notes.

21.48    Platting Variances—Governs the review and approval of subdivisions requiring variances from the standards of this title.

21.52    Administration—Summarizes responsibilities of the staff, planning commission and assembly and sets forth selected related procedures.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


Chapter 21.08 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

21.08.010    “A”.

21.08.020    “B”.

21.08.030    “C”.

21.08.040    “D”.

21.08.050    “E”.

21.08.060    “F”.

21.08.070    “G”.

21.08.080    “H”.

21.08.090    “I”.

21.08.100    “J”.

21.08.110    “K”.

21.08.120    “L”.

21.08.130    “M”.

21.08.140    “N”.

21.08.150    “O”.

21.08.160    “P”.

21.08.170    “Q”.

21.08.180    “R”.

21.08.190    “S”.

21.08.200    “T”.

21.08.210    “U”.

21.08.220    “V”.

21.08.230    “W”.

21.08.240    “X”.

21.08.250    “Y”.

21.08.260    “Z”.


21.08.010 “A”.

A.    “Aggrieved person” means:

1.    The applicant or any person adversely affected by the decision;

2.    Any governmental unit who is a party to or has submitted comments on any actions before the planning commission and contends the fulfilling of their governmental responsibilities are threatened by the action of the planning commission or assembly.

B.    “Alley” means a permanent service right-of-way providing a secondary access to abutting properties.

C.    “Applicant” (subdivider) means a person who holds any legal or equitable interest in land being subdivided. The term also includes all heirs, assigns, or successors in interest, or representatives of the applicant.

D.    “Area” means the total unit of land identified for action under this title for purposes of calculating intensities, densities, and land uses.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.08.020 “B”.

A.    “Block” means an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by rights-of-way (other than alleys), physical barriers, and exterior boundaries of the subdivision.

B.    “Block length” means the distance between intersections of through streets, measured between the right-of-way lines of the intersecting streets, which distance is the longest dimension of a block.

C.    “Boundary survey map” is a map of the boundaries of a parcel.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.08.030 “C”.

A.    “Comprehensive plan” means an official adopted document including text, charts, graphics or maps or any combination designed to portray general and long range proposals for the arrangement of land uses and development of an economic base and human resource and which is intended to guide development policy towards achieving orderly and coordinated development within the entire community.

B.    “Crosswalk” means a public right-of-way, ten feet or more in width, which provides pedestrian passage through a street or within a block.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.08.040 “D”.

A.    “Dedication” means the deliberate appropriation of land or rights in land by its owner for any general and public use, reserving to himself or herself no other rights than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public use to which the property has been devoted. The intention to dedicate shall be evidenced by the owner by the presentation for filing of a final plat or short plat showing the dedication thereon; and the acceptance by the public shall be evidenced by the approval of such plat for filing by the city. A dedication by the owner under the terms of this section is a conveyance of an interest in property which shall be deemed to include the warranties of title listed in AS 34.15.030. The dedication of streets, alleys, sidewalks, or public open space shall convey a fee interest in the area dedicated. The dedication of all other public rights-of-way including utility rights-of-way shall be deemed to create an easement ingress to perform the indicated function in the area depicted.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.08.050 “E”.

A.    “Easement” means an interest in land owned by another that entitles the easement holder to a specified limited use of said area of land.

B.    “Engineer” means a registered, professional, civil engineer authorized to practice engineering in the state of Alaska. Engineers perform the consultation, investigation, evaluation, planning, design, and inspection of private and public works, structures, or projects. Unless also qualified as a surveyor, an engineer may not engage in the preparation of subdivisions. (Cross-reference: AS 8.48.291.)

(Ord. 15-14 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.08.060 “F”.

A.    “Floodplain” means that area of land adjoining the channel of a river, stream, or other similar body of water which may be inundated by a flood that can be reasonably expected to occur. The floodplain includes all the lands within the limits of the one-hundred-year flood and the floodway within it if such floodway is delineated. The floodplain area is defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.08.070 “G”.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.08.080 “H”.

A.    “Hybrid subdivision” means subdivision that contains elements of conventional minor and major subdivisions. Five lot hybrids and combi hybrids are fully described in Chapter 21.36 of this code.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.08.090 “I”.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.08.100 “J”.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.08.110 “K”.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.08.120 “L”.

A.    “Legal access” means access over a roadway meeting residential road standards, having a width of at least twenty feet and constructed in accordance with official construction standards approved by the municipality.

B.    “Lot” means a parcel of land shown as an individual unit on the most recent plat of record and intended for one principal building and/or use.

C.    “Lot depth” means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.

D.    “Lot frontage” means all property abutting the right-of-way of a dedicated street, private road, or road easement, measured along the right-of-way between side lot lines of a lot.

E.    “Lot width” means the mean horizontal distance separating side lot lines on an individual lot.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.08.130 “M”.

A.    “Monument” means a permanent survey control point.

B.    “Municipality” refers to the city and borough of Sitka.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.08.140 “N”.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.08.150 “O”.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.08.160 “P”.

A.    “Parcel” (or “tract”) means a portion of subdivision having fixed boundaries, not including lots.

B.    “Person” means an individual, corporation, partnership, unincorporated association, or government agency.

C.    “Planting strip” means a strip of land between the roadway and the sidewalk or sidewalk site.

D.    “PUD” (planned unit development) means a group or combination of dwellings and uses developed as a functional unit under conditional use and site plan approval procedures, the plan of which may not conform to the regulations established in any one zone or more zoning districts with respect to lot size, types and mixture of uses, density, lot coverage, access or required open space.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.08.170 “Q”.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.08.180 “R”.

A.    “Right-of-way” means a strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, walkway, road, utilities, gas or oil pipeline, water main, sewer main, or for any other public purpose.

B.    “Roadway” means the portion of a street designated for vehicular traffic, and where curbs are laid, the portion between curbs.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.08.190 “S”.

A.    “Screening easement (buffer and landscape areas)” means a strip or parcel of land for the purpose of insulating land uses against the adverse effects of adjacent land uses, designating access along arterial highways, providing a wind screen, filtering dust, muffling noise, deterring glare, and reducing soil erosion.

B.    “Shall” is synonymous with “will” and is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word “may” is permissive.

C.    “Sidewalk” means an improved right-of-way for pedestrian circulation that is part of the street right-of-way.

D.    “Street” means a right-of-way which provides for vehicular and pedestrian circulation.

1.    “Cul-de-sac street” means a short street intersecting with another street at one end and terminated by a vehicular turnaround at the other end, and which is not intended to be extended or continued to serve future subdivisions or adjacent land.

2.    “Street width” means the shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-of-way of streets.

3.    “Stub street” means a dead-end local street which provides for eventual extension of the street onto unplatted land.

4.    “Arterial streets” and “highways” are those which are used primarily for fast or heavy traffic.

5.    “Collector streets” are those which are designed and intended to carry traffic from minor streets to the major street system of arterial streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within the development.

6.    “Minor streets,” also called “local access streets,” are those which are used primarily for access to abutting properties.

7.    “Marginal access streets” are minor streets which are parallel with and adjacent to arterial streets and highways, and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.

E.    “Structure” means anything that is constructed or erected and located on or under the ground, or attached to something fixed to the ground not including utility poles and related ground, or pad-mounted equipment, residential fences less than six feet high, retaining walls, rockeries, and other similar improvements of a minor character less than three feet high.

F.    “Subdivision” means the division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, sites, or other divisions (including short subdivisions) for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, lease or building, or development, including any resubdivision and when appropriate to the context, the process of subdividing or the land subdivided.

G.    “Surveyor” means a professional land surveyor who is registered and has complied with the laws of the state of Alaska.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.08.200 “T”.

A.    “Tract.” See “Parcel.”

B.    “Transportation plan” means an element of the city and borough’s comprehensive plan which addresses transportation modes, routes, and facilities.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.08.210 “U”.

A.    “Unit (dwelling)” means a structure or portion thereof containing a kitchen, living area, toilet, and sleeping accommodations, and designed as a unit to be occupied by no more than one family.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.08.220 “V”.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.08.230 “W”.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.08.240 “X”.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.08.250 “Y”.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.08.260 “Z”.

A.    “Zero lot line subdivision” means a technique whereby parcels may be created that might not otherwise conform to minimum size standards and which allows two adjacent single-family housing units to share a common side or rear lot line and shall be provided one-hour fire rated assemblies on each side of the adjoining property line.

(Ord. 12-31A § 4(B), 2012: Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


Chapter 21.12 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS 

Sections:

21.12.010    Application. 

21.12.020    Concept plat.

21.12.030    Final plat. 

21.12.040    Recording timetable.


21.12.010 Application. 

A.    The minor subdivision plat procedure shall apply to the following plats:

1.    Plats that create no more than four additional tracts or lots;

2.    Plats that create parcels that will become integral parts of the adjoining lots or rights-of-way;

3.    A movement or creation of lot lines that does not result in an increase in the density or number of residential units within the area being subdivided or resubdivided;

4.    A subdivision involving the vacation of a street or alley;

5.    A subdivision created for a government agency acquisition of a street right-of-way.

B.    Basic Criteria. The following general conditions are necessary for approval of a minor subdivision:

1.    No dedications are needed;

2.    Monuments exist sufficient to locate all proposed lots on the site, as required by Section 21.40.160;

3.    The plat includes all contiguous land under common ownership;

4.    Maintenance agreements as necessary.

C.    Preapplication. Participation in preapplication procedures as described in the major subdivision plat requirements (Section 21.32.020) is advised to address any questions regarding the minor subdivision application.

(Ord. 18-07 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.12.020 Concept plat.

A.    A concept plat, prepared by a registered land surveyor, must be submitted at least thirteen days prior to the next planning commission meeting. Applications shall include the application fee prescribed in Section 21.52.140.

1.    Three copies of the plat, drawn to a scale of at least one inch equals one hundred feet on paper of one of the following sizes, with each sheet being the same size: eighteen by twenty-four inches, twenty-four by thirty-six inches, or thirty by forty-two inches that includes the following:

a.    All dimensions and square footages of the parcels and easements to be created. The easements and improvements shall comply with all the applicable standards in Chapter 21.40.

2.    One eight-and-one-half-inch by eleven-inch sheet of the concept plat without signature blocks.

B.    The planning commission may offer guidance on the concept plat at a regularly scheduled meeting and that guidance shall be given within sixty days of the date of the application. In the event a final plat is not submitted within sixty days of the planning commission review of the concept plat, a new concept plat review shall be undertaken.

C.    Mailing of public notices and compliance with the advertising requirements in Section 21.52.040 is not required.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.12.030 Final plat. 

A.    A final plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor and submitted for planning commission review following the board review of the concept plat. The plat shall comply with all the major subdivision final plat submission requirements in Section 21.32.160. The easements and improvements shall comply with all the applicable standards in Chapter 21.40. It must be submitted at least thirteen days prior to the next planning commission meeting. Flagging may be required along the proposed plat’s existing or proposed boundaries or features as required by the platting authority pursuant to Section 21.40.160. Notices and a public hearing shall be required and given as provided for Chapter 21.52.

B.    In addition to providing a plat that conforms to the major subdivision final plat requirements, the following shall be submitted:

1.    General topography of the site and immediate surroundings, showing specific topographic features and spot elevations. The purpose of this topography is to provide an understanding of the overall terrain of the site and to confirm the grades of access easements and rights-of-way. The planning commission may also require more detailed topographic information of existing and proposed grades.

C.    The planning commission shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions the final plat at a regularly scheduled meeting and the action shall be given within sixty days of the date of submission of a complete final plat. A delay in commission action may be requested in writing by the applicant, may result from the application being incomplete, or may result from evidence requiring further city consideration. If the plat approval is denied or the applicant is not satisfied with the conditions placed on the plat, the matter shall be reconsidered by the planning commission unless the applicant files an appeal directly to the assembly.

D.    After the final plat is approved, a recordable plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor including any required certificates as also required of a major subdivision, all applicable plat notes required by this title, and all plat notes required by the planning commission during the approval process. The recordable document shall reference all monuments that have been installed following the approval of the plat.

(Ord. 18-07 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.12.040 Recording timetable.

A.    The approved minor subdivision plat shall be submitted for recording within twelve months of the commission action.

B.    The recordable plat shall contain all the information required for minor subdivisions and final major subdivision plats including all signature blocks, the required easement maintenance signature block, location of set and recovered monuments, plat notes required by the planning commission during the approval process, and easement designations.

C.    The city may elect to extend this time period one additional six-month period upon written request of the applicant prior to the expiration of the twelve-month period, if the city determines that the inability to submit the plat for recording within the twelve-month period is beyond the applicant’s control. Failure to submit the complete plat for recording within these timeframes shall void the approval.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


Chapter 21.16 BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENTS

Sections:

21.16.010    Boundary line adjustments.


21.16.010 Boundary line adjustments.

A.    Owner(s) of two adjoining lots may apply to move but not remove the common boundary and no additional lots shall be created. Boundary line adjustments may be used to eliminate or reduce encroachments or nonconformities with the provisions of Sitka General Code Titles 21 and 22. Any substantial movement of a lot line in a subdivision, which has been recorded for less than eighteen months, shall follow the replatting procedure in Chapter 21.20. Other boundary line adjustments may be approved administratively if consistent with any direction provided by the planning commission or assembly. The city shall have the authority to direct such changes subject to zoning requirements set out in Title 22 of this code.

B.    A final plat shall be prepared in accordance with final plat preparation requirements in Sitka General Code 21.32.160. Boundary line adjustments may be approved by the municipal administrator with an opportunity to appeal to the planning commission and the assembly.

C.    Following approval, it shall be recorded reflecting such boundary changes. The recordable subdivision plat shall be submitted within three months of the date of approval or the approval becomes void. The recordable plat shall contain all the information required for minor subdivisions and final major subdivision plats including all signature blocks, the required easement maintenance signature block, location of set and recovered monuments, plat notes required by the municipality, and easement designations.

D.    Public notice and notifications of nearby property owners is not required.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


Chapter 21.20 REPLATS AND PLAT MODIFICATIONS

Sections:

21.20.010    Requirements for a complete plat vacation application.

21.20.020    Type of approval and criteria for approval of a plat vacation.

21.20.030    Requirements for a complete plat alteration application.

21.20.040    Type of and criteria for approval of a plat alteration.

21.20.050    Technical plat modifications.

21.20.060    Easement modifications.

21.20.070    Recording requirements.


21.20.010 Requirements for a complete plat vacation application.

A.    Application Contents. In addition to the general requirements for a completed application an applicant for a plat vacation shall submit the following:

1.    The reasons for the proposed vacation;

2.    Signatures of all parties having an ownership interest in that portion of the subdivision proposed to be vacated;

3.    If the subdivision is subject to restrictive covenants which were filed at the time of the approval of the subdivision, and the application for vacation would result in the violation of a covenant, the application shall contain an agreement signed by all parties subject to the covenants providing that the parties agree to terminate or alter the relevant covenants to accomplish the purpose of the vacation of the subdivision or portion thereof;

4.    A copy of the approved plat sought to be vacated, together with all plat amendments recorded since the date of the original approval.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.20.020 Type of approval and criteria for approval of a plat vacation.

A.    Type of Application. A plat vacation is a planning commission action with appeal rights to the assembly.

B.    Criteria for Approval. The plat vacation may be approved or denied after a written determination is made whether the public use and interest will be served by the vacation of the subdivision. If any portion of the land contained in the subdivision was dedicated to the public for public use or benefit, such land, if not deeded to the city or borough, shall be deeded to the city or borough unless the city or borough shall set forth findings that the public use would not be served in retaining title to those lands.

C.    Vacation of Streets. When the vacation application is specifically for a city street vacation, the street vacation procedures of the city or borough shall be utilized. When the application is for the vacation of a plat together with the streets, the procedure for vacation in this section shall be used, but vacations of streets may not be made that are prohibited under Alaska State statute or the city’s street vacation ordinance.

D.    Easements established by a dedication are property rights that cannot be extinguished or altered without the approval of the easement owner or owners, unless the plat or other document creating the dedicated easement provides for an alternative method or methods to extinguish or alter the easement.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.20.030 Requirements for a complete plat alteration application.

A.    Application Contents. In addition to the requirements for a completed application as set forth in Section 21.32.160, Major subdivision—Final plat submission requirements, an applicant for a plat alteration shall submit the following:

1.    Signatures of the majority of those persons having an ownership interest of lots, tracts, parcels, sites or divisions in the subject subdivision or portion to be altered;

2.    If the subdivision is subject to restrictive covenants which were filed at the time of the approval of the subdivision, and the application for alteration would result in the violation of a covenant, the application shall contain an agreement signed by all parties subject to the covenants providing that the parties agree to terminate or alter the relevant covenants to accomplish the purpose of the alteration of the subdivision or portion thereof;

3.    A copy of the approved plat sought to be vacated, together with all plat amendments recorded.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.20.040 Type of and criteria for approval of a plat alteration.

A.    Type of Application. Plats may be approved by the planning commission with right of appeal to the assembly.

B.    Criteria for Approval. The plat alteration may be approved or denied after a written determination is made whether the public use will be served by the alteration of the subdivision. If any land within the alteration is part of an assessment district, any outstanding assessments shall be equitably divided and levied against the remaining lots, parcels, or tracts, or be levied equitably on the lots resulting from the alteration. If any land within the alteration contains a dedication to the general use of persons residing within the subdivision, such land may be altered and divided equitably between the adjacent properties. A plat alteration must also be consistent with Section 21.32.160, Major subdivision—Final plat submission requirements.

C.    Revised Plat. After approval of the alteration, the applicant shall produce a revised drawing of the approved alteration of the final plat or short plat, which after collecting the necessary signatures, shall be filed with the State of Alaska Recorder’s Office to become the lawful plat of the property.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.20.050 Technical plat modifications.

Minor technical modifications to existing subdivision plats or replats may be approved by the administrator to correct inadvertent errors in items such as bearings and distances, lot dimensions, and square footages. The approved revised plat may then be recorded after administrative approval. The modifications shall not substantively alter the number of lots being created, the location of public road rights-of-way, or other essential characteristics of the plat. (Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.20.060 Easement modifications.

Modifications of easements on plats approved after the effective date of this code shall be made in accordance with procedures established by the municipality. All beneficiaries of the easements shall approve the modification prior to municipal review. Modification procedures may, or may not, include formal planning commission or assembly review. In the event planning commission review is not considered necessary, the board shall still be notified in writing of any modifications. (Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.20.070 Recording requirements.

Recordable subdivision plats, approved under this chapter, shall be submitted within three months of the date of approval or the approval becomes void. The recordable subdivision plat shall be submitted within three months of the date of approval or the approval becomes void. The recordable plat shall contain all the information required for minor subdivisions and final major subdivision plats including all signature blocks, the required easement maintenance signature block, location of set and recovered monuments, plat notes required by the municipality, and easement designations. (Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


Chapter 21.24 ZERO LOT LINE SUBDIVISIONS

Sections:

21.24.010    Application and zero lot line plat of subdivision.

21.24.020    Final plat requirements.

21.24.030    Zoning requirements.

21.24.040    Party wall agreement.

21.24.050    Procedure after application.


21.24.010 Application and zero lot line plat of subdivision.

The zero lot line subdivision application, review and approval procedures shall be the same as those for minor subdivisions (Chapter 21.12) except as specified below:

A.    The exact locations of the structures shall be shown along with dimensions to each adjacent property line. This may be accomplished by either of the following methods:

1.    Obtain foundation permit and have foundation in place when survey is accomplished to provide plat of subdivision; or

2.    Indicate proposed location of structure and surveyor field stake foundation prior to building permit.

B.    No construction beyond the footings and stem wall shall be permitted and commenced until plat approval has been completed.

C.    Upon the receipt of a detailed written request by the applicant, the municipality may approve an alternate zero lot line process on a case-by-case basis. In all instances, a plat must be approved by the city planning commission or assembly and shall comply with the documentation required elsewhere in this chapter.

D.    The plat application shall include the proposed party wall agreement as required in Section 21.24.040.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.24.020 Final plat requirements.

The final plat shall comply with all other final plat requirements and shall include all required plat certificates and plat notes. In addition, the final plat shall contain the following additional certification:

LOT(S) ______________ ARE INTENDED TO BE SOLD ONLY FOR ZERO LOT LINE DEVELOPMENT. LOT DEVELOPMENT SHALL REMAIN ZERO LOT LINE OR COMMON WALL CONSTRUCTION IN ITS ENTIRETY FOR THE LIFE OF THE COMMONLY BOUND UNITS. SHOULD FIRE OR OTHER DESTRUCTION OCCUR TO ONE OR BOTH OF THE UNITS, THEY SHALL BE RECONSTRUCTED ONLY AS A COMMON WALL UNIT, AGAIN, FULLY JOINED TO THEIR NEIGHBOR, UNLESS ONE SUCH PARTY TOTALLY BUYS THE INTEREST OF THE OTHER AND RECONSTITUTES THE ORIGINAL PROPERTY BACK INTO A SINGLE LEGAL USE. THERE IS A RECORDED PARTY WALL AGREEMENT RESTRICTING THE USE OF THIS PROPERTY FOUND AT SITKA RECORDING DISTRICT UNDER SERIAL NUMBER ______________.

CONSTRUCTION OF THE COMMON WALL UNITS ALONG A COMMON LOT LINE SHALL BE SIMULTANEOUS UNLESS SEPARATE CONSTRUCTION RECEIVES PRIOR APPROVAL BY THE MUNICIPALITY FOR GOOD CAUSE SHOWN.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.24.030 Zoning requirements.

A.    Additional Requirements.

1.    Zero lot line subdivisions shall permit side by side, one-family structures only (no duplex or more per side) and shall have a minimum of twenty-five percent of the total party wall adjoined together as a common wall.

2.    The common wall shall consist of the following minimum rated fire wall: five-eighths-inch type “x” rated sheet rock shall be placed on the interior face of each unit, followed by a minimum of a two-inch by four-inch stud wall (sixteen-inch on center), followed by a five-eighths-inch weather-resistant, fire-rated gypsum wallboard. This is followed by a minimum of a one-inch air space, then a five-eighths-inch weather-resistant, fire-rated gypsum wallboard, then a minimum of a two-inch by four-inch stud wall (sixteen-inch center) with a five-eighths-inch type “x” rated sheet rock on the interior face of the second unit. This double-protected wall forms the common or party wall and shall be constructed so as to extend from the top of the concrete stem wall to the underside of the roof sheathing.

3.    Separate water, sewer, and electrical utility services are required for each unit side. All the above services shall extend to and be individually connected to the adjacent municipal lines in the adjacent street. As separate saleable units, a zero lot line is treated as if they were totally separated buildings. No break or problem in any utility service should be allowed to have any adverse effect on the adjacent unit.

(Ord. 12-31A § 4(A), 2012; Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.24.040 Party wall agreement.

A party wall agreement shall be included as a covenant to all zero lot line subdivisions and shall be entered into by the adjacent affected property owners. This agreement shall include, but is not limited to, the following sections:

A.    Recitals.

1.    A legal description of the property;

2.    Declarations of ownership, common wall definitions, and the purpose of the document.

B.    Party Wall.

1.    Declaration of the party wall as defined;

2.    Provisions for the shared responsibility of major maintenance and replacement as well as the use of any common problems (i.e., party wall) of said development;

3.    Statement of the duration and effect of this agreement;

4.    Provisions for regulations involving encroachment onto the adjacent property.

C.    Use of the Property.

1.    Provisions for the major maintenance or modification of each side of the structure’s exterior with the adjacent owner’s agreement;

2.    Declaration of the restricted use to a single-family dwelling only for each lot;

3.    Restrictions for the maintenance and upkeep of each lot in a neat and orderly fashion;

4.    A statement on the procedure should one or both of the units be destroyed or removed. This may include the provision of one owner purchasing the total interest of the other party and the removal and revocation of the zero lot line subdivision and party wall agreement thereby returning the total property back to a single lawful use.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.24.050 Procedure after application.

A.    Submittal. The applicant shall submit all required information at least fifteen days prior to the date that the planning commission hearing on the subdivision is scheduled. All data shall be submitted to the planning office of the municipality.

B.    Public Hearing. At a regular meeting, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the application request. The commission may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application. Flagging of lot lines shall be installed as directed by the municipality. If denied, the commission shall cause to have prepared a formal letter outlining the reasons for denial.

C.    Denial—Appeal. If the planning commission denies the requested subdivision, the applicant has fifteen days, from the date of the denial, to file a timely appeal. Such appeal shall be in writing, stating any reasons the applicant feels are relevant to the cause and shall be filed with the municipal clerk. A timely appeal shall stay all proceedings pending the outcome of the appeal. The assembly of the city and borough of Sitka shall hear the appeal, acting as a board of adjustment, within sixty days of receipt of the appeal. All records, applications, and other material shall be supplied to the assembly for their deliberations.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


Chapter 21.28 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT AND CLUSTER SUBDIVISIONS

Sections:

21.28.010    General provisions.

21.28.020    Cluster development projects.

21.28.030    Ownership.

21.28.040    Procedure.

21.28.050    Concept plan.

21.28.060    Permitted construction.

21.28.070    Changes in concept plan.

21.28.080    Staged development.

21.28.090    Condominium developments.


21.28.010 General provisions.

It is the intent of the city and borough to encourage imaginative and innovative design in the application of subdivision and improvement standards for subdivision developments proposed as planned unit cluster development projects, commercial centers, industrial parks, and shopping centers. Planned unit development proposals shall be subject to requirements of all existing city and borough ordinances, except as modified by this chapter to create development qualities different from those that result from conventional design. Projects developed under the provisions of this chapter should:

A.    Encourage the enhancement and conservation of lands which have scenic, environmental, cultural, and historical significance;

B.    Enable the development of property other than by the strict application of subdivision standards in order to allow for mixed uses and mixed densities, and provide a greater level of design features and site amenities;

C.    Provide for more efficient use of land, resulting in better coordinated networks of utilities and safer networks of streets, promoting greater opportunities for public and private recreational open space, and resulting in lower construction and maintenance costs to the general public; 

D.    Encourage harmonious and coordinated development of the site, considering the natural features, community facilities, pedestrian and vehicular circulation in conformance with overall transportation plans, and the land use relationship with surrounding properties and the general community.

Departure from the subdivision regulations and standards requires demonstration that adequate provisions will be made for sufficient light and air, that the density of development is compatible with surrounding land uses, that pedestrian and vehicular traffic circulation systems are safe and efficient, that the development will progress in orderly phases, and that the public health, safety, and general welfare will be protected. (Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.28.020 Cluster development projects.

Cluster planned unit developments are projects in which the individual lots are substantially smaller than otherwise allowed, provided there is at least as much open space within the total development as would exist if all lots were of standard size. The net density of units as a whole shall be the same as allowed under regular zoning unless otherwise approved by the planning commission.

At least seventy percent of the open space shall be dedicated to scenic or recreational purposes to be enjoyed in common by all residents, employees, and/or customers living, working or shopping in the development, their guests and, where applicable, by the general public.

Cluster developments shall include:

A.    A binding contract commitment to maintain the common areas and provide for its administration and specification of uses. This commitment shall include provisions for the transfer of ownership shares in common areas when individual residential, office, or other uses are sold.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.28.030 Ownership.

All land proposed for a planned unit development shall be owned or be under the control of the applicant, whether that applicant is an individual, partnership or corporation, or groups of individuals, partnerships or corporations. The applicant shall present proof of control and shall:

A.    Provide agreements, contracts, and proposed deed restrictions acceptable to the municipality for the completion of the undertaking in accordance with the adopted concept plan as well as for the continuing operation and maintenance of such areas, functions and facilities not intended to be provided, operated, or maintained at general public expense;

B.    Bind any developer successors in title to any commitments made under subsection (A) of this section.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.28.040 Procedure.

Planned unit developments and cluster subdivisions shall follow the major subdivision review and approval process in Chapter 21.32. These procedures include review and approval of the final plat by both the planning commission and the assembly.

A.    Concept Review. After initial consultation with the city pursuant to Section 21.32.030, a review of the preliminary development concept shall be made by the planning commission to any site planning and platting issues and concerns regarding the proposal in order to guide subsequent detailed planning and engineering. Flagging and monumentation shall be installed consistent with the requirements in the major subdivision review process.

B.    Preliminary Plat Submission. The preliminary plat submittal shall contain essentially the same information required in the regular major subdivision platting procedure under Section 21.32.040 and shall also contain a written description of proposed departures from design and improvement standards. Draft covenants and restrictions shall be submitted with the preliminary plat.

C.    Final Plat Submission. The final plats shall contain the same information and detail as required for final major subdivision plats elsewhere in this title. Final covenants and restrictions shall accompany the final plat that is submitted for planning commission review.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.28.050 Concept plan.

This plan shall indicate:

A.    Pedestrian and vehicular circulation, showing right-of-way widths as well as access points to the major thoroughfare systems. The applicant may submit one or more alternate proposals for a nonmotorized circulation system within the planned unit development.

B.    The use of all lands showing the general location, function and extent of the components or units of the plan including proposed uses, densities, or intensities of use; open space, such as parks, outdoor recreation, or scenic areas; and community-serving recreational, and education, or leisure facilities.

C.    The provision of utilities to and within the planned unit development, including municipal sewer and water supply; sanitary sewer; electrical power; telecommunications; emergency services; and fire protection.

D.    Provisions, if required by the assembly, for financial responsibility to ensure:

1.    The completion of each stage of the project; and to indemnify the project for a period of one year after completion of construction as to any costs the project may incur by reason 	of deficiency of design or construction.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.28.060 Permitted construction.

Upon approval of the concept plan, submission and approval by the municipal engineering, department of prepared construction documents, construction may proceed for public and/or approved private roads, utility installation, community-serving open space, and recreational facilities. No lots or rights shall be sold until plat recording. (Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.28.070 Changes in concept plan.

It is not intended that the planned unit development concept plan so approved shall be inflexibly applied, but rather the planned unit development should be in conformance with the concept plan, subject to modification upon approval of the planning commission due to changed economic, social or demographic conditions. (Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.28.080 Staged development.

A planned unit development subdivision proposed for completion in stages shall be designed and constructed so that each stage will be self-supporting should future proposed stages not occur. The concept plan is to include details as to each development stage and the expected timing of each stage. (Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.28.090 Condominium developments.

Condominium developments shall follow the same procedures as cluster developments and shall include specific provisions concerning the division of ownership of the individual dwelling units, as well as provisions for maintenance, utility costs, ownership of common areas, appearance and cleanliness, violations of agreement provisions, along with such other provisions as may be required by the planning commission consistent with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


Chapter 21.32 MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS 

Sections:

21.32.010    General outline of procedure for major plat approval.

21.32.020    Major subdivision preapplication.

21.32.030    Major subdivision—Suggested concept plan submittal.

21.32.040    Major subdivision—Preliminary plat submission requirements. 

21.32.050    Preliminary plat review and approval. 

21.32.160    Major subdivision—Final plat submission requirements.

21.32.170    Final subdivision plat review and approval by the planning commission.

21.32.180    Final subdivision plat review and approval by the assembly.

21.32.190    Appeal to superior court.


21.32.010 General outline of procedure for major plat approval.

The following are the basic steps to obtain major subdivision approval:

A.    Major subdivision preapplication;

B.    Major subdivision concept plat application for planning commission review;

C.    Review and approval of the complete preliminary plat by the planning commission;

D.    Consideration of any platting variances by the planning commission immediately prior to planning commission consideration of the final plat;

E.    Review and approval of the complete final plat by the planning commission;

F.    Review of any appeal of the planning commission’s actions through the planning commission reconsideration process;

G.    Review and action on the final plat by the assembly. 

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.32.020 Major subdivision preapplication.

A preapplication consultation is required preceding the preparation and submission of the preliminary plat. During this stage, the applicant makes known his intentions to the city and is advised of platting procedures and requirements related to subdivision of the subject tract. Applicants are encouraged to submit a brief statement of intent and site location map when making an appointment for a preapplication conference. (Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.32.030 Major subdivision—Suggested concept plan submittal.

A.    Applicants are strongly encouraged to submit a concept plan of a major subdivision for planning commission review. Planning commission review of a concept plan will likely expedite the overall review process by allowing issues to be addressed early on.

B.    Submission of a subdivision application, to be in a form approved by the city, is required prior to any planning commission review of a concept plan. Applications shall be signed by all persons holding an interest in the property that is the subject of the application. It shall include requests for any necessary platting variances and vacations and, if appropriate, information on the timing on phased development.

C.    The concept plan should include approximate dimensions and square footages of the parcels and easements to be created. The concept plat may be prepared by a registered land surveyor. The easements and improvements shall comply with all the applicable standards in Chapter 21.28. The planning commission may offer guidance on the concept plat at a regularly scheduled meeting and that guidance shall be given.

D.    Mailing of public notices and compliance with the advertising requirements in Chapter 21.52 is not required.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.32.040 Major subdivision—Preliminary plat submission requirements. 

A.    In the event the owner or developer does not elect to go through the concept plat review process and submit a complete application at that time, an application for subdivision plat approval shall precede the submission of a preliminary plat. If a previous application does not incorporate any request for any necessary platting variances and vacations, those requests shall accompany the applications. Applications shall be in a form approved by the city.

B.    Preliminary plat applications shall be signed by all persons holding an interest in the property that is the subject of the application. If the applicant intends to develop the land covered by the preliminary plat in phases, the application for preliminary plat approval shall include a master phasing plan specifying the timing and sequence of development.

C.    The preliminary plat shall include all contiguous land under the applicant’s ownership even if under separate legal description. If only a portion of the applicant’s land is intended for development under the proposed subdivision, the remaining portion shall be given a tract designation and shall be part of the preliminary and final plat.

D.    The applicant shall submit the application for preliminary plat approval, including the following items, within the time required by the city in order for staff review before the regular meeting of the planning commission at which the plat is to be considered. The city shall determine the completeness of the application and notify the applicant if additional information is necessary. The perimeter of the subdivision may be flagged with readily viewable marking prior to the planning commission hearing when required pursuant to Section 21.40.160. In addition, the planning office may require that interior subdivision lot corners shall be marked with two-inch square wooden hubs and flagging ten days prior to the planning commission hearing. The planning commission review and public hearing shall be scheduled for the earliest possible date depending upon the size and complexity of the proposal.

E.    Preliminary Plat Submittal.

1.    Plat Copy Requirements.

a.    Four blue or black line prints of the preliminary plat prepared by a registered surveyor (or fewer copies as approved by the city).

b.    One eight-and-one-half-inch by eleven-inch sheet of the proposed new lot lines without signature blocks.

c.    One copy to each of the appropriate governmental state or federal regulatory agencies and to the private telephone/television companies directed by the city.

2.    All plats shall be drawn to a scale of at least one inch equals one hundred feet to show details and to enable appropriate decisions. Plats shall be submitted on sheets of one of the following sizes with each sheet being the same size: eighteen by twenty-four inches, twenty-four by thirty-six inches, or thirty by forty-two inches. The plat shall have four distinctive line weights according to the following breakdown from heaviest to lightest:

a.    Boundary lines;

b.    Block and tract outlines;

c.    Lot lines;

d.    Easements, street centerlines, topographic contours, and other features.

3.    The preliminary plat shall include the following information:

a.    Title block at the bottom right corner of the plat sheet or the index sheet showing:

i.    Name of proposed subdivision,

ii.    Scale,

iii.    Date,

iv.    Total area,

v.    Legal description of parcel being subdivided,

vi.    Proposed lot numbers, block numbers, and street names,

vii.    Name, address, and license number of surveyor preparing plat,

viii.    Owner(s) and/or applicants of the property and mailing address;

b.    When a plat consists of more than one sheet, an index sheet is required. The index sheet must include a key map showing the entire project with street names, lots, block numbers, match lines indicating the sheet numbers which will display pertinent data of that particular portion of the project. The match lines shall follow obvious divisions within the plat and be easily recognizable. When more than one sheet is submitted, one sheet shall contain all the approval certificates. All sheets must be the same size;

c.    North arrow;

d.    Vicinity map which includes the following:

i.    Scale of one inch equals one thousand feet,

ii.    Principal road systems, and, if applicable, major water bodies and/or watercourses, boundaries of national forest or other pertinent boundaries, location of subdivision and north arrow;

e.    Dedicated rights-of-way, patent reservations, road easements, or utility and other reservations, public or private, within the proposed subdivision boundaries and within contiguous parcels showing location, dimensions, and purposes;

f.    Adjacent property lines shall be shown with dashed lines to show their general relationship to the proposed plat;

g.    Proposed lot lines, tract lines, and rights-of-way including approximate dimensions and areas of all lots and tracts, approximate curve radii and lengths, and similar information;

h.    Designation of proposed public areas;

i.    Topography shall be shown with contour intervals of two feet for any portion of the proposed subdivision within the floodplain of any watercourse; five feet outside floodplain areas if the ground slope is less than ten percent; and ten feet if the ground slope is greater than ten percent;

j.    Preliminary horizontal location of water supply, sewage collection or disposal systems, storm drainage and other public improvement details to enable the city to make a preliminary determination as to conformance with municipal and state standards;

k.    The location of water bodies and drainage courses, including the location of flood hazard areas;

l.    The location of existing facilities, permanent buildings and structures within the proposed subdivision such as roadways, buildings, sewage systems, wells, oil lines including pipe sizes, utility poles and lines, underground power lines, excavations, bridges, and culverts;

m.    Legal access from the public system where necessary;

n.    Any additional information required by the municipality.

F.    The applicant shall submit supporting written information including all soils and engineering data required by the appropriate state agency for the review of installation of either on-site sewer and water facilities, if such are needed, or the general design and layout when such utilities are to become a part of the city and borough community system. If this subdivision or any part thereof is in a coastal management district, any information required for coastal management compliance shall also be submitted as may be required by the city.

G.    Accompanying the preliminary plat shall be a plat certificate documenting all persons holding any legal interest in the land being subdivided, prepared by an authorized title insurance company.

(Ord. 18-07 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.32.050 Preliminary plat review and approval. 

The planning commission shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions the preliminary plat at a regularly scheduled meeting and the action shall be given within sixty days of the date of submission of a complete final plat. Flagging may be required along the proposed plat’s existing or proposed boundaries or features as required by the platting authority pursuant to Section 21.40.160. A delay in commission action may be requested in writing by the applicant, may result from the application being incomplete, or may result from evidence requiring further city consideration. If the plat approval is denied or the applicant is not satisfied with the conditions placed on the plat, the matter shall be reconsidered by the planning commission unless the applicant files an appeal directly to the assembly. (Ord. 18-07 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.32.160 Major subdivision—Final plat submission requirements.

The plat shall comply with the development and design standards contained in this title and Title 22, Zoning, shall be used to evaluate applications. Outstanding natural and cultural features such as scenic viewpoints, watercourses, and historical sites shall be reserved insofar as possible. Flood hazard areas shall be marked as required. Plat certificates and standard footnotes shall be shown on the final plat as required in this code.

A.    An original and four copies of the final plat, prepared by a registered surveyor (or fewer copies as approved by the city), containing all documentation relating to the subdivision and improvements as directed by the city shall be submitted. The original shall be reproducible, drawn on stable base polyester film, three mils thick or equivalent, with legible graphics and text in permanent ink. The final plat shall be of the same drawing size and scale as the preliminary plat, and bear the information specified in Section 21.32.040E, and shall show the following:

1.    The boundaries of the plat showing the stakes, monuments or other evidence found to determine the boundaries as well as boundaries, names, and parcel numbers of adjoining subdivisions, lots and tracts or portions thereof shall be identified and ties shown.

2.    Bearings and distances to the nearest established street centerlines, section lines or official monuments which are necessary to accurately describe the location of the plat. All existing monuments found shall be properly referenced, including the date set, type of monument, the surveyor’s name and registration number. Existing survey points reset by ties shall be documented.

3.    The final plat shall show the centerlines of all streets, lengths, tangents, radii, and central angles of all curves, the total width of each street right-of-way and improvements within the right-of-way, the width of the portion being dedicated (if different from the right-of-way), and the width of any existing dedications.

4.    The final plat shall show the width, bearing, and other necessary data to delineate all easements to which the lots are subject. Documentation of any unrecorded easements shall appear on the title sheet. Easements for storm drains, sewers, and other purposes shall be indicated in a manner determined by the city. Easements being dedicated shall be so indicated in the certificate of dedication.

5.    All lot and block numbers shall be shown. Sufficient data shall be shown to determine readily the bearing and length of each line. No ditto marks shall be used.

6.    The names of adjacent subdivisions and the lot numbers of adjacent lots shall be shown. Adjacent unsubdivided lands shall be shown.

7.    The exact boundaries of all lots, tracts or areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use, or for the common use of property owners shall be shown. The purpose of the dedication or reservation shall be set forth on the plat. Undedicated rights-of-way shall be shown.

8.    The provisions of Section 21.40.150, Flood hazard areas, shall be recorded showing all lots, blocks, or tracts affected by the floodplain regulations adopted by the city and borough including a written statement stating the affected lots, blocks and tract by legal description and the citation of the floodplain map used to make the floodplain determination.

9.    All plat certificates and plat notes required in Chapter 21.44, Required Plat Certificates and Plat Notes.

10.    Plats should be submitted in digital form in an AutoDesk AutoCAD drawing file, ESRI ArcGIS coverage, shapefile or personal geodatabase, or in another format based on prior approval by municipal staff.

11.    Coordinates must be delivered in the Alaska State Plane, Zone 1 projection. Datum must be North America Datum, 1983 (NAD83), and have vertical and horizontal control, along with any other nonstandard shifts or rotations, completely documented.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.32.170 Final subdivision plat review and approval by the planning commission.

A.    A final plat shall be prepared and submitted for planning commission review following the board review of the concept plat. The plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor and shall comply with all the major subdivision final plat submission requirements. The easements and improvements shall comply with all the applicable standards in Chapter 21.40. It must be submitted at least thirteen days prior to the next planning commission meeting. The perimeter of the subdivision shall be flagged with readily viewable marking at least ten days prior to the planning commission hearing. In addition, the planning office may require that interior subdivision lot corners shall be marked with two-inch square wooden hubs and flagging ten days prior to the planning commission hearing. Notices and a public hearing shall be required and given as provided for Chapter 21.52.

B.    The planning commission shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions the final plat at a regularly scheduled meeting and the action shall be given within sixty days of the date of submission of a complete final plat. The applicant shall ensure that the flagging of lot lines required for preliminary plat review remains visible during the final review process. A delay in commission action may be requested in writing by the applicant, may result from the application being incomplete, or may result from evidence requiring further city consideration. If plat approval is denied, or the applicant is not satisfied with conditions placed on the plat, the planning commission shall review the plat on reconsideration prior to an appeal being considered by the assembly.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.32.180 Final subdivision plat review and approval by the assembly.

A.    The assembly shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions the final plat at a regularly scheduled meeting and the action shall be given within sixty days of the date of submission of a complete final plat. A delay in assembly action may be requested in writing by the applicant, may result from the application being incomplete, or may result from evidence requiring further city consideration.

B.    No lot, tract, or parcel within any major subdivision may be sold until service by public road access, water supply, sanitary sewer collection and disposal, and electrical power has been inspected, approved, and accepted for maintenance by the city and borough. All easements shall be recorded with the plat, and may not be changed without city approval. Streets shall be named and all lots shall have street addresses when the plat is recorded. Due consideration should be given to the dedication of park, playground and other areas for public use. If the plat approval is denied or the applicant is not satisfied with the conditions placed on the plat, the matter shall be reconsidered by the planning commission unless the applicant files an appeal directly to the assembly.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.32.190 Appeal to superior court.

Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the assembly under this chapter may appeal that decision to the superior court. An appeal to the superior court shall be heard solely on the record created before the assembly and the planning commission. (Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


Chapter 21.36 HYBRID SUBDIVISIONS

Sections:

21.36.010    General description.

21.36.020    General provisions.


21.36.010 General description.

Hybrid subdivisions are considered to be subdivisions that have elements common to both minor and major subdivisions. Hybrid subdivisions fall into two classifications.

The first classification is a subdivision that contains five lots where the first lot has access and utility connections directly off of a dedicated street right-of-way that has been accepted for maintenance by the state of Alaska or city and borough of Sitka.

The second type of hybrid subdivision is combi hybrid where a significant portion of the lots are on a right-of-way and the rest of the lots are served by access and utility easements off of that main road. (Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.36.020 General provisions.

A.    Five Lot Hybrids. Five lot hybrids are governed by the minor subdivision process. All standards and review procedures of the minor subdivision process shall apply. Five lot hybrids shall not be approved if planning commission, with appeal rights to the assembly, is not satisfied that the lot immediately adjacent a dedicated right-of-way is fully served by that right-of-way.

B.    Combi Hybrids. Combi hybrids shall follow the major subdivision review process and shall meet all applicable major subdivision design requirements. The use of combi hybrids shall only be approved when it is determined through the review process that a conventional minor subdivision or major subdivision cannot be developed on the parcel.

C.    Combi Hybrid Review Process and Criteria. The developer shall bear the burden of proving that a combi hybrid is the only method of developing a specific parcel. In requesting a combi hybrid, the applicant shall first provide detailed topography and realistic alternative subdivision layouts that comply with the applicable minor or major subdivision requirements. The planning commission shall review those alternatives and may require the preparation of alternative layouts. Combi hybrids shall only be approved during the preliminary plat stage after the planning commission, with possible appeal to the assembly, has determined that the combi hybrid is required due to the uniqueness of the terrain, significantly higher costs of conventional development, and overriding public benefits of the combi hybrid subdivision. 

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


Chapter 21.40 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS AND MONUMENTATION 

Sections:

21.40.010    Design principles and standards.

21.40.020    Compliance with standard specifications and subdivision agreements.

21.40.030    Easements.

21.40.040    Lots and blocks.

21.40.060    Maintenance agreements.

21.40.070    Street improvements.

21.40.080    Street arrangement.

21.40.090    Access to primary and secondary roads.

21.40.100    Street names.

21.40.110    Dedicated right-of-way street design standards.

21.40.120    Rights-of-way.

21.40.130    Additional design and construction requirements.

21.40.140    Design and construction requirements for subdivided island properties.

21.40.150    Flood hazard areas.

21.40.160    Monumentation and flagging. 


21.40.010 Design principles and standards.

A.    General Provisions.

1.    Compliance. Proposed subdivisions shall conform to the comprehensive plan, the official zoning map, and all requirements in the Sitka General Code Title 22, Zoning.

2.    Name. The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate, or too closely approximate, the name of any other subdivision. The planning commission has advisory authority to designate the name of the subdivision and shall do so before final plat approval.

3.    Lands Unsuitable for Development. Lands which have been found to be unsuitable for development or subdivision because of potential hazards, such as flooding, snow avalanches, rockfalls, landslides, unstable slopes, subsidence, high water table, polluted or nonpotable water supply, high voltage lines, air or vehicular traffic hazards or other features which may be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of existing or future residents, shall not be developed or subdivided and shall not be included in any building lot unless the hazards are eliminated or will be overcome by approved design and construction plans. The applicant shall submit engineered plans showing proposed design and construction in said areas for city review as part of the subdivision approval process.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.40.020 Compliance with standard specifications and subdivision agreements.

Construction shall be completed in compliance with city and borough of Sitka standard construction specifications to the degree determined by the municipal engineer, and any signed subdivision agreement between the city and borough of Sitka and the property owner. (Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.40.030 Easements.

A.    Generally. Municipality shall be party to all easements. All easements shall be recorded and no changes shall occur without municipal approval.

B.    Utility Easements. Utility easements at least five feet wide along the front property lines of lots shall be provided where necessary for public utilities. An anchor pole easement ten feet wide, twenty-five feet deep, appropriately placed, together with the right of access shall be provided where necessary for pole-mounted public utilities. Buried electrical and telecommunication utilities are recommended wherever possible. No more than four lots shall be served by private utility easements.

C.    Access Easements.

1.    No more than four lots shall utilize a single common access road that is constructed to less than the regular municipal street standard. For minor subdivisions of two or three lots with access easements rather than public street access, said easements shall be constructed in accordance with city standards.

2.    All access easements serving more than two lots shall be named and all lots shall be assigned physical street addresses.

3.    In the event that a minor subdivision is proposed adjacent to a subdivision that contains an access easement, the municipality may require that the access easements be adjacent each other. The minimum square footage of the lots in the second subdivision shall not include the easements. The municipality may also require that a road be built to municipal standards within the two twenty-foot easements. The adjoining property owners shall equally share the cost of the construction of the road.

4.    Establishment of Maximum Access Easement Grade. During the subdivision plat approval process, a maximum developed grade shall be established for each access easement. This grade shall not exceed twenty percent in any case and shall exceed fifteen percent in only exceptional cases.

5.    Access Easement Grade Verification. Prior to the issuance of a building permit on a lot in a minor subdivision served by an access easement, the lot owner shall provide verification from a registered land surveyor of the grade of the access easement and a statement that the grade does not exceed the maximum grade approved for the access easement.

D.    Drainage Easements.

1.    Drainage easements conforming substantially to the exterior boundaries of on-site watercourses, drainage ways, channels, or streams as determined by the city public works director shall be provided. Wherever possible, it is desirable that the drainage be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential volume of flow. Ten-foot wide easements, or wider, may be required on both sides of any year around creek or stream. The planning commission may require wider easements if the stream is anadromous as determined by the board after consultation with Alaska Department of Fish and Game.

2.    Where existing site conditions make it impractical to include drainage facilities within road rights-of-way, permanent easements for such drainage facilities shall be provided in accordance with the approved site drainage plan.

3.    When a drainage system proposes to convey water across private land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage easements or other drainage rights must be secured by the applicant and indicated on the application.

4.    Low lying lands along watercourses subject to flooding or overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in areas designated for dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as drainage ways.

E.    Temporary Easements. Two five-foot temporary construction easements, one on each side of each permanent easement, shall be granted when necessary. Temporary easements shall be for a term not to exceed ninety consecutive days from the date of beginning of construction unless otherwise required by the planning commission.

(Ord. 08-10 § 4 (part), 2008; Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.40.040 Lots and blocks.

A.    Lots—Generally. The size, shape, arrangement and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated consistent with minimum lot sizes defined in Title 22, Zoning, and the appropriate environmental regulatory agency regulations.

B.    Lot Dimensions and Arrangement.

1.    Lot dimensions shall not be less than the requirements of the zoning ordinance.

2.    Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for off-street parking and loading facilities required for the type of use and development contemplated, as established by the zoning ordinance.

3.    Residential lots abutting on major streets and highways shall be platted with sufficient depth to permit adequate separation between the buildings and such traffic ways.

4.    Corner lots should be of a size sufficient to meet front yard setbacks on both streets as required by the applicable zoning requirements. This provision may require that corner lots exceed normal lot size minimum square footages.

5.    On-Site Sewage Disposal. In areas where no public sewer system is available, the lots shall be large enough to conform to the regulations and specifications of the appropriate environmental regulatory agency.

C.    Blocks.

1.    Blocks shall generally be of sufficient width to provide for two rows of lots with minimum depth. Exceptions may be permitted in blocks adjacent to major streets, waterways, and water bodies or other land features restricting further development.

2.    The planning commission may require easements and/or rights-of-way through a block to accommodate utilities, drainage, and pedestrian traffic.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.40.060 Maintenance agreements.

A.    Any minor subdivision containing lots which do not directly access public roads shall have road maintenance agreements setting forth the rights of the various lot owners.

B.    Any road maintenance agreement concerning access roads not maintained by the municipality shall be prepared, notarized and recorded. Such agreements shall also be referenced on the subdivision plat.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.40.070 Street improvements.

A.    Generally. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets shall conform to the comprehensive plan and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, in their appropriate relation to adjoining subdivisions.

B.    Improvements. Streets shall be graded and improved to conform to applicable standards and specifications adopted by the assembly in accordance with the approved construction plans.

C.    No more than four lots shall utilize a single common access road that is constructed to less than the municipal street standard.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.40.080 Street arrangement.

A.    The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the connection to existing streets in adjoining areas. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, future extension of streets shall be provided for as required by the city.

B.    Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topographic or other physical conditions or the streets are designed as permanent dead-end streets.

C.    The street arrangement shall make the best use of the topography of the land consistent with the type of development proposed.

D.    Where an existing half-street is adjacent to the subdivision, the remaining half of the street shall be dedicated.

E.    Collector streets shall be properly related to the public street system, to special traffic generated by facilities such as schools, churches, and shopping centers; to population densities; and to major streets that they feed.

F.    Minor streets, which include local access and cul-de-sac streets, shall conform as much as possible to topography; shall discourage use by through traffic; shall permit efficient drainage and sewer systems; and shall result in the minimum amount land devoted to streets necessary to provide convenient safe access to lots.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.40.090 Access to primary and secondary roads.

A.    Proposed subdivisions that border on, contain limited access highway right-of-way or easement, or existing or proposed major streets, are required to limit access to such streets by one of the following means:

1.    Providing access to all lots from local streets; and screening and/or providing a buffer along the rear of lots that back up against a primary arterial;

2.    Requiring use of cul-de-sacs, loop streets, or other minor streets; or

3.    Providing a marginal access or service frontage road(s) separated from the arterial by buffer land that provides limited access to the arterial.

B.    All lots in major subdivisions shall have direct access to dedicated public roads. Exceptions to this provision shall only be granted through Chapter 21.48 when there is a finding that a compelling public interest exists that merits the waiver.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.40.100 Street names.

Names of new streets shall not duplicate existing street names unless a new street is a continuation of or in alignment with the existing street. Street names for dedicated rights-of-way may be recommended by the Sitka historic preservation commission and approved by the municipality. House numbers shall be assigned in accordance with the house numbering system in effect in the city and borough. (Ord. 08-10 § 4 (part), 2008.)


21.40.110 Dedicated right-of-way street design standards.

A.    Cul-de-sacs. Streets designed to have one end permanently closed shall be no longer than four hundred feet, and shall be terminated by a circular turnaround having a radius not less than forty-five feet. Offset or T-shaped turnarounds providing equivalent radius may be substituted.

B.    Grade. The grade of streets shall not exceed twelve percent unless approved by the planning commission. The minimum grade of all streets shall be not less than one percent. 

C.    Grade Changes. All changes in street grades shall be connected by vertical curves.

D.    Intersections.

1.    Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles (ninety degrees). The intersection of two new streets at an angle less than seventy degrees shall require approval of the city public works director or his designee. Generally, streets approaching an intersection should be curved for at least one hundred feet to create right angles. Not more than two streets shall intersect at any one point unless specifically approved by the planning commission.

2.    Adequate stopping sight distance will be provided at each intersection. Sight distance must be equal to or exceed the stopping sight distance required for the speed limit of the intersecting street. In no case will sight distance be less than one hundred fifty feet.

3.    Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersections on the opposite side of such street.

4.    Minimum property line radius at the intersection of two local streets shall be at least fifteen feet; and minimum property line radius at an intersection involving a collector street shall be at least twenty feet.

5.    Intersections shall be designed with a minimum grade. At the approach to an intersection in hilly or rolling areas, a leveling area shall be provided as required by the city.

6.    Where existing topography or vegetation inside any lot corner at an intersection creates a traffic hazard by limiting visibility, the city may require that such ground and/or vegetation (including trees) be modified in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way or easement to the extent deemed necessary to provide sight distance. An easement shall be provided on the plat for required cut slopes.

7.    The cross-slopes on all streets, including intersections, shall be three percent or less.

E.    Alleys. Alleys may be required to the rear of all lots used for business purposes.

F.    Curves. Curves on public streets shall not be less than one-hundred-foot radius. 

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.40.120 Rights-of-way.

A.    The right-of-way of all streets shall be of the width specified below, unless necessitated by unusual topographic, physical or design features as determined by the planning commission:

	 	 	Right-of-way

	1.	Pedestrian walkway	10 feet

	2.	Alleys or easements	20 feet

	3.	Arterials	80 feet

	4.	Collectors	60 feet

	5.	All other streets	50 feet

B.    Excess Right-of-Way. Right-of-way widths in excess of the standards designated in this title shall be required whenever, due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide adequate side slopes.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.40.130 Additional design and construction requirements.

A.    Flood Hazard Areas. Designs of facilities in flood hazard areas in all lots in all subdivisions shall be consistent with the requirements in Section 21.40.150.

B.    Street Lighting. Street lighting shall be installed by the developer at all intersections in all major subdivisions along the road system prior to the issuance of a building permit of the affected lots. Street lighting requirements in the city and borough customer service policy also apply.

C.    Underground Utilities. All utilities shall be installed underground in all minor and major subdivisions along the road system.

D.    Sidewalks. Although sidewalks or pathways are not required in major subdivisions, contractors will be offered the ability, through the subdivision variance process, to have increased density or less setbacks in any subdivision submitted for approval if they have included sidewalks and/or pathways in that subdivision.

E.    Drainage Plans Required. Drainage plans shall be prepared by the applicants for minor and major subdivisions when they are determined to be necessary by the municipality. The plans shall be approved by the municipality prior to final plat approval.

F.    Mail Boxes. Developers of minor and major subdivisions shall install concrete pads for mailboxes consistent with U.S. Postal Service policies and regulations for the lots that are created in the subdivision.

G.    Major Subdivision Lot Sale Restriction. No lot, tract, or parcel within any major subdivision may be sold until service by water supply, sanitary sewer collection and disposal, and electrical power has been inspected, approved, and accepted for maintenance by the city and borough. Said utilities shall be dedicated to the municipality after they are accepted for maintenance. This restriction may be waived by the municipality.

H.    Water and Sewer Utilities—Minor Subdivisions. All water and sewer lines in minor subdivisions shall be constructed to municipal standards and inspected by the municipality prior to the issuance of a building permit on the lots served by the utilities if an approved subdivision agreement is in place.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.40.140 Design and construction requirements for subdivided island properties.

A.    Generally. Access and utility easements on island properties shall be sufficient in width, design, and construction to accommodate the needs of all present and future property owners. Potential moorage sites shall be designated on all plats. In the event sites are not identified and served by access easements, a plat note shall be added stating that private individual docks or mooring buoys will be required to access the lots.

B.    Design and Construction. All access easements shall be a minimum of fifteen feet wide. Utility easements shall be a minimum of ten feet wide. The character of the construction of the easement and the type of vehicle that is allowed to use the easement shall be described in a plat note. The width of easements may be reduced, as appropriate, through the variance process.

C.    The planning commission shall approve the location, design and construction of all easements, mooring locations, and binding plat notes. The board shall initially rely on the representations of the applicant in its review and then shall utilize its independent judgment as to the sufficiency of the arrangements. The right of appeal to the assembly shall be maintained. The trails and other accesses shall be constructed in accordance with the terms of the plat notes within one year of the recording of the plat.

D.    The municipality shall be a party to all easements and binding plat notes. They shall not be modified without the approval of the platting board.

E.    All property owners who directly benefit from the access and utility easements and moorage arrangements shall approve, in writing, of any future resubdivision of parcels on an island prior to the approval of a resubdivision.

F.    Maintenance agreements shall be prepared and referenced on the face of the plat and shall apply to all communal docks.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.40.150 Flood hazard areas.

Subdivision of land within flood hazard areas requires that the land subdivision and associated development are designed to minimize flood damages. The approval of a land use permit or a subdivision in the flood hazard area shall not constitute a representation, guarantee, or warranty of any kind by the municipality and any official or employee thereof of the practicability or safety of the proposed use, and shall create no liability upon the municipality, its officials or employees.

A.    Plats involving land within a flood hazard area must show the following:

1.    Evidence has been submitted that all necessary permits required by state or federal law have been applied for and granted;

2.    The flood hazard area shall be labeled “flood hazard area” on preliminary and final plats;

3.    The preliminary and final plat shall include the ground elevation and the regulatory flood elevations, if available, at reference points to be established by the city;

4.    All new or replacement water supply systems and sanitary sewage systems, including on-site systems, shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters;

5.    All new or replacement utilities such as electric and telephone systems shall be designed or constructed in an attempt to eliminate disruptions due to flooding and associated hazards;

6.    The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;

7.    The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 

8.    The requirements of the subdivision for a waterfront location (if applicable);

9.    The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding or the proposed subdivision and land use;

10.    The compatibility of the proposed uses with the existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future;

11.    The relationship of the proposed subdivision to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area;

12.    The safety of access to the property for emergency vehicles in times of flood;

13.    The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site;

14.    The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges;

15.    The installation of valves or controls on sanitary and storm drains which permit the drains to be closed to prevent back-up of sewage and storm waters into buildings or structures.

B.    In determining if the requirements of this section are fulfilled, the planning commission shall consider the intent of this title and at least:

1.    The danger to life and property due to the increased flood heights or velocities caused by subdivision fill, roads, structures, and intended uses;

2.    The danger that structures may be swept onto other lands or down stream and the risk of injury to others;

3.    The adequacy of proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to be safe from disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions under flood conditions.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.40.160 Monumentation and flagging. 

A.    Generally.

1.    All subdivisions, boundary line adjustments, replats, and any plat that requires approval to be recorded shall comply with the required monumentation and flagging as detailed in this section. References to monumentation and flagging requirements appear in other sections of this code; however, this section shall control.

2.    All monuments required herein shall be installed, shown, and referenced on all final subdivision plats prior to the recording of the plats. All monuments recovered during the survey process shall all be shown on the plat.

3.    The following are the requirements for secondary monumentation:

a.    All secondary monuments shall be at least a five-eighths-inch by twenty-four-inch rebar and cap at all exterior and interior controlling corners, points, and angles. Monuments shall be capped and stamped with survey grade material and information. Where topography limits depth or type of monument, a reasonable survey grade monument of choice may be used if approved by the platting authority, and this includes setting monuments until reasonable refusal for depth.

b.    Secondary monumentation shall be required at all exterior and interior angles, corners, points, and used where needed for curvature control for all subdivisions, replats and/or reviews under this title.

i.    Where there is an existing and sufficient monument that is accurate and durable, that monument may be used to fulfill this subsection.

ii.    Primary monumentation may be required for certain plats. A primary monument will fulfill this subsection.

4.    The following are the requirements for primary monumentation:

a.    Primary monuments must be established for surveys as set forth in this subsection. A primary monument must consist of a minimum two-inch diameter metal pipe, at least thirty inches long, with a minimum four-inch flange at the bottom. A minimum two-and-one-half-inch diameter metal cap must be permanently attached at the top. If both the cap and the pipe are of nonferrous metal, then additives with magnetic qualities must be permanently attached at both the top and bottom of the monument. Every primary monument cap must be permanently stamped with the year set, the surveyor’s registration number, and the corner identification. This data must be orientated so that the data may be read when the reader is facing north. Monuments and accessories found in a disturbed condition must be returned to the original position and condition as nearly as possible or replaced so as to perpetuate the position. An alternative monument may be approved by the platting authority, where needed due to constraints of topography.

b.    All major subdivisions, planned unit developments, cluster subdivisions, small lot subdivisions of six lots or more, or any hybrid or combi subdivision of six lots or more shall provide at least two recovered or new primary monuments along the boundary of the subdivision at points required by the platting authority or planning commission.

c.    All minor subdivisions, zero-lot lines, or hybrid or combi subdivisions of five lots or less shall provide at least one recovered or new primary monument along the boundary of the subdivision at points required by the platting authority or planning commission.

d.    Primary monumentation for boundary line adjustments, accretion plats, replats, vacation of easements or right-of-ways, lot joiners, or lot splits may be required where existing primary monumentation is found insufficient by the platting authority or planning director.

e.    Existing primary monuments that are recovered, accurate, and durable may be used to fulfill this subsection.

f.    All primary monuments must be referenced to at least three bearing trees or objects. If bearing trees or objects are used, they must be located as nearly as possible at right angles and may not be farther than one hundred feet from the monument. A distance to trees or objects must be measured at waist height and in the case of trees measured to the center of the tree with distances reduced to horizontal equivalent. Bearing trees must be marked with a nonferrous metal tag of at least nine square inches in size which must be placed facing the monument. These tags must be clearly and permanently marked as to the corner nomenclature and distance.

5.    Existing recovered monumentation shall be shown and described.

6.    Flagging requirements appear in other sections of this title; however, this section shall control. If considered appropriate to facilitate the review or consideration of a subdivision or other plat, flagging may be required to be installed by the municipality during the review process. Criteria to determine when flagging shall be installed shall include when topography, drainage, structures, location of utilities or other important improvements, or other material issues, such as disputed property line raise the need for more information. Such a decision shall be by motion of the planning commission, platting authority, or city and borough assembly.

(Ord. 18-07 § 4 (part), 2018: Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


Chapter 21.44 REQUIRED PLAT CERTIFICATES AND PLAT NOTES

Sections:

21.44.010    General provisions and list of all required plat certificates and plat notes.

21.44.020    Outline of required plat certificates.

21.44.030    Outline of standard plat notes.


21.44.010 General provisions and list of all required plat certificates and plat notes.

The final plat shall bear the following certificates. The examples contained within this chapter may be modified by the city to accommodate specific circumstances and conditions determined at the time of preliminary plat review. 

21.12.030D    Additional Plat Notes by Planning Commission

21.40.020    Compliance with Standard Specifications and Subdivision Agreements

21.40.030    Easements

21.40.030A    Municipality Party to All Easements

21.40.030C4    Maximum Access Easement Grade

21.40.030C5    Grade Verification

21.40.030E    Temporary Easements

21.40.060    Maintenance Agreements

21.40.090    Access to Primary and Secondary Roads

21.40.130    Additional Design and Construction Requirements

21.40.130B    Street Lighting

21.40.130G    Lot Sale Restriction 

21.40.140    Island Properties

21.40.140A    Private Individual Docks or Mooring Buoys

21.40.140B    Construction and Type of Vehicle Usage of Easements

21.40.140C    Commission Approval of Location of Easements, Buoys and Binding Plat Notes

21.40.140D    Municipality Party to Easements and Binding Plat Notes 

21.44.020    Required Plat Certificates

21.44.020A    Certification of Surveyor

21.44.020B    Certification of Ownership and Dedication

21.44.020C    Certification of Payment of Taxes

21.44.020D    Certification of Approval of the Planning Commission

21.44.020E    Certification of Approval by Assembly

21.44.020F    Certification of Payment of Local Improvement District

21.44.030    Standard Plat Notes

21.44.030A1    Private Covenants

21.44.030A2    Private Access, Utility, and Drainage Easement Maintenance Agreements (21.40.030A) (21.40.060B) (21.40.140D and F)

21.44.030A3    Limitation of Habitable Structures within Floodplain

21.44.030B    Development Plat Restriction (21.40.130I)

21.44.030C    Purpose of Plat

21.44.030D    City and Borough of Sitka Party to Access/Utility Easements

21.44.030E    Subdivisions Developed in Phases

(Amended during 3/15 supplement; Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.44.020 Outline of required plat certificates.

A.    Certification of Surveyor. A certificate signed and sealed by the land surveyor who prepared the plat as follows:

CERTIFICATE OF SURVEYOR

I, ___________ certify that I am a registered land surveyor in the State of Alaska, that this plat is a true and correct representation of lands surveyed by me or under my direct supervision; that the distances and bearings are shown correctly and the error of closure for field traverses does not exceed one part in 5,000; and that all permanent exterior control monuments, all other monuments, and lot corners have been set and staked.

B.    Certification of Ownership and Dedication. Where a dedication of land to the public is proposed in the plat, the final plat shall bear a statement of ownership and dedication as follows: 

CERTIFICATE OF OWNERSHIP AND DEDICATION

I (we) hereby certify that I (we) (company name) am (are)(is) the owner(s) of the property shown and described hereon and that I (we) (it) hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my (our) (its) free consent, and dedicate all streets, alleys, walks, parks, and other open spaces to public or private use as noted.

_____________    _____________________ Date	Owner(s)/Company Name 

Notary’s Acknowledgement

The above certificate shall be signed by all persons or authorized signers for any company holding any legal or equitable interest in the land being platted or dedicated. The certificate shall be signed before the municipal clerk or a notary public.

C.    Certification of Payment of Taxes. The following certificate shall be printed on the final plat:

CERTIFICATE OF PAYMENT OF TAXES

STATE OF ALASKA    ) 	) ss.  FIRST JUDICIAL DISTRICT	)

I, the undersigned, being duly appointed and qualified, and acting assessor for the City and Borough of Sitka, do hereby certify that, according to the records of the City and Borough of Sitka, the following described property is carried on the tax records in the name of: _____________ (all owners of record), and that, according to the records in my possession, all taxes assessed against said lands and in favor of the City and Borough of Sitka are paid in full; that current taxes for the year _____ will be due on or before ________.

DATED this ____ day of _________, ______, at Sitka, Alaska

_______________________ Assessor City and Borough of Sitka

D.    Certification of Approval of the Planning Commission. The following form of certification shall be printed on the final plat by the person preparing the plat, to be filled in after approval by the planning commission:

CERTIFICATION OF APPROVAL BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION

I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown hereon has been found to comply with the subdivision regulations of the City and Borough Planning Commission, and that said plat has been approved by the board by Plat Resolution No. _________ dated _________, and that the plat shown hereon has been approved for recording in the office of the district court, ex officio recorder, Sitka, Alaska.

__________    __________________________ Date	Chairman, Planning Commission

ATTEST:

______________________ Secretary

E.    Certification of Approval by Assembly. The following form of certification shall be printed on the final plat by the person preparing the plat, to be filled in after approval by the assembly:

CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL BY THE ASSEMBLY

I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown hereon has been found to comply with the subdivision regulations of the City and Borough of Sitka, and that said plat has been approved by the Assembly as recorded in Minute Book _____, Page _____, dated _________ and that the plat shown hereon has been approved for recording in the office of the district court, ex officio recorder, Sitka, Alaska.

________________    __________________ Date	Mayor

ATTEST:

______________________ Municipal Clerk

F.    Certification of Payment of Local Improvement District. The following certificate shall be printed on the final plat:

CERTIFICATE OF PAYMENT OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT

I, the undersigned, being duly appointed and qualified, and acting finance director for the City and Borough of Sitka, do hereby certify that, according to the records of the City and Borough of Sitka, the following described property is carried on the records in the name of: __________________ (all owners of record) __________________ and that, according to the records in my possession, all L.I.D.’s assessed against said lands and in favor of the City and Borough of Sitka are paid in full.

Dated this _________ day of _________, 20____ at Sitka, Alaska. 

_________________________ Finance Director City and Borough of Sitka

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.44.030 Outline of standard plat notes.

A.    The final plat shall bear the following information:

1.    A statement referring to private covenants governing the subdivision, if any, as follows: 

Restrictive covenants were recorded __________, 20___, at the Recording District under Serial Number ______________.

2.    A statement referring to private access, utility, and drainage easement(s) maintenance agreements, if any, as follows:

Private maintenance agreement for the access, utilities, and drainage for this plat is recorded ______________, 20____, at the Recording District under Serial Number _____________.

3.    A statement limiting placement of habitable structures, if any portion of the plat depicts areas within the floodplain. The statement, where required, shall read:

No habitable structure may be placed upon any lot that shall have an elevation of the lowest floor, including a basement of less than, at, or above the highest known water elevation to comply with the floodplain provisions.

B.    Development Plat Restriction. All major subdivisions or other plats requiring public construction improvements shall contain the following plat restriction which shall conspicuously appear in bold print on the face of the final plat:

NO LOT, TRACT, OR PARCEL WITHIN THIS SUBDIVISION MAY BE CONVEYED BY ______________ (OWNER) UNTIL SERVED BY ROAD, DRAINAGE, WATER, SEWER, AND ELECTRICITY SERVICE AND SAID IMPROVEMENTS HAVE BEEN INSPECTED, APPROVED, AND ACCEPTED FOR MAINTENANCE BY THE CITY AND BOROUGH OF SITKA, ALASKA OR A SUBDIVISION AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE CITY AND BOROUGH OF SITKA AND THE OWNERS OF THE PARCELS IN THE SUBDIVISION HAS BEEN EXECUTED. THE EXECUTED SUBDIVISION AGREEMENT SHALL SPECIFICALLY LIST THE LOTS THAT MAY BE SOLD PRIOR TO THE INSTALLATION AND ACCEPTANCE OF THE ROADS AND UTILITIES.

    Such a plat restriction may be deleted or disregarded if the developer provides a bond sufficient, in the opinion of the director of public works, to ensure the construction of the required public construction improvements or if the municipality has adopted, by ordinance, a local improvement district to provide such improvements and has issued a notice to proceed to a contractor for that construction project.

C.    A plat note shall be added which describes the purpose of the plat and describes how this plat relates to the previous plats covering the same property.

D.    A plat note shall be added that states the city and borough of Sitka is a party to all access and utility easements and the easements shall not be modified or relocated without municipal approval.

E.    Subdivisions that are developed in phases shall contain final plat documentation describing the nature of public and private improvements, dedications, and other development actions subject to the scheduling of the phases.

F.    Each plat showing any property that borders on saltwater shall carry a plat note stating:

Publicly owned tidelands adjacent to the properties included on this plat may contain important herring habitat and may be used for a variety of recreational, subsistence, customary, and traditional purposes in accordance with State and Federal laws.

(Ord. 04-42 § 4, 2004; Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


Chapter 21.48 PLATTING VARIANCES

Sections:

21.48.010    Requirements for platting variances.

21.48.020    Procedure.

21.48.030    Platting variance within flood hazard areas.


21.48.010 Requirements for platting variances.

A variance from the requirements of this title may be granted only if the planning commission finds that:

A.    The granting of a platting variance will not be detrimental to the public safety, or welfare, or injurious to adjacent property.

B.    The tract to be subdivided is of such unusual size and shape or topographical conditions that the strict application of the requirements of this title will result in undue and substantial hardship to the owner of the property.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.48.020 Procedure.

A.    Application for a platting variance shall include:

1.    Sketch of plat or photocopy of an existing survey;

2.    A plat, with full dimensions, prepared by a registered land surveyor;

3.    A written explanation of the conditions, facts, and reasons why a variance should be granted;

B.    The planning commission shall have the authority to grant platting variances. In granting or denying any platting variance, the planning commission shall state its findings and conclusions that warrant granting such variance;

C.    Any aggrieved party from the action of the planning commission may appeal to the assembly.

(Ord. 08-10 § 4 (part), 2008.)


21.48.030 Platting variance within flood hazard areas.

A.    Variances from the requirements of this title may be granted by the planning commission subject to the following conditions:

1.    Variances shall not be issued within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

2.    Variances shall only be issued upon:

a.    A showing of good and sufficient cause; or

b.    A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; or

c.    A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

3.    Variances shall be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.

4.    The city shall notify the applicant in writing that:

a.    The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level could result in excessive increased premium rates for flood insurance.

b.    Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be recorded on the face of the plat.

5.    The municipality shall:

a.    Maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance; and

b.    Report such variances issued in its annual report submitted to the Federal Insurance and Mitigation Administration.

B.    Variances may be issued by a community for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in this section.

(Amended during 3/15 supplement; Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.) 


Chapter 21.52 ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

21.52.010    Planning commission—Responsibilities.

21.52.015    Assembly—Responsibilities.

21.52.020    Administration—Responsibilities.

21.52.030    Action on application or appeal.

21.52.040    Public notice.

21.52.050    Public hearing.

21.52.060    Reconsideration.

21.52.070    Appeals—General.

21.52.080    Commencement of appeal—Stay.

21.52.090    Notice appeal hearing and preparation of record.

21.52.100    Appeal hearing.

21.52.110    Scope of appellate review.

21.52.120    Judicial review.

21.52.130    Penalties and remedies.

21.52.140    Fees.


21.52.010 Planning commission—Responsibilities.

A.    The planning commission shall be responsible for preliminary and final review of minor subdivision plats, platting variances, vacation of streets, and waivers of subdivision regulations subject to review by the assembly. The planning commission shall be responsible for review and recommend approval of major subdivisions and planned unit developments for action by the assembly.

B.    The planning commission shall either deny, approve, or approve with conditions (recommended or required) the preliminary or final plat within ninety days of the submission of a completed application by the applicant. The applicant may request, in writing, a delay in commission action that would stop this process.

C.    The planning commission may waive any or all improvements and requirements except for the preparation, submission for approval and recording of a plat upon proof that:

1.    Legal access to each tract or lot within the subdivision exists over a street or access easement of at least twenty feet;

2.    The subdivision will create no more than four parcels;

3.    No dedication of a public right-of-way, public easement, or other public area is required;

4.    Proof has been submitted demonstrating that adequate utility easements are provided;

5.    The outside corners of each lot are marked and at least two outside corners of the whole subdivision tract are monumented and referenced to publicly recorded survey markers.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.52.015 Assembly—Responsibilities.

The borough assembly shall have final approval responsibilities for major subdivisions and planned unit developments and shall be responsible for appeals of planning commission approval actions. (Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.52.020 Administration—Responsibilities.

A.    The municipal administration shall be responsible for preapplication and application management; technical reviews; coordination of planning commission and assembly hearings including appeals.

B.    Within fifteen working days after obtaining all certificates of approval of the plat and after the ten-day appeal period, the administration shall file the final plat in the Sitka recording district.

C.    The municipal administrator may grant no more than two six-month extensions to the deadline for recording final plats if the applicant proves that a good-faith effort to complete required conditions of the approval is being made.

D.    The municipal administrator may waive any plat submission requirements as long as all the requirements of the final plat are met prior to the recording of the plat. In the event one or more plat submission requirements are waived, all the information necessary for full public, planning commission, and assembly review shall still be provided.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.52.030 Action on application or appeal.

The planning commission shall take formal action by voting on a motion to approve or recommend approval of an application. The decision and/or recommendation shall be recorded in the minutes prepared by the secretary to the board. The action shall include findings of fact supporting the decision, based upon the application, technical review, public comments, and the record of the public hearing. (Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.52.040 Public notice.

A.    All subdivision approvals under this title shall be subject to public notice.

B.    The administration, after determining that the submitted application is complete, shall be responsible for issuing public notices.

C.    Forms of Notice.

1.    Publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the borough at least five calendar days before the public hearing.

2.    Mailing at least five working days before the public hearing to all record owners of property within a distance of three hundred feet of the exterior boundary of the property that is the subject of a major subdivision and planned unit development application; and within one hundred and fifty feet of the exterior boundary of the property that is the subject of a minor subdivision, replat, and zero lot line application. The notice shall be mailed by first class mail to the owner of record of the property at the address as stated in the current property tax records of the municipal assessor.

D.    Every notice required by this section shall state the date, time, and location of the public hearing, a description of the action requested, a description of the property that is the subject of the application, and the names of the applicants and owners of the subject property.

E.    From the time of filing an application or an appeal all plans, data, and other supporting material shall be available for public inspection at the planning department.

F.    The failure of any person to receive any notice required by this section shall not affect the validity of any proceeding under this chapter.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.52.050 Public hearing.

The planning commission shall hold public hearings on all subdivision application requests. Public hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the hearing body’s rules of procedure and shall serve to create or supplement an evidentiary record upon which the body will base its decision or recommendation. The chair shall open the public hearing and, in general, observe the following sequence of events:

A.    Staff presentation, including submittal of any administrative reports. Members of the hearing body may ask questions of the staff.

B.    Applicant presentation, including submittal of any materials. Members of the hearing body may ask questions of the applicant.

C.    Testimony or comments by the public germane to the matter. Questions directed to the staff or the applicant shall be posed by the chair at its discretion.

D.    Rebuttal, response or clarifying statements by the staff and the applicant.

E.    The evidentiary portion of the public hearing shall be closed and the hearing body shall deliberate on the matter before it.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.52.060 Reconsideration.

A.    The planning commission may reconsider decisions upon petition of any aggrieved person, filed within ten calendar days after the date of the decision, or, on its own motion. If the plat approval is denied or the applicant is not satisfied with the conditions placed on the plats the matter shall be reconsidered by the planning commission unless the applicant files an appeal directly to the assembly.

B.    The assembly may reconsider decisions only if it finds any of the following:

1.    That there was a clerical error in the decision;

2.    The decision resulted from fraud or mistake;

3.    New evidence or a change in circumstances is discovered; 

4.    The application was rejected by a tie vote.

C.    The planning commission shall review the petition, and decide whether to reconsider the matter. Additional evidence shall be necessary to support reconsideration. If the petition is granted, the planning commission then shall decide the matter or set the matter on its agenda for rehearing. The decision of the planning commission on reconsideration shall be final, subject to appeals to the assembly.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.52.070 Appeals—General.

Planning commission decisions authorized under this title may be appealed by the applicant, any person adversely affected by the decision, any governmental agency that has previously submitted comments on the issue, or any member of the assembly or planning commission. (Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.52.080 Commencement of appeal—Stay.

A.    A decision of the planning commission is final unless an appeal is filed within ten calendar days after the planning commission’s final action, including reconsideration.

B.    Any appeal shall be filed with the municipal clerk in writing, specifically stating the reason for the appeal and the relief sought.

C.    Upon commencement of an appeal, the subject decision is stayed until the decision on appeal becomes final.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.52.090 Notice appeal hearing and preparation of record.

A.    The municipal clerk shall schedule the appeal hearing, mail notice of the appeal, and prepare the appeal record.

B.    All persons listed in the record shall receive notice of the appeal hearing. The notice shall include the appellant’s notice of appeal, state the date of the appeal hearing and that written argument supporting or opposing the appeal may be submitted by persons who are not able to be present at the hearing.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.52.100 Appeal hearing.

A.    The public hearing on the appeal shall occur at the first available regular assembly meeting and that occurs at least ten days after the filing of the appeal unless the planning commission, the applicant, or the assembly requests it be heard at the next following regular meeting.

B.    A full rehearing shall occur, with all parties presenting whatever evidence is relevant with opportunity to make argument, unless the assembly elects to make its decision only on the record as to evidence, considering only the arguments of those opposing or supporting the appeal.

C.    Every decision of the assembly shall be based upon adopted findings and conclusions which should be reasonably specific so as to provide the applicant, community and where appropriate, reviewing authorities, a clear and precise understanding of the reason for the decision. The assembly may refer the matter back to the planning commission to develop additional findings and conclusions.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.52.110 Scope of appellate review.

The assembly may exercise its independent judgment on legal issues raised by the appellant. Legal issues are those matters that relate to the interpretation of construction of ordinances or other provisions of law. (Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.52.120 Judicial review.

Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the assembly under this chapter may appeal that decision to the superior court. An appeal to the superior court shall be heard solely on the record created before the assembly and the planning commission. (Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.52.130 Penalties and remedies.

A.    The owner or agent of the owner of land located within a subdivision who offers to sell, transfers, sells or enters into a contract to sell land in a subdivision before a plat of the subdivision has been prepared, approved and recorded in accordance with this title, is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars for each lot or parcel offered for sale, transferred, sold or included in a contract to be sold. This subsection does not apply to any government or governmental agency, federal, state or municipality, that is exempt by AS 34.55.042 from such penalties and subdivision requirements.

B.    No person may record a plat or seek to have a plat recorded unless it has been formally approved by the city and borough. A person who violates this subsection is punishable upon conviction by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars.

C.    The city and borough of Sitka or any aggrieved person may bring a civil action to enjoin any violation of this title, any transfer or sale of an unlawfully subdivided parcel, the violation of the planning commission or the assembly pursuant to this title issued, and the violation of any term or condition of any plat or other entitlement approved under this title, and to obtain damages for any injury the plaintiff suffered as a result of the violation. An action for injunction under this section may be brought notwithstanding the availability of any other remedy. Upon application for injunctive relief and a finding of an existing or threatened violation, the superior court shall enjoin the violation.

(Ord. 10-05 § 4, 2010; Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


21.52.140 Fees.

The assembly shall adopt a schedule of fees for plat, variance, and vacation applications, and for appeals under this title. Specifically, fees shall be set for:

A.    All subdivision plat applications; 

B.    Platting variance;

C.    Street or other dedication; 

D.    Vacation and appeals;

E.    Planned unit development;

F.    Boundary survey application; 

G.    Subdivision replat.

(Ord. 03-1729 § 4 (part), 2003.)


Title 22 ZONING  

Chapters:

22.04    Introduction and General Provisions

22.08    Definitions 

22.12    Zoning Maps and Boundaries 

22.16    District Regulations 

22.20    Supplemental District Regulations and Development Standards  

22.24    Special Use Permits

22.30    Zoning Code Administration


Chapter 22.04 INTRODUCTION AND GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

22.04.010    Title.

22.04.020    Purpose.

22.04.030    Conformity with regulations required.

22.04.040    Interpretation and application of provisions.

22.04.050    Public uses.

22.04.060    Severability.

22.04.070    Conflict with other regulations.

22.04.075    Brief user’s guide.


22.04.010 Title.

This title shall be known and cited as the “Zoning Ordinance of the City and Borough of Sitka, Alaska.” (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.04.020 Purpose.

The purpose of this title is to regulate the use of land and improvements by districts in accordance with the comprehensive plan, the coastal management program and other applicable programs. These zoning regulations are designed to:

A.    Provide for orderly development;

B.    Lessen street congestion;

C.    Promote fire safety and public order;

D.    Protect the public health and general welfare;

1.    Provide for adequate public utilities;

E.    Prevent overcrowding and to stimulate systematic development of transportation, water, sewer, school, park and other public facilities;

F.    Protect private property rights;

G.    Encourage the protection of environmentally critical or historically significant resources;

H.    Assure provision of adequate space for commercial, industrial, residential and other land uses necessary for public welfare;

I.    Provide for efficient and effective administration and enforcement of these regulations;

J.    Provide adequate light, air, privacy, and convenience of access to property;

1.    Enhance surface water management; and

K.    Provide for the gradual elimination of those uses of land, buildings and structures which do not conform to the standards of the district in which they are located and are adversely affecting the development and taxable value of property in the district. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.04.030 Conformity with regulations required.

Unless otherwise set forth in this title:

A.    No building, structure, land or water area shall hereinafter be used or occupied, and no building, structure, or part thereof shall hereinafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, repaired or structurally altered except in conformity with the regulations specified in this title for the district in which it is located.

B.    No building or other structure shall hereinafter be erected or altered to:

1.    Exceed the height restrictions of this title;

2.    Accommodate or house a greater number of families than permitted by this title;

3.    Occupy a greater percentage of lot area than permitted by this title;

4.    Leave narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, space between portions of buildings or structures, or other open space than required by this title.

C.    Any building erected, enlarged or converted to a different type of use after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title to a use which requires off-street parking shall provide parking space in compliance with the regulations established in this title.

D.    Any building erected, enlarged or converted to a different type of use after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title for commercial or industrial purposes shall provide reasonable facilities for the loading and unloading of goods in compliance with the regulations established by this title.

E.    No yard, parking or loading area or other open space required around any building may be considered as providing a yard, parking or loading area or open space for any other building, and no yard or open space on one lot may be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other lot.

F.    No yard, open space, space between portions of buildings or structures, or lot existing at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this title shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth in this title. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.04.040 Interpretation and application of provisions.

In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be the minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly within each district, each class or kind of building, structure, land or water area, except as specifically provided in this title. 

A.    In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, they shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. It is not intended by this title to interfere with or revoke or invalidate any easement, covenant, or other agreement between parties.

B.    When the provisions of this title impose greater restrictions than are imposed by other applicable city, state, and federal regulations, the provisions of this title shall control.

C.    In case of any ambiguity or difference of meaning or inconsistencies between the text and any illustrations or other graphics, the text throughout this title shall control.

D.    Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, words in the present tense can include the future tense, and words in the singular can include the plural, or vice versa. Except for words and terms defined in the beginning of each chapter of this title and in Chapter 22.08 of this code, all words and terms used in this title shall have their customary meanings.

E.    The words “shall” and “should” are always mandatory and not discretionary. The word “may” is discretionary. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.04.050 Public uses.

A.    Unless otherwise prohibited by law, to insure that public uses and structures conform to the general community pattern and to regulations governing private uses and development, agencies of the federal government, state, and the city and borough shall submit plans and receive approvals in conformance with the requirements outlined in this title.

B.    Whatever private use is made of any public land or public structures, such private use shall fully conform to the regulations set forth in this title. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.04.060 Severability.

Should any word, phrase, paragraph, subsection, section or provision of this title be found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such finding shall not affect the validity of this title as whole, or any part thereof, other than the part so found to be invalid. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.04.070 Conflict with other regulations.

Whenever the requirements of this title are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rule, regulation or ordinance, the most restrictive or those imposing the higher standards shall apply. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.04.075 Brief user’s guide.

A.    Chapters. The Sitka zoning code, Title 22, contains seven chapters:

1.    Chapter 22.04, Introduction. Establishes the purpose, title and basic rules for using the city development code.

2.    Chapter 22.08, Definitions. Provides definitions for words used throughout the title. Words or terms used only in one chapter may be defined in that chapter.

3.    Chapter 22.12, Zoning Maps and Boundaries. Contains the official maps showing the location of zoning districts.

4.    Chapter 22.16, District Regulations. Lists and describes the zoning classifications, allowed uses for each zone, and categorization of uses.

5.    Chapter 22.20, Supplemental District Regulations and Development Standards. Provides development standards, such as density, setbacks, height, lot width, landscaping, buffering, parking, access, and other standards to cover general and specific uses; also covers home occupations, accessory dwelling units, adult entertainment, transfer of development rights, and sign standards.

6.    Chapter 22.24, Special Use Permits. Establishes the permit processes and criteria for permits provided by this title, e.g., nonconforming use permits, conditional use permits, planned unit development permits, and variances.

7.    Chapter 22.30, Zoning Code Administration. Provides for administrative and quasi-judicial permit review and approval procedures.

B.    Numbering Scheme. The numbering scheme used in this title operates as shown below:

    22	04	010	A.1.a.i.(1)(a)

    Title	Chapter	Section	paragraphs

C.    Format. Each chapter begins with a listing of the sections and a purpose statement for the chapter. General definitions are contained in the definitions chapter, Chapter 22.08 of this code; specialized definitions may be found at the beginning of the chapter where those definitions are used. Cross-references to other chapters and sections of this title can be found throughout the title. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


Chapter 22.08 DEFINITIONS 

Sections:

22.08.010    General interpretation.

22.08.020    Interpretation of unlisted meanings.

22.08.025    Accessory dwelling unit.

22.08.030    Administrative officer.

22.08.040    Alteration.

22.08.042    Antenna.

22.08.047    Apartment.

22.08.050    Applicant.

22.08.060    Arterial street.

22.08.070    Automobile service station.

22.08.080    Automobile wrecking yard.

22.08.090    Bed and breakfast.

22.08.100    Boardinghouse.

22.08.105    Brewery, small scale.

22.08.110    Building.

22.08.120    Building, accessory.

22.08.130    Building area/site coverage.

22.08.140    Building height.

22.08.150    Building line, front.

22.08.160    Building, principal or main.

22.08.164    Cemetery. 

22.08.167    Church.

22.08.170    Cluster housing development.

22.08.180    Collector street.

22.08.190    Commercial.

22.08.195    Commercial home horticulture.

22.08.200    Comprehensive plan.

22.08.210    Conditional use.

22.08.220    Condominium.

22.08.230    Congregate care facility/retirement center.

22.08.240    Coverage.

22.08.245    Cul-de-sac.

22.08.250    Day care, home provider, children’s services.

22.08.253    Dedication.

22.08.254    Density.

22.08.255    Dock.

22.08.256    Dock, commercial.

22.08.257    Dock, community personal use.

22.08.258    Dock, personal use.

22.08.260    Dormitory.

22.08.270    Drinking establishment.

22.08.280    Dwelling.

22.08.285    Dwelling, multiple-family.

22.08.290    Dwelling, single-family.

22.08.300    Dwelling, two-family or duplex.

22.08.310    Dwelling unit.

22.08.320    Dwelling unit, accessory.

22.08.330    Easement.

22.08.340    Eating establishment.

22.08.350    Factory built/prefabricated building.

22.08.360    Family.

22.08.370    Fence height.

22.08.380    Floor area.

22.08.385    Floor area ratio.

22.08.387    Footprint.

22.08.390    Garage.

22.08.400    Garage, body and fender repair.

22.08.410    Garage, mechanical repair.

22.08.420    Garage sales.

22.08.430    Grade (ground level).

22.08.440    Guest room.

22.08.442    Hazardous waste.

22.08.443    Hazardous waste storage.

22.08.444    Hazardous waste treatment.

22.08.445    Hazardous waste treatment and storage facility.

22.08.450    Home occupation.

22.08.453    Horticulture.

22.08.455    Hostel.

22.08.460    Hotel.

22.08.461    Household.

22.08.462    Industrial.

22.08.465    Island, subdivided.

22.08.470    Junkyard.

22.08.475    Kennel.

22.08.480    Loading berth.

22.08.485    Lodge.

22.08.490    Lot.

22.08.495    Lot area.

22.08.500    Lot, corner.

22.08.510    Lot, depth of.

22.08.520    Lot, interior.

22.08.530    Lot line adjustment.

22.08.535    Lot line, front.

22.08.540    Lot line, rear.

22.08.550    Lot line, side.

22.08.560    Lot lines.

22.08.563    Lot of record.

22.08.565    Lot, through.

22.08.570    Lot width.

22.08.580    Lot, zero line.

22.08.585    Manufactured home.

22.08.587    Marijuana.

22.08.590    Mobile home.

22.08.600    Mobile/manufactured home parks.

22.08.610    Mobile/manufactured home subdivision.

22.08.620    Motel.

22.08.630    Natural resource extraction.

22.08.640    Nonconformity.

22.08.645    Office.

22.08.647    Open space.

22.08.648    Or related zones.

22.08.650    Owner or manager apartment.

22.08.660    Parking, public.

22.08.670    Parking space, off-street.

22.08.680    Parsonage.

22.08.685    Personal service.

22.08.690    Planned unit development.

22.08.695    Private recreational cabin.

22.08.700    Profession.

22.08.702    Project.

22.08.705    Public facilities and utilities.

22.08.706    Public hearing.

22.08.707    Public improvement.

22.08.708    Public open space.

22.08.710    Quasi-institutional home.

22.08.712    Recreational vehicle or travel trailer.

22.08.713    Recreational vehicle/travel trailer park.

22.08.720    Residential.

22.08.722    Residential, zero lot.

22.08.725    Rezone.

22.08.730    Setback.

22.08.735    Short-term rentals.

22.08.736    Sign.

22.08.737    Sign area.

22.08.738    Sign, attached.

22.08.739    Sign face.

22.08.740    Sign, freestanding.

22.08.741    Sign, off-site.

22.08.742    Sign, permanent.

22.08.743    Sign, temporary.

22.08.744    Site plan.

22.08.745    Site plan, binding.

22.08.750    State highway.

22.08.751    Sports club.

22.08.760    Story.

22.08.770    Street.

22.08.780    Structure.

22.08.785    Subdivision code.

22.08.786    Subdivision, major.

22.08.787    Subdivision, minor.

22.08.790    Tank farms.

22.08.795    Temporary building or structure.

22.08.797    Tidelands.

22.08.800    Townhouse.

22.08.805    Tract or parcel.

22.08.830    Use, accessory.

22.08.840    Use, principal.

22.08.850    Variance.

22.08.851    Vessel.

22.08.853    Walkway.

22.08.854    Watchman or caretaker dwelling.

22.08.855    Watercourse.

22.08.860    Wetland.

22.08.865    Wildlife rehabilitation centers.

22.08.870    Yard, front.

22.08.880    Yard, rear.

22.08.890    Yard, side.

22.08.895    Zone or zone district.

22.08.896    Zoning code.


22.08.010 General interpretation.

For the purpose of this title, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:

A.    Words used in the present tense include the future tense;

B.    The singular number includes the plural;

C.    The word “person” includes a partnership and corporation as well as the individual;

D.    The word “lot” also includes the words “plot,” “parcel,” or “tract”;

E.    The term “shall” is always mandatory;

F.    The words “used” or “occupied” as applied to any land or building includes the words “intended,” “arranged” or “designed” to be occupied. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.020 Interpretation of unlisted meanings.

When a word or term is not specifically stated, the city and borough administrator or his designee shall have the authority to interpret the meaning or description most comparable, subject to appeal to the planning commission, then to the assembly. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.025 Accessory dwelling unit.

An “accessory dwelling unit (ADU)” is a second dwelling unit that is located on the same parcel as the primary single-family dwelling unit. An ADU must provide a complete, independent residential living space and shall include provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. Accessory dwelling units are further regulated under Chapter 22.20 and other sections of this title. (Ord. 13-14A § 4 (part), 2013.)


22.08.030 Administrative officer.

“Administrative officer” means the city and borough administrator or his designee assigned to administer and enforce the zoning title. Said individual may include, but is not limited to, the planning director, or planning assistant. (Ord. 04-60 § 4(D) (part), 2004.)


22.08.040 Alteration.

“Alteration” means any change, addition or modification in a construction, location, occupancy or use classification. In buildings for businesses, commercial, industrial or similar uses, the installation or re-arrangement of partitions affecting more than one-third of a single floor area shall be considered an alteration. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.042 Antenna.

“Antenna” means a wire or system of wires, rods, poles, or similar devices, or satellite dishes used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves, external to or attached to the exterior of any building. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.047 Apartment.

“Apartment” means any portion of a building which is designed, built, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied or which is occupied as the home or residence of an individual or family unit living and doing their own cooking independently of any other individual or family unit in the same building. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.050 Applicant.

“Applicant” means a person seeking development approval from the city. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.060 Arterial street.

“Arterial street” means a street designed and intended to carry traffic from residential and collector street systems to state highways and other arterial streets. Arterials are designated in the comprehensive plan or in supporting documents of the plan. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.070 Automobile service station.

“Automobile service station” means a retail place of business engaged primarily in the sale of motor fuels, lubricants and other petroleum products, but also in supplying accessories and services generally required in the normal operation and maintenance of motor vehicles. The servicing of motor vehicles shall be generally limited to lubrication, installation or replacement of accessory items and the performance of minor automobile maintenance and repair. Sales and leasing of motor vehicles on a limited basis, not becoming the principal use, shall be considered an accessory use. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.080 Automobile wrecking yard.

“Automobile wrecking yard” means any lot or portion of a lot used for the purpose of dismantling used motor vehicles or trailers or the storage or sale of parts from dismantled or partially dismantled obsolete or wrecked vehicles. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.090 Bed and breakfast.

“Bed and breakfast” means a lodging use, where rooms within a single dwelling unit or owner-occupied side of a two-family unit are provided to transient guests by a resident operator for a fee by pre-arrangement on a daily or short-term basis. A breakfast meal and/or light snacks may be served to those guests renting rooms. Only limited cooking facilities, if any, may be provided in the guest rooms. Extensive stays are not encouraged by the owners and are not considered appropriate. Bed and breakfasts require a building official and fire official certification that the residence complies with life and fire safety aspects. (Ord. 15-39 § 4 (part), 2015: Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.100 Boardinghouse.

“Boardinghouse” means a building, residential in character, other than a hotel or motel, with not more than five guest rooms and no more than two persons per room where lodging, with or without meals, is provided for compensation for three or more persons, but not exceeding fifteen persons, on other than a day-to-day basis, and which is not open to transient guests. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.105 Brewery, small scale.

“Small scale brewery” means an operation involving the processing of grain into beer where all activities with the exception of unloading raw materials and loading finished product for off-site transport are conducted within an enclosed building, where overall production is less than ten thousand barrels per year (three hundred ten thousand gallons per year), where the operation requires no more than standard utilities, and where retail sales may be conducted on-premises. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.110 Building.

“Building” means any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.120 Building, accessory.

“Accessory building” means a detachable building, the use of which is appropriate, subordinate and customarily incidental to that of the main building or to the use of the land and which is located on the same lot as the main building or use. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.130 Building area/site coverage.

“Building area/site coverage” means the total areas taken on a horizontal plane on its largest level of the principal building and all accessory building including decks, porches, steps and eave overhangs. 

Figure 22.08.130 Site Coverage
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.140 Building height.

“Building height” means the vertical distance from the average elevation of the finished grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, to the highest point of a mansard roof, or to the highest point of the highest gable of a pitched or hip roof. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.150 Building line, front.

“Front building line” defines the minimum distance from the front property line to the furthest extension of any structure or appurtenance including but not limited to decks, steps and porches to be erected on the property. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.160 Building, principal or main.

“Principal or main building” means a building which contains the principal or main use of the lot on which it is situated. In a residential district, the principal building shall be the residence. In a commercial district, the principal building would be the commercial use. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.164 Cemetery. 

“Cemetery” means an area set apart for or containing graves, mausoleums, urns, or similar arrangements for the deceased. (Ord. 19-15 § 4 (part), 2019.)


22.08.167 Church.

“Church” means a building or structure generally open to the public and used as a place of gathering for the purpose of religious worship or related activities. The definition of a church shall be dependent upon IRS interpretation and that of the State Assessor’s Office. A standard single-family residence not remodeled for public meetings shall not be considered a church. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.170 Cluster housing development.

“Cluster housing development” means two or more independent single-family dwellings developed as a group or “cluster” requiring a conditional use permit and site plan approval, the plan of which may not conform to the minimum yard and lot requirements of the district in which the project is located. Cluster developments may not exceed the density allowed in the district in which they are located and are specifically intended to provide a method to allow development on unusual terrain where standard development would be prohibitively expensive. 

Figure 22.08.170 Cluster Housing Development
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.180 Collector street.

“Collector street” means a street designed and intended to carry traffic from residential street systems to arterial street systems or state highways. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.190 Commercial.

“Commercial” means activities involving sales or rental of any article, substance or commodity and the provision of all commercial services including financial institutions and personal services. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.195 Commercial home horticulture.

“Commercial home horticulture” means the on-site production, principally for use or consumption by the property owner or tenant, of plants or their products, including but not limited to gardening and fruit production. Commercial home horticulture does not include the sale of such products produced off site, but does include the sale of such products produced and sold on site to others. It also does not include such products as livestock, poultry, other animals, or the production of animal related products. Accessory buildings, such as garden stands, other than those specifically allowed in zoning districts, may be permitted through the planning commission home horticulture permit process in Section 22.24.025. (Ord. 14-38A § 5, 2014: Ord. 09-51 § 4(C), 2009.)


22.08.200 Comprehensive plan.

“Comprehensive plan” means an official adopted document including text, charts, graphics or maps or any combination designed to portray general and long range proposals for the arrangement of land uses and development of an economic base and human resource and which is intended to guide development policy towards achieving orderly and coordinated development within the entire community. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.210 Conditional use.

“Conditional use” means a provision which allows for flexibility within the zoning title by permitting certain specified uses in zoning districts where said uses could be considered appropriate, but only after additional conditions and safeguards are applied to insure their compatibility with permitted principal uses. Such conditions might include such things as parking, signs, fences or other sight and sound buffers, protection of natural resources of value to the community or similar public concerns. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.220 Condominium.

“Condominium” means a type of real property ownership in which projects composed of two or more dwelling units or commercial or industrial establishments which are individually owned, with common areas of the project, if any, and common land area being owned according to fixed percentages by the owners of the separate dwelling units or commercial or industrial establishments in a cooperative manner. This type of development requires the preparation of a plat under the State Horizontal Property Regimes Act and the formulation of a legal homeowners’ association to guide the financial and maintenance arrangements for the units in total. Approval of condominiums shall be allowed only under the conditional use and site plan approval procedure. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.230 Congregate care facility/retirement center.

“Congregate care facility/retirement center” means a residential facility designed for and occupied by at least one person per unit who is able to live independently and without twenty-four-hour supervision; and providing centralized services for the residents including meals, recreation, housekeeping, laundry and transportation. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.240 Coverage.

“Coverage” means the percentage of total lot area allowed to be covered by buildings or structures exceeding thirty inches in height. Customary yard accessories, ornaments and furniture are not included in this definition of coverage. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.245 Cul-de-sac.

“Cul-de-sac” means a short street intersecting with another street at one end and terminated by a vehicular turnaround at the other end.

Figure 22.08.245 Cul-de-sac
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.250 Day care, home provider, children’s services.

“Day care,” “home provider,” or “children’s services” means the caring of children, ages newborn through twelve, in other than the children’s own home environment. It shall be lawful to care for up to four children, not your own, in a private home and be considered a valid home occupation. For five or more children, state licensing and a conditional use permit as a day care center shall be required. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.253 Dedication.

“Dedication” means the deliberate appropriation of land or rights in land by its owner for any general and public use, reserving to himself or herself no other rights than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public use to which the property has been devoted. The intention to dedicate shall be evidenced by the owner by the presentment for filing of a final plat or short plat showing the dedication thereon, and the acceptance by the public shall be evidenced by the approval of such plat for filing by the city. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.254 Density.

“Density” means the number of permitted dwelling units allowed on each acre of land or fraction thereof. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.255 Dock.

“Dock” means a fixed or floating structure, including moorings, for the purpose of berthing floating vessels. (Ord. 03-1750 § 4 (part), 2003; Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.256 Dock, commercial.

“Commercial dock” means a fixed or floating structure, including moorings, for the purpose of berthing floating vessels that: includes commercial and recreational vessels, does not have a limitation on the size or number of lease slips, may include covered lease slips and boathouses, may include secure float plane facilities, and may have seafood sales on the structure. A commercial dock along the Sitka Road System shall have one parking space per slip. Commercial docks in Sitka Sound and in outlying areas do not have a parking space requirement. (Ord. 07-08 § 4 (part), 2007.)


22.08.257 Dock, community personal use.

“Community personal use dock” means a dock jointly owned and used by property owners in the immediate area for the berthing of floating vessels owned by the property owners in the area, lessees of uplands, family members of property owners in the area, or others utilizing the dock without compensation. Commercial fishing vessels owned by the upland property owner are allowed. Community personal use docks shall not include, or accommodate, covered or uncovered lease slips, commercial seafood processing, sale of seafood, float houses, liveaboards, or float planes unless specifically allowed elsewhere in this title, or any other commercial activity including the loading and off-loading of charter clients. Community personal use docks are for noncommercial purposes. Waterborne aircraft, used for commercial purposes, may be allowed on island properties and in outlying areas through the conditional use process in accordance with Table 22.16.015-2. (Ord. 07-08 § 4 (part), 2007.)


22.08.258 Dock, personal use.

“Personal use dock” means a fixed or floating structure, including moorings, for the purpose of berthing floating vessels owned by the upland property owner, lessees of uplands, family members of upland property owners, or others utilizing the dock without compensation. Commercial fishing vessels owned by the upland property owner are allowed. Personal use docks shall not include, or accommodate, covered or uncovered lease slips, seafood processing, sale of seafood, float houses, liveaboards, or float planes unless specifically allowed elsewhere in this title, or any other commercial activity including the loading and off-loading of charter clients. The maximum perimeter of the dock and float shall not exceed three hundred linear feet. Gangways and ramps are not included in this limitation. (Ord. 07-08 § 4 (part), 2007.)


22.08.260 Dormitory.

“Dormitory” means a residential building, other than a hotel or motel, with six or more guest rooms, where lodging with or without meals is provided for compensation on other than a day-to-day basis for students, employees or the like and which is not open to transient guests. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.270 Drinking establishment.

“Drinking establishment” means a building or place of business involving the retail sales or dispensing of alcoholic beverages. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.280 Dwelling.

“Dwelling” means a building designed or used exclusively as a living quarters for one or more families. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.285 Dwelling, multiple-family.

“Multiple-family dwelling” means a residential building designed for or occupied by three or more families, with the number of families not exceeding the number of dwelling units that are provided. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.290 Dwelling, single-family.

“Single-family dwelling” means a detached building constructed on a permanent foundation, designed for human habitation exclusively and constituting one household. 

Figure 22.08.290 Single-Family Detached Dwelling
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.300 Dwelling, two-family or duplex.

“Two-family dwelling” or “duplex” means a detached building constructed on a permanent foundation, designed for human habitation exclusively by two families and constituting two dwelling units. 

Figure 22.08.300 Two-Family Dwelling (Duplex)
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.310 Dwelling unit.

“Dwelling unit” means a structure or portion thereof containing a kitchen, living area, toilet and sleeping accommodations and designed as a unit to be occupied by no more than one family. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.320 Dwelling unit, accessory.

“Accessory dwelling unit” means a separate, complete dwelling unit attached to or contained within the structure of the primary dwelling, or contained within a separate structure that is accessory to the primary dwelling unit on the premises. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.330 Easement.

“Easement” means an interest in land owned by another that entitles the easement holder to a specified limited use or enjoyment of said area of land. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.340 Eating establishment.

“Eating establishment” means a place, building or structure where the preparation or serving of food for sale or consumption is conducted. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.350 Factory built/prefabricated building.

“Factory built/prefabricated building” means a detached building designed for long-term habitation and use and having complete facilities, constructed and fabricated into one or more sections at a factory and designed to be joined at location of use on a permanent foundation and meeting all applicable building codes and housing codes. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.360 Family.

“Family” means any number of individuals related by blood or marriage; any number of individuals coming under the definition of “handicapped persons” in the Fair Housing Act, with such persons present as reasonable accommodation will require for such handicapped persons to occupy a dwelling; or an unrelated group of not more than five persons, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.370 Fence height.

“Fence height” means the vertical distance between the ground, either natural or filled, directly under the fence and the highest point of the fence. No fence shall exceed eight feet in height without a variance. Fences in the public and industrial zones may be no higher than twenty feet. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.380 Floor area.

“Floor area” means the total horizontal area of each floor of a building within the surrounding outer walls exclusive of vent shafts and courts. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.385 Floor area ratio.

“Floor area ratio” means the ratio of building floor area to the area of the lot upon which the building is located. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.387 Footprint.

“Footprint” means the outermost exterior perimeter of a building at the foundation where it touches the ground plane. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.390 Garage.

“Garage” means a building or portion thereof in which only motor vehicles used by the tenants of the building are stored or kept and in which gasoline, distillate or other volatile flammable liquids, or other household goods may be stored. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.400 Garage, body and fender repair.

“Body and fender repair garage” means a major automobile repair building or portion thereof, including but not limited to engine, transmission or differential repair or replacement but especially involved in the body and fender repair of damaged vehicles. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.410 Garage, mechanical repair.

“Mechanical repair garage” means any garage, available to the public, operated for gain, and used for the storage, major mechanical repair including but not limited to engine, transmission or differential repair or replacement, greasing, washing, servicing or adjusting or equipping vehicles. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.420 Garage sales.

“Garage sales” means the sale or barter, by the owner or occupant of a residential structure, of miscellaneous personal property excess to the person’s needs. Garages sales can occur in any structure on the property. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.430 Grade (ground level).

“Grade (ground level)” means the average level of the finished ground at the center of all exterior walls of a building. In case walls are parallel to and within five feet of a public sidewalk, the ground shall be measured at the sidewalk. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.440 Guest room.

“Guest room” means any room in a dormitory, boardinghouse or lodginghouse, or bed and breakfasts, or short-term rentals used for and maintained to provide sleeping accommodations for not more than two persons. Each one hundred square feet or fraction thereof of floor area used for sleeping room purposes shall be considered a separate guest room and must be approved by the building official and fire chief. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.442 Hazardous waste.

“Hazardous waste” means all dangerous and extremely hazardous waste as defined in, or its successor, except for moderate risk waste as set forth in, or its successor. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.443 Hazardous waste storage.

“Hazardous waste storage” means the holding of hazardous waste for a temporary period as regulated by the state or its successor. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.444 Hazardous waste treatment.

“Hazardous waste treatment” means the physical, chemical, or biological processing of hazardous waste for the purpose of rending these wastes nondangerous or less dangerous, safer for transport, amenable for storage, or reduced in volume, as regulated by the state or its successor. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.445 Hazardous waste treatment and storage facility.

“Hazardous waste treatment and storage facility” means on-site storage and treatment facilities which treat and store hazardous wastes generated on the same property. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.450 Home occupation.

“Home occupation” means occupations conducted within a dwelling unit by the residents thereof, which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for living purposes and does not change the character thereof nor involve persons other than the residents of the building. For specific details, see Section 22.20.060. (Ord. 12-31A § 4(G), 2012: Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.453 Horticulture.

“Horticulture” means the on-site production of plants or their products, including but not limited to gardening and fruit production. Horticulture does not include construction of accessory buildings other than those specifically allowed in the zoning districts. It also does not include such products as livestock, poultry, other animals, or the production of animal related products. (Ord. 09-51 § 4(E), 2009.)


22.08.455 Hostel.

“Hostel” means a place where travelers may stay for a limited duration at low cost in a facility operated by a nonprofit entity that is appropriately recognized by a state or national hostel organization that may include dormitory-like sleeping accommodations. (Ord. 05-47 § 4(A), 2005.)


22.08.460 Hotel.

“Hotel” means any building or group of buildings in which there are six or more guest rooms used, designed or intended for use for the purpose of offering to the general public lodging or food and lodging. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.461 Household.

“Household” means a housekeeping unit consisting of any number of related persons; eight or fewer nonrelated, nontransient persons; or eight or fewer related and nonrelated nontransient persons, unless a grant of special or reasonable accommodation allows an additional number of persons. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.462 Industrial.

A.    “Industrial” means a use engaged in the manufacture of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products.

B.    “Industrial” shall not include occupations conducted only by residents of the property without outside employees, such as pottery, weaving, woodworking and the like.

C.    This definition of “industrial” shall not authorize uses of property which are prohibited by other ordinances in the same zone. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.465 Island, subdivided.

“Subdivided island” shall include all islands that have been divided into two or more lots or which are connected with an adjacent island at mean low tide. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.470 Junkyard.

“Junkyard” means any lot or portion thereof used for the storage, salvage, keeping or abandonment of junk or waste material including worn out, wrecked, scrapped, partially or fully dismantled, discarded, tangible materials, combination of materials or items such as machinery, metal, rags, rubber, paper, plastics, chemicals and building materials which cannot, without further reconditioning, be used for their original purpose. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.475 Kennel.

“Kennel” means a structure or lot on which four or more small domestic animals at least four months of age are kept. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.480 Loading berth.

“Loading berth” means an off-street space used for the temporary parking of commercial vehicles while unloading merchandise, materials or supplies at a building or structure and located upon the same lot as the building. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.485 Lodge.

“Lodge” means a premises that provides lodging (room and board) accommodations during all seasons for use by visitors engaging in recreational activities and includes a variety of related services. Lodges on islands may include satellite small cabins along with the main structure. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.490 Lot.

“Lot” means a parcel of land shown as an individual unit on the most recent plat of record and intended to be used for one principal building and/or use. 

Figure 22.08.490 Lot Types
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.495 Lot area.

“Lot area” means the total horizontal area within the boundary lines of a lot, excluding any street right-of-way or access easement. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.500 Lot, corner.

“Corner lot” means a lot situated at the junction of and bordering on two intersecting streets. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.510 Lot, depth of.

“Depth of lot” means a mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured in the general direction of its side lot line. 

Figure 22.08.510 Lot Depth
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.520 Lot, interior.

“Interior lot” means a lot located within a group of lots other than on intersecting streets. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.530 Lot line adjustment.

“Lot line adjustment” means the adjustment or relocation of a boundary line between existing lots which results in no more lots than existed before the adjustment. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.535 Lot line, front.

“Front lot line” means the lot line adjacent to any public street. In the case of a corner lot, the front line shall be considered to be along both street lot lines. 

Figure 22.08.535, 22.08.540, 22.08.550 Lot Lines


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.540 Lot line, rear.

“Rear lot line” means the lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.550 Lot line, side.

“Side lot line” means any lot line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.560 Lot lines.

“Lot lines” means the property lines bounding a single parcel of property. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.563 Lot of record.

“Lot of record” means an area or parcel of land as shown on an officially recorded plat or subdivision, or an area or parcel of land to which a deed or contract is officially recorded as a unit of property, or which is described by metes and bounds or as a fraction of a section. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.565 Lot, through.

“Through lot” means a lot fronting on two streets that is not a corner lot. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.570 Lot width.

“Lot width” means the mean horizontal distance separating side lot lines of an individual lot. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.580 Lot, zero line.

“Zero lot line” is a structure containing two adjacent single-family housing units that share a common side or rear lot line and shall be provided one-hour fire rated assemblies on each side of the adjoining property line. The uses allowed in zero lot line, residential are limited to residential uses, home occupations as regulated by other sections of this title and day cares accommodating up to four children of paying non-family member clients. Also see “Residential, zero lot.” (Ord. 12-31A § 4(C), 2012: Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.585 Manufactured home.

“Manufactured home” means a structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (“HUD”) standards, transportable in one or more sections which, in the traveling mode is eight feet (two thousand four hundred thirty-eight millimeters) or more in width or forty feet (twelve thousand one hundred ninety-two millimeters) or more in length or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty square feet (thirty square meters) or more, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes plumbing, heating and electrical systems. “Manufactured home” shall also include any structure which meets all the requirements of this definition listed above, except the size requirements, and has a manufacturer certificate required by HUD that complies with HUD standards for manufactured homes. (Ord. 15-14 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 10-12 § 4(A), 2010.)


22.08.587 Marijuana.

A.    “Marijuana” means all parts of the plant of the genus Cannabis whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or its resin, including marijuana concentrate. “Marijuana” does not include fiber produced from the stalks, oil, or cake made from the seeds of the plant, sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination, or the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other products.

B.    “Marijuana establishment” means a marijuana cultivation facility, a marijuana testing facility, a marijuana product manufacturing facility, or a retail marijuana store.

C.    “Marijuana cultivation facility” means an entity registered to cultivate, prepare, and package marijuana and to sell marijuana to retail marijuana stores, to marijuana product manufacturing facilities, and to other marijuana cultivation facilities, but not to consumers.

D.    “Marijuana cultivation facility, limited” means a marijuana cultivation facility with fewer than five hundred square feet under cultivation.

E.    “Marijuana product manufacturing facility” means an entity registered to purchase marijuana; manufacture, prepare, and package marijuana products; and sell marijuana and marijuana products to other marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to retail marijuana stores, but not to consumers.

F.    “Marijuana product manufacturing facility, extract only” means an entity registered to purchase marijuana; manufacture, prepare, and package marijuana concentrate; and sell marijuana concentrate to other marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to retail marijuana stores, but not to consumers.

G.    “Marijuana retail facility” means an entity registered to purchase marijuana from marijuana cultivation facilities, to purchase marijuana and marijuana products from marijuana product manufacturing facilities, and to sell marijuana and marijuana products to consumers.

H.    “Marijuana testing facility” means an entity registered to analyze and certify the safety and potency of marijuana.

I.    “Marijuana products” means concentrated marijuana products and marijuana products that are comprised of marijuana and other ingredients and are intended for use or consumption, such as, but not limited to, edible products, ointments, and tinctures.

(Ord. 16-11 § 4 (part), 2016.)


22.08.590 Mobile home.

“Mobile home” means a structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight feet (two thousand four hundred thirty-eight millimeters) or more in width or forty feet (twelve thousand one hundred ninety-two millimeters) or more in length or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty square feet (thirty square meters) or more, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes plumbing, heating, and electrical systems. (Ord. 15-14 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 10-12 § 4(B), 2010.)


22.08.600 Mobile/manufactured home parks.

“Mobile home parks” means any area, lot or portion of a lot where space for two or more mobile homes is leased, rented or held out for rent for occupancy and having separate attachments for normal public utilities. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.610 Mobile/manufactured home subdivision.

“Mobile home subdivision” means two or more mobile homes on separate lots developed under the subdivision regulations and the conditional use procedures of this title, where mobile homes are permanently installed for residential use on individually owned parcels of property. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.620 Motel.

“Motel” means a building or group of buildings designed primarily for sleeping accommodations, with or without individual kitchen facilities, and specifically designed for transient or roadside traffic with either separate entrances or a common entrance directly to a convenient central parking facility. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.630 Natural resource extraction.

“Natural resource extraction” means commercial or industrial operations involving the removal of timber, native vegetation, peat, mulch, topsoil, fill, sand and gravel, rock or any operations having similar characteristics. Said use includes the use of heavy equipment such as loaders, dozers, backhoes and other equipment such as crushers. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.640 Nonconformity.

“Nonconformity” means any lot, structure, use of land, use of a structure or characteristics of such use which does not conform to the terms of this title but which was in lawful and active use on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.645 Office.

“Office” means a building, or part thereof, designed, intended or used for the practice of a profession, the carrying on of a business, the conduct of public administration, or, where not conducted on the site thereof, the administration of an industry, but shall not include a retail commercial use, any industrial use, or place of amusement or place of assembly. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.647 Open space.

“Open space” means any part of a lot unobstructed by structures from the ground upward. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.648 Or related zones.

“Or related zones” applies to the extension of a particular zoning district such as R-1 or R-2. R-1 or related zones includes R-1, R-1 MH, R-1 LD, and R-1 LDMH. R-2 or related zones includes R-2 and R-2 MHP. SF or related zones includes SF and SFLD. C-1 or related zones includes C-1 and C-2. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.650 Owner or manager apartment.

“Owner or manager apartment” means a defined area within a residential building that is designated to be used exclusively as the living quarters for the owner, manager and/or family of that building, or caretaker of residential structures. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.660 Parking, public.

“Public parking” means a structure or open area other than a street, alley or other right-of-way used for the temporary parking of automobiles and available for public use, whether free, for compensation or as an accommodation for clients or customers. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.670 Parking space, off-street.

“Off-street parking space” means a ten-foot by twenty-foot space located off any street, alley or other right-of-way which is adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors and adequate maneuvering room on a parking lot with access to a public street or alley. Requirements for off-street parking are found in Section 22.20.100. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.680 Parsonage.

“Parsonage” means the permanent place of residence of the pastor or minister of a church and owned by the church, not the pastor. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.685 Personal service.

“Personal service” means businesses engaged in providing care of the corporeal person or his/her apparel such as accounting, tax preparation, hair care, massage therapists, tailoring, etc., not including health care. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.690 Planned unit development.

“Planned unit development” means a group or combination of dwellings and uses developed as a functional unit under conditional use and site plan approval procedures, the plan of which may not conform to the regulations established in any one or more zoning districts with respect to lot size, mixture of uses, density, lot coverage, access or required open space. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.695 Private recreational cabin.

“Private recreational cabin” means living quarters in a building separate from and in addition to the main residential building on a lot, used for intermittent or temporary occupancy by nonpaying guests. Maximum total of six hundred fifty square feet of living and sleeping areas. (Ord. 09-56 § 4, 2009.)


22.08.700 Profession.

“Profession” means an occupation or calling requiring the practice of a learned art through specialized knowledge, training, experience or a degree issued by an institute of higher learnings; e.g., doctor of medicine, lawyer, engineer, computer specialist, etc. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.702 Project.

“Project” means a proposal for development. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.705 Public facilities and utilities.

“Public facilities and utilities” means land or structures owned by or operated for the benefit of the public use and necessity, including but not limited to public facilities defined in RCW 36.70A.030, as amended, and private utilities serving the public. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.706 Public hearing.

“Public hearing” means an open record hearing at which evidence is presented and testimony is taken. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.707 Public improvement.

“Public improvement” means any structure, utility, roadway or sidewalk for use by the public, required as a condition of development approval. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.708 Public open space.

“Public open space” means any publicly owned land including, but not limited to, parks, playgrounds, waterways, and trails. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.710 Quasi-institutional home.

“Quasi-institutional home” means a residential facility located in a residence or living unit, the principal use being to serve as a place for no more than six persons in an R-1 zone and twenty persons in an R-2 or larger zone seeking rehabilitation, counseling, self-help and family environment. This definition shall not include dwellings intended for use as a family setting for handicapped persons as defined in the Fair Housing Act. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.712 Recreational vehicle or travel trailer.

“Recreational vehicle” or “travel trailer” means a motor vehicle or portable vehicular structure capable of being towed on the highways by a motor vehicle, designed and intended for casual or short-term occupancy for travel, recreational and vacation uses, identified by a model number, serial number, and vehicle registration number, and equipped with limited pressure water storage, sewage holding tank and other such self-contained living facilities. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.713 Recreational vehicle/travel trailer park.

“Recreational vehicle/travel trailer park” means an area, lot or portion of a lot where two or more travel trailers are parked, camped, leased or rented for temporary occupancy, and may include state camper parks, road wayside parks or campgrounds where public water and toilets are provided or a holding tank dump station has been erected. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.720 Residential.

“Residential” means activity involving the occupation of a building for living, cooking and sleeping purposes. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.722 Residential, zero lot.

“Zero lot, residential” is a structure containing two adjacent single-family housing units that share a common side or rear lot line and shall be provided one-hour fire rated assemblies on each side of the adjoining property line. The uses allowed in zero lot line, residential are limited to residential uses, home occupations as regulated by other sections of this title and day cares accommodating up to four children of paying non-family member clients. Also see “Lot, zero line.” (Ord. 12-31A § 4(D), 2012.)


22.08.725 Rezone.

“Rezone” means a change in classification from one zoning district to another. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.730 Setback.

“Setback” means the distance between the lot line and the building line. The building line shall include eaves, open porches and other such projections beyond the foundation. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.735 Short-term rentals.

“Short-term rentals” means rentals of single dwelling units for less than fourteen consecutive days for money or other valuable consideration by one party which then occupies the dwelling. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.736 Sign.

“Sign” means any device, flag, light, figure, picture, letter, message, symbol, plaque or poster visible outside the lot on which it is located and which is designed to inform or attract the attention of the public, excluding murals or architectural designs which do not advertise a business, product or service. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.737 Sign area.

“Sign area” means the area of the smallest rectangle that can be drawn around all parts of the sign from the viewpoint exposing the largest surface area, excluding simple support structures. Sign supporting structures which are part of the sign display shall be included in the area of the rectangle.

Figure 22.08.737 Sign Area


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.738 Sign, attached.

“Attached sign” means a sign permanently attached to or mounted on a building. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.739 Sign face.

“Sign face” means any side of a sign which contains advertising or graphic display which is visible to the public. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.740 Sign, freestanding.

“Freestanding sign” means any sign not attached to a building. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.741 Sign, off-site.

“Off-site sign” means a permanent sign not located on the same lot as the business or use it is intended to serve. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.742 Sign, permanent.

“Permanent sign” means a sign nailed, glued, screwed or similarly fastened to foundation systems capable of holding it in position under an imposed wind load of twenty-five pounds per square foot or the design requirements of Chapter 23 of the Building Code. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.743 Sign, temporary.

“Temporary sign” means a sign or advertising display intended to be displayed for a limited time not to exceed thirty days in one calendar year or for a fixed event and not permanently affixed to a structure or the ground. (Ord. 03-1746 § 4 (part), 2003: Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.744 Site plan.

“Site plan” means a scale drawing which shows the areas and locations of all buildings, streets, roads, improvements, easements, utilities, open spaces and other principal development features for a specific parcel of property. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.745 Site plan, binding.

“Binding site plan” means a site plan reviewed and approved pursuant to this title, containing the inscriptions or attachments setting forth the limitations and conditions of use for a specific parcel of property and meeting the requirements of the municipal engineer. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.750 State highway.

“State highway” means a street, road or other right-of-way owned and maintained by the state of Alaska or the municipality, usually considered the largest within the road system and intended to provide large scale transportation over long distance. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.751 Sports club.

“Sports club” means a public facility used by all age groups for athletic and recreational type activities to promote overall wellness. Recreational use and activities are conducted almost wholly outdoors, including golf driving ranges (not associated with a golf course), miniature golf, firing ranges, water parks, amusement parks, yacht clubs, and similar uses. (Ord. 03-1750 § 4 (part), 2003.)


22.08.760 Story.

“Story” means that portion of a building between any floor and the next floor above or below, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building between the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above it. If the finished floor level directly above a basement floor, cellar floor or unused floor space is more than six feet above grade at any point, such a basement cellar or unused floor space shall be considered a story. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.770 Street.

“Street” means a permanently designated right-of-way, open to general public use, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property, such as an avenue, place, drive, boulevard, highway and any other similar public thoroughfare, except an alley as defined herein. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.780 Structure.

“Structure” means anything including membrane structures which is constructed or erected and which is located on or under the ground or attached to something fixed to the ground not including utility poles and related ground or pad-mounted equipment, residential fences less than eight feet high, retaining walls, rockeries, and other similar improvements of a minor character less than three feet high. (Ord. 03-1746 § 4 (part), 2003; Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.785 Subdivision code.

“Subdivision code” means Title 21 of the Sitka General Code. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.786 Subdivision, major.

“Major subdivision” means a division of land into five or more lots, tracts or other divisions. Subdivision includes resubdivisions of previously subdivided land. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.787 Subdivision, minor.

“Minor subdivision” means a division of land into four or fewer lots or tracts. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.790 Tank farms.

“Tank farms” means any and all lots that contain one or more tanks or enclosed storage facilities with an aggregate total capacity capable of holding ten thousand gallons of a liquid or more, and designed for the purpose of containing fluids other than water. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.795 Temporary building or structure.

“Temporary building or structure” means a building or structure not having or requiring permanent attachment to the ground or to other structures which have no required attachment to the ground. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.797 Tidelands.

“Tidelands” means property along the road system submerged, periodically submerged, below mean high higher water on the seaward side of a developed street right-of-way. The tidelands are also outside of the road system and include any property currently or formerly below mean high higher water. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.800 Townhouse.

“Townhouse” means a building containing physically contiguous attached single-family dwelling units, each being separated from the adjoining units by an approved party wall or fire wall extending from the basement or cellar floor to the roof. 

Figure 22.08.800 Townhouse Development
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.805 Tract or parcel.

“Tract” or “parcel” means a portion of a subdivision having fixed boundaries, not including lots. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.830 Use, accessory.

“Accessory use” means a use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land, building or structure and located on the same lot or parcel of land. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.840 Use, principal.

“Principal use” means the main, primary or principal use of the land, buildings, or structures located on a lot or parcel of land. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.850 Variance.

“Variance” means the relaxation of the strict application of the terms of this title to a proposed development to be constructed in the future. This definition shall not be construed to permit any use in any district in which that use is prohibited by the district regulations. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.851 Vessel.

“Vessel” means a watercraft that is self-propelled or propelled manually or by wind and is used as a means of transportation in navigation or commerce on water and includes small rowboats and sailboats. (Ord. 03-1750 § 4 (part), 2003.)


22.08.853 Walkway.

“Walkway” means a hard surfaced portion of a street, right-of-way, trail, ramp or easement intended for private or public pedestrian use. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.854 Watchman or caretaker dwelling.

“Watchman or caretaker dwelling” means a dwelling associated with a commercial or industrial building or structure for the purpose of housing a watchman or caretaker and immediate family. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.855 Watercourse.

“Watercourse” means the course or route followed by waters draining from the land, formed by nature or human activity and consisting of a bed, banks, sides and associated wetlands and headwaters. A watercourse shall receive surface and subsurface drainage waters and shall flow with some regularity, but not necessarily continuously, naturally and normally, in draining from higher to lower lands. The watercourse shall terminate at the point of discharge into a larger receiving body such as a lake. Watercourses shall include sloughs, streams, creeks and associated wetlands. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.860 Wetland.

“Wetland” means areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.

Wetlands do not include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland sites, including but not limited to irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales, canals, detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, and landscape amenities. However, wetlands include those artificial wetlands intentionally created to mitigate conversion of wetlands. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.865 Wildlife rehabilitation centers.

“Wildlife rehabilitation centers” means centers devoted to rehabilitation of birds of prey and other wildlife, educational and tourism aspects of wildlife display, and information dissemination. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.870 Yard, front.

“Front yard” means a yard extending the full width of the lot across the front adjoining any public street and measured horizontally at right angles to the front lot line or future street right-of-way line. On corner lots where two streets intersect, said lot shall contain two front yard setbacks, one adjacent to each street. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.880 Yard, rear.

“Rear yard” means a yard extending the full width of the lot across the rear of the lot and measured horizontally at right angles to the rear lot line. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.890 Yard, side.

“Side yard” means a yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard and measured horizontally at right angles to the side lot line. 

Figure 22.08.870, 22.08.880, 22.08.890 Yards and Setbacks
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.895 Zone or zone district.

“Zone” or “zone district” means a defined area of the city within which the use of land is regulated and certain uses permitted and other uses excluded as set forth in this title. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.08.896 Zoning code.

“Zoning code” means Title 22 of the Sitka General Code. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


Chapter 22.12 ZONING MAPS AND BOUNDARIES 

Sections:

22.12.010    Districts established. 

22.12.020    Maps.

22.12.030    Maps—Changes.

22.12.040    Maps—Replacement.

22.12.050    District boundary—Interpretation when uncertainty exists.

22.12.060    District boundary—Interpretation when street/alley vacated.


22.12.010 Districts established. 

The city and borough is divided into districts as shown on the zoning maps of the city and borough which, together with all explanatory matter, are adopted by reference to be a part of this title. The districts shall be as follows:

	P	Public lands district

	SF/SFLD	Single-family and single-family low density residential districts

	R-1 LDMH	Single-family or duplex low density or single-family low density manufactured home district

	R-1	Single-family and duplex residential district

	R-1 MH	Single-family and duplex manufactured home district 

	R-2	Multifamily district

	R-2 MHP	Multifamily and mobile home district

	CBD	Central business district

	C-1/C-2	General commercial and general commercial mobile home districts

	WD	Waterfront district

	I	Industrial district

	GI	General island district

	LI	Large island district

	R	Recreation district

	OS	Open space district

	GP	Gary Paxton special district

	C	Cemetery district

(Ord. 19-15 § 4 (part), 2019: Ord. 14-21 § 4 (part), 2014; Ord. 10-12 § 4 (part), 2010; Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.12.020 Maps.

The use districts are bounded and defined on official zoning maps of the city and borough and identified by the signature of the mayor and attested to by the city and borough clerk. These maps are by reference made a part of this title. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.12.030 Maps—Changes.

A.    No changes of any nature shall be made to the official zoning maps or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this chapter. Any unauthorized change of any kind whatsoever by any persons or person shall be considered a violation of this chapter and punishable as provided in Chapter 22.30, Article VII.

B.    Regardless of the existence of proposed copies of the official zoning maps which may from time to time be made or published, the official zoning maps shall be located in the office of the planning director where they can be kept current and shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of lands, water areas, buildings and other structures in the city and borough. The maps contained within this code are for general information only and not of sufficient detail to be relied upon. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.12.040 Maps—Replacement.

In the event that the official zoning maps become damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the assembly, after recommendation from the planning commission, may by ordinance adopt new official zoning maps which shall supersede the prior official zoning maps. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.12.050 District boundary—Interpretation when uncertainty exists.

When uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning maps, the following rules shall apply:

A.    Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed as following such centerlines.

B.    Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following the lot lines in effect at the time the zoning district was approved.

C.    Boundaries indicated as approximately following section or section subdivision lines shall be construed as following such section or section subdivision lines.

D.    Boundaries indicated as approximately following municipal limits shall be construed as following said limits.

E.    Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed as following the mean high water line of that shore. In the event of change, the shoreline shall be construed as following the actual shoreline affected by that change; boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines.

F.    All areas within the city and borough limits which are underwater or tidelands and are not shown as included within any district are subject to all regulations of the upland district immediately adjacent to the tideland or underwater areas.

G.    In unsubdivided property, the location of any district boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions shown on the same map, shall be determined by the use of a scale appearing on the map.

H.    Boundaries indicated as parallel to the extensions of features indicated in subsections A through F of this section shall be construed as such. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning maps shall be determined by the scale of the map.

I.    Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the zoning maps, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections A through G of this section, the planning commission shall interpret the district boundaries. 

(Ord. 03-1746 § 4 (part), 2003; Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.12.060 District boundary—Interpretation when street/alley vacated.

Where any public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations for the abutting property shall apply to the area of the street or alley of such vacation. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


Chapter 22.16 DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sections:

22.16.010    Generally.

22.16.015    Permitted, conditional and prohibited uses. 

22.16.016    Accessory uses.

22.16.020    P public lands district.

22.16.030    SF/SFLD single-family residential and single-family low density residential districts.

22.16.035    R-1 LDMH single-family or duplex low density or single-family low density manufactured home district.

22.16.040    R-1 single-family and duplex residential district.

22.16.045    R-1 MH single-family, duplex and manufactured home zoning district.

22.16.050    R-2 multifamily residential district.

22.16.060    R-2 MHP multifamily and mobile home district.

22.16.070    CBD central business district.

22.16.080    C-1 general commercial district or C-2 general commercial mobile home district.

22.16.100    WD waterfront district.

22.16.110    I industrial district.

22.16.120    GI general island district.

22.16.135    LI large island district.

22.16.150    R recreation district.

22.16.160    OS open space zone.

22.16.170    GP Gary Paxton special zone.

22.16.180    C cemetery district. 


22.16.010 Generally.

Lot sizes, setbacks, uses and development standards listed herein shall be considered the minimum standards allowable. The following shall consist of the zoning districts of the city and borough. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.16.015 Permitted, conditional and prohibited uses. 

The use of a property is defined by the activity for which the building or lot is intended, designed, arranged, occupied, or maintained. Each lot or parcel in single-family and related zones shall contain only one principal use as defined by the use tables in this chapter. Multifamily and commercial zones may contain up to three principal uses. Other uses on the lot or parcel may be permitted accessory uses or conditional uses. All applicable requirements of this code, or other applicable state or federal requirements, shall govern a use located in the city and borough of Sitka.

The land use tables contained in this chapter determine whether specific uses are permitted as principal (P) or conditional (C) uses. Each table lists the zoning districts in the vertical columns and the land use activities in the horizontal rows. If no symbol appears in the box at the intersection of a row and column, the use is not allowed and is prohibited unless otherwise noted. In general, prohibited uses shall be as follows:

A.    Any use or structure not of a character indicated under permitted principal, accessory or conditional uses;

B.    Any use which causes, or may be reasonably expected to cause, an excessive disturbance not in keeping with the character and stated intent of this district. “Excessive” is defined for these purposes as a degree exceeding that generated by uses permitted in the district in their customary manner of operation or to a degree injurious to the public safety, health, welfare or convenience.

If the letter “P” appears in the box, the use is permitted outright subject to the provisions of the code. If the letter “C” appears in the box, the use is a conditional use subject to review and approval including site plan approval. If the box contains a number, there will be a corresponding footnote further specifying the conditions applicable to the use in the zone.

With the exception of the Gary Paxton special district or as otherwise provided in this code, if the letter “P,” “C,” or another notation does not appear in the box, the use is prohibited.

The Gary Paxton special (GP/GPS) district was specifically developed to allow for a wide range of flexible uses on the site. When the site was acquired, it was recognized that a number of appropriate uses may surface that could not be anticipated. Appropriate and inappropriate uses could be regulated through lease agreements and sales agreements that must be approved by the municipality. As a result, the GP/GPS district use tables shall function differently from the manner outlined above.

Any uses, except retail and business uses, at Table 22.16.015-6, as well as natural resource extracting and mining support facilities uses within Table 22.16.015-5, may be approved in the GP/GPS district without a requirement of a zoning amendment in accordance with Section 2.38.080.

Retail and business uses in the GP/GPS district that are permitted uses, conditional uses, or prohibited uses on the site are governed by Table 22.16.015-6. Natural resource extractions and mining support facilities are conditional uses governed by Table 22.16.015-5 in the GP/GPS district. These use tables are binding on the owners and the operators in the Gary Paxton industrial park. No changes to these tables shall be made without a zoning ordinance text amendment that follows the full procedures in Chapter 22.30, Zoning Code Administration.

As outlined in Section 22.16.110, the I industrial zone is intended for industrial and heavier commercial uses. The zone also contains a number of heavy public uses as permitted and conditional uses. Additional conditional uses may be approved by the assembly, through the conditional use process, even though they may not be specifically listed as permitted or conditional uses in the following table.

 

Table 22.16.015-1 Residential Land Uses 

	Zones	P(1)	SF	SFLD	R-1	R-1 MH	R-1 LDMH	R-2	R-2 MHP	CBD (11, 12)	C-1 (11)	C-2 (11)	WD (2, 11)	I	GI (3, 10)	LI(3)	R	OS	GP (13)	C (16)

	RESIDENTIAL

	•    Single-family detached	 	P	P	P(4)	P(4)	P(4)	P(4)	P(4)	 	P	P	P	 	P	P	P	P	 	 

	•    Townhouse	 	 	 	C(5)	C(5)	C(5)	C(5)	C(5)	C	P	P	P	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Duplex	 	 	 	P	P	 	P	P	 	P	P	P	 	P	P	 	 	 	 

	•    Residential zero lot line	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	P	 	P	P	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Multiple-family	 	 	 	C(5)	C(5)	C(5)	P(5)	P(5)	P(5,8)	P(5)	P(5)	P(5)	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Single manufactured home on an individual lot	 	 	 	 	P	P	 	P	 	 	P	P	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Mobile home park	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	 	P	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Accessory dwelling unit	 	 	 	P(14)

C	C	C	P(14)

C	C 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	GROUP RESIDENCES	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Assisted living	C	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Bunkhouse for transient workers	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	C	 	C	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Dormitory	C(4)	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Quasi-institutional	C	 	 	C	C	C	C	C	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	TEMPORARY LODGING

	•    Hostel	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	 	P	P	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Hotel/motel	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	 	PU/ CS	C	C	 	 	 

	•    Bed and breakfast	 	 	 	C(7)	C(7)	C(7)	C(8)	C(8)	P	P	P	P	 	P	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Short-term rental	C(15)	 	 	C	C	C	C	C	P	P(9)	P(9)	P(9)	 	P	C	P(9)	 	 	 

	•    Rooming house	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	C	P	P	P	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Lodge	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	 	PU/ CS	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Limited storage	 	 	 	C(6)	C(6)	C(6)	C(6)	C(6)	 	 	 	 	 	P	C	 	 	 	 

	P: Public Lands District	C-1/C-2: General Commercial and General Commercial/ Mobile Home Districts

	SF: Single-Family District

	SFLD: Single-Family Low Density District	WD: Waterfront District

	R-1: Single-Family/Duplex District	I: Industrial District

	R-1 MH: Single-Family/Duplex/Manufactured Home District	GI: General Island District

	R-1 LDMH: Single-Family/Duplex and Single-Family/Manufactured Home Low Density Districts	LI: Large Island District

	R: Recreational District

	R-2: Multifamily District	OS: Open Space District

	R-2 MHP: Multifamily/Mobile Home District	GP: Gary Paxton Special District

	CBD: Central Business District	C: Cemetery District

P—Permitted

C—Conditional Use Permit Required

PU/CS—Permitted on Unsubdivided Islands and Conditional Use on Subdivided Islands

C.     Residential Uses Table 22.16.015-1 Footnotes.

1.    Public facilities not otherwise identified may be permitted in the public zone subject to planning commission recommendation and assembly approval subject to findings of fact that show the use is in the public interest; all reasonable safeguards are to be employed to protect the surrounding area; and that there are no reasonable alternative locations for the use.

2.    All uses in the waterfront district are intended to be water-related or water-dependent except that upland uses may be non-water-related.

3.    Uses listed as conditional uses in the GI and LI zones may be considered, but not necessarily approved, on a case-by-case basis.

4.    Including zero lot developments.

5.    Townhouse, cluster housing developments and planned unit developments are conditional uses subject to this title and Title 21 of this code, Subdivisions.

6.    On-site storage of commercial fishing vessels, fishing equipment and other small business equipment is a permitted conditional use so long as such storage does not occupy more than four hundred square feet.

7.    Bed and breakfast establishments are limited to three guest rooms in the R-1, R-1 MH, and R-1 LD districts as conditional uses only when no other rental such as apartments is in operation on the same lot.

8.    Bed and breakfast establishments are limited to five guest rooms in the R-2, R-2 MHP districts as conditional uses only when no other rental such as apartments is in operation on the same lot.

9.    Short-term rentals including legal nonconforming uses shall provide two off-street parking spaces per unit, comply with the municipal fire code, and comply with the requirements of the building department based on a life safety inspection.

10.    Hotels, motels, lodges, boarding houses and bed and breakfasts capable of accommodating a maximum of six guests plus one guest for each one-half acre or fraction thereof above one acre on unsubdivided islands are permitted principal uses. Hotels, motels, lodges, boarding houses and bed and breakfasts, on unsubdivided islands that exceed this maximum, are conditional uses.

    Bed and breakfast establishments, boarding houses, hotels, motels and lodges are conditional uses on subdivided islands.

11.    Many of the permitted and conditional uses in the CBD, C-1, C-2, and WD zones generate traffic, noise, odor, and general impacts to a higher level and greater degree than permitted and conditional uses in residential districts. Owners of residential uses in the CBD, C-1, C-2 and WD districts must be aware of and accepting of all the permitted uses in these districts. 

12.    Single or multiple apartments shall only be permitted on the first floor of structures in the CBD district if approved through the conditional use process. Single and multiple apartments are permitted uses on upper floors of structures in the CBD district.

13.    Any uses, except retail and business uses, and natural resource extraction and mining support facilities uses may be approved in accordance with Section 2.38.080.

14.    Accessory dwelling units shall be constructed in conformance with the standards outlined in Chapter 22.20, Supplemental District Regulations and Development Standards.

15.    Conditional use limited to allow boats to be used as short-term rentals in harbors and slips within the public lands zoning district.

16.    All uses in the cemetery district are intended to be cemetery-related and conducted with reverence and respect for those interred.

  

Table 22.16.015-2 Cultural/Recreational Uses  

	ZONES	P

(1)	SF (7)	SFLD(7) 	R-1 (7)	R-1 MH (7)	R-1 LDMH (7)	R-2 (7)	R-2 MHP(7)	CBD	C-1	C-2	WD(2)	I	GI(3)	LI

(3)	R	OS	GP (9)	C

(10)

	CULTURAL

	•    Library	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	 	 	P	P	 	 	 	 

	•    Museum	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	 	 	P	P	 	 	 	C

	•    Conference center	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	P	P	P	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Church	 	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	P	P	P	 	 	PU/CS	C	 	 	 	C

	•    Art gallery	P	 	 	C(4)	C(4)	C(4)	C(4)	C(4)	P	P	P	C	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Radio station	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	RECREATIONAL

	•    Park and recreation	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	 	 	 	 

	•    Park	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	 	 	P	P	P	P	 	C

	•    Trails	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	 	 	P	P	P	P	 	 

	•    Campground	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	 	P	 	 

	•    Resort	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	 	 	C	C	P	 	 	 

	•    Marina	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	 	C	C	C	P	 	 

	•    Travel trailer/recreational vehicle park	C	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	C	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Ballpark/athletic field	P	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	 	P	P	P	P	P	C	P	 	 	 

	•    Amusement and entertainment	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	PU/CS	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Theater	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Theater, drive-in	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Outdoor amphitheater	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	 	 	PU/CS	C	 	P	 	 

	•    Bowling center	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Sports club and yacht club	C	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	 	C	C	 	C

(5)	 	 

	•    Golf facility	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Shooting range—indoor	C	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	 	 	PU/CS	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Shooting range—outdoor	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	 	 	PU/CS	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Arcades	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Community center	C	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	P	 	 	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Personal use docks—accomodating waterborne aircraft	 	C(6)	C(6)	C(6)	C(6)	C(6)	C(6)	C(6)	 	 	 	P	 	P(8)	P(8)	P(8)	P(8)	 	 

	•    Personal use docks—perimeter of dock and float exceed 300 linear feet	 	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	 	 	 	P	 	P(8)	P(8)	P(8)	P(8)	 	 

	•    Personal use docks—one lease slip, float houses permitted in accordance with the Sitka Coastal Management Program, no linear perimeter restriction, allowing liveaboards, and allowing float planes	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P(8)	P(8)	P(8)	P(8)	 	 

	•    Personal use docks—no perimeter restrictions, no restrictions on liveaboards and float planes. Float houses allowed if permitted in accordance with Sitka Coastal Management Program	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	P(8)	P(8)	P(8)	P(8)	 	 

	•    Personal use docks—one nonfee liveaboard	 	P	P	P	P	P	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P(8)	P(8)	P(8)	P(8)	 	 

	•    Personal use docks—liveaboards, no more than 300-foot perimeter	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	 	 	 	P	 	P(8)	P(8)	P(8)	P(8)	 	 

	•    Community personal use docks	 	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	 	 	 	P	 	P(8)	P(8)	P(8)	P(8)	 	 

	•    Commercial use docks	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	C	C	C	C	 	 

	P: Public Lands District	C-1/C-2: General Commercial and General Commercial/ Mobile Home Districts

	SF: Single-Family District

	SFLD: Single-Family Low Density District	WD: Waterfront District

	R-1: Single-Family/Duplex District	I: Industrial District

	R-1 MH: Single-Family/Duplex/Manufactured Home District	GI: General Island District

	R-1 LDMH: Single-Family/Duplex and Single-Family/Manufactured Home Low Density Districts	LI: Large Island District

	R: Recreational District

	R-2: Multifamily District	OS: Open Space District

	R-2 MHP: Multifamily/Mobile Home District	GP: Gary Paxton Special District

	CBD: Central Business District	C: Cemetery District

P—Permitted

C—Conditional Use Permit Required

PU/CS—Permitted on Unsubdivided Islands and Conditional Use on Subdivided Islands

D.    Cultural/Recreational Uses Table 22.16.015-2 Footnotes.

1.    Public facilities not otherwise identified may be permitted in the public zone subject to planning commission recommendation and assembly approval subject to findings of fact that show the use is in the public interest, all reasonable safeguards are to be employed to protect the surrounding area, and that there are no reasonable alternative locations for the use.

2.    All uses in the waterfront district are intended to be water-related or water-dependent except that upland uses may be non-water-related.

3.    Uses listed as conditional uses in the GI and LI zones may be considered, but not necessarily approved, on a case-by-case basis.

4.    When operated as a home occupation.

5.    Sport fishing lodges.

6.    Any waterborne aircraft approved through the conditional use process shall be restricted to those owned by the upland property owner or long-term lessee that are not used for commercial purposes. Waterborne aircraft shall also only be allowed on docks in a secure environment.

7.    The city requires liveaboards in R-1, R-2, SF, and related zones to meet the relevant liveaboard regulations that are required in the municipal harbor regulations under “liveaboards.”

8.    Waterborne aircraft that moor on docks on an ongoing basis are allowed as a permitted use on personal use and community personal use docks if they are solely used by the owners of the property and are solely used for noncommercial purposes. All nonprivate use of waterborne aircraft would require conditional use approval.

9.    Any uses except retail and business uses and natural resource extraction and mining support facilities uses may be approved in accordance with Section 2.38.080.

10.    All uses in the cemetery district are intended to be cemetery-related and conducted with reverence and respect for those interred.

Table 22.16.015-3 General Services Uses  

	ZONES	P(1)	SF	SFLD	R-1 (6)	R-1

MH (6)	R-1

LDMH (6)	R-2	R-2 MHP	CBD	C-1	C-2	WD(2)	I	GI(3)	LI(3)	R	OS	GP (8)	C (9)

	PERSONAL SERVICES

	•    General services	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	 	 	C	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Dry cleaning	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Industrial laundry	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	 	P	 	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Funeral home/crematorium	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	P	P	 	 	C	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Cemeteries/mausoleum	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	P

	•    Day care/kindergartens	P	 	 	P(6)	P(6)	P(6)	P(5)	P(5)	C	P(5)	P(5)	 	 	P	P	 	 	 	 

	•    Veterinary clinic	 	 	 	 	 	 	(7)	 	C	C	C	 	P	C	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Automotive repair	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	P	P	P	P	C	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Automotive service	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	P	P	P	P	C	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Miscellaneous repair	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	P	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Social service agencies	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	C	 	CU/*S	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Stable	C	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	 	 	PU/CS	 	C	 	 	 

	•    Kennel	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	 	C	P	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Bank	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	P	P	P	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Credit union	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	P	P	P	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Massage treatments	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	 	 

	HEALTH SERVICES

	•    Offices/outpatient clinic	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	P	P	P	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Hospital	C(4)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	P	P	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Medical/dental laboratory	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	P	P	P	 	P	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Marijuana testing facility	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	 	 	C	 

	•    Miscellaneous health facility	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	C	C	C	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	EDUCATIONAL SERVICES

	•    Elementary school	P	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	C	C	C	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Middle/junior high school	P	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	C	C	C	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Secondary/high school	P	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	C	C	C	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Vocational school	P	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	C	C	C	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Specialized instruction school	P	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	C	C	C	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    College/university	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	C	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    School district support facility (excluding bus barns)	P	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	C	P	P	 	P	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Auditorium	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	P: Public Lands District	C-1/C-2: General Commercial and General Commercial/ Mobile Home Districts

	SF: Single-Family District

	SFLD: Single-Family Low Density District	WD: Waterfront District

	R-1: Single-Family/Duplex District	I: Industrial District

	R-1 MH: Single-Family/Duplex/Manufactured Home District	GI: General Island District

	R-1 LDMH: Single-Family/Duplex and Single-Family/Manufactured Home Low Density Districts	LI: Large Island District

	R: Recreational District

	R-2: Multifamily District	OS: Open Space District

	R-2 MHP: Multifamily/Mobile Home District	GP: Gary Paxton Special District

	CBD: Central Business District	C: Cemetery District

P—Permitted

C—Conditional Use Permit Required

PU/CS—Permitted on Unsubdivided Islands and Conditional Use on Subdivided Islands

CU/*S—Conditional Use on Unsubdivided Islands and Prohibited on Subdivided Islands

E.    General Services Uses Table 22.16.015-3 Footnotes.

1.    Public facilities not otherwise identified may be permitted in the public zone subject to planning commission recommendation and assembly approval subject to findings of fact that show the use is in the public interest, all reasonable safeguards are to be employed to protect the surrounding area, and that there are no reasonable alternative locations for the use.

2.    All uses in the waterfront district are intended to be water-related or water-dependent except that upland uses may be non-water-related.

3.    Uses listed as conditional uses in the GI and LI zones may be considered, but not necessarily approved, on a case-by-case basis.

4.    Hospital buildings shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from all property lines.

5.    Establishments accommodating five or more children require state licenses and are conditional uses.

6.    Day cares with four children or less not related to the provider are a permitted use in owner occupied detached single-family dwellings in the R-1 and related zones.

    Day cares with four children or less not related to the provider are a conditional use in residential zero lot line dwellings in the R-1 and related zones. Day cares with four children or less not related to the provider are also a conditional use in two-family dwellings, that are constructed as duplex where each unit is of similar size, in the R-1 and related zones.

    Day cares are not allowed in apartments or similar dwelling units in R-1 or related zones.

    Day cares with five children or more not related to the provider are a conditional use, in owner occupied detached single-family dwellings only, in the R-1 and related zones.

7.    A replacement vet clinic in the 1200 block of Halibut Point Road as a substitute for the long standing historical use in the area is expressly authorized and shall be the only vet clinic allowed in an R-2 zone.

8.    Any uses, except retail and business uses, and natural resource extraction and mining support facilities uses may be approved in accordance with Section 2.38.080.

9.    All uses in the cemetery district are intended to be cemetery-related and conducted with reverence and respect for those interred.

Table 22.16.015-4 Public Facilities Uses  

	ZONES	P(1)	SF	SFLD	R-1	R-1 MH	R-1 LDMH	R-2	R-2 MHP	CBD	C-1	C-2	WD (2)	I	GI(3)	LI(3)	R	OS	GP (6)	C (8)

	GOVERNMENT SERVICES	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Public agency or utility office	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	C	 	 	 	PU/CS	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Public agency or utility service yard	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	P	P	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Public agency warehouse	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	P	P	C	C	 	 	 	 

	PUBLIC SERVICES

	Courts	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	 	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	Police station	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	Fire station	P	 	 	C	C	C	C	C	P	P	P	C	C	PU/CS	C	C	 	 	 

	Utility facilities (transformers, pump stations, etc.)	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	 	 

	Solid waste transfer facility	C(4)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	C	C	C	C	 	 	 	 

	Landfill	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	C	C	 	 	 

	Land clearing landfills	C	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Wastewater treatment plant	C	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	P	P	C	C	 	 	 	 

	Public water supply facility	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	C	C	P	 	 	 

	Public transportation facility/airport	C	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	C	P(5)	P	C	 	 	 	 	 

	Animal shelter	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	 	C	C	 	 	 	 	 

	Recycling facility	C	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Housing support facility (7)	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

 

	P: Public Lands District	C-1/C-2: General Commercial and General Commercial/ Mobile Home Districts

	SF: Single-Family District

	SFLD: Single-Family Low Density District	WD: Waterfront District

	R-1: Single-Family/Duplex District	I: Industrial District

	R-1 MH: Single-Family/Duplex/Manufactured Home District	GI: General Island District

	R-1 LDMH: Single-Family/Duplex and Single-Family/Manufactured Home Low Density Districts	LI: Large Island District

	R: Recreational District

	R-2: Multifamily District	OS: Open Space District

	R-2 MHP: Multifamily/Mobile Home District	GP: Gary Paxton Special District

	CBD: Central Business District	C: Cemetery District

P—Permitted

C—Conditional Use Permit Required

PU/CS—Permitted on Unsubdivided Islands and Conditional Use on Subdivided Islands

F.    Public Facilities Uses Table 22.16.015-4 Footnotes.

1.    Public facilities not otherwise identified may be permitted in the public zone subject to planning commission recommendation and assembly approval subject to findings of fact that show the use is in the public interest, all reasonable safeguards are to be employed to protect the surrounding area, and that there are no reasonable alternative locations for the use.

2.    All uses in the waterfront district are intended to be water-related or water-dependent except that upland uses may be non-water-related.

3.    Uses listed as conditional uses in the GI and LI zones may be considered, but not necessarily approved, on a case-by-case basis.

4.    Minimum site area is twenty acres.

5.    Ferry terminals, barge freight terminals, docks, and harbor facilities including float plane facilities, fueling piers and tank farms, and other port facilities are permitted principal uses subject to planning commission review and public hearing and assembly approval of a binding site plan.

6.    Any uses, except retail and business uses, and natural resource extraction and mining support facilities uses may be approved in accordance with Section 2.38.080.

7.    In which the primary purpose of the support facility is to support and maintain housing-related programs in the immediate area.

8.    All uses in the cemetery district are intended to be cemetery-related and conducted with reverence and respect for those interred.

 

Table 22.16.015-5 Manufacturing/Storage Uses  

	ZONES	P(1)	SF	SFLD	R-1	R-1 MH	R-1 LDMH	R-2	R-2 MHP	CBD	C-1	C-2	WD(2)	I(3)	GI(4)	LI(4)	R	OS	GP (7)	C (8)

	MANUFACTURING

	•    Food products include seafood processing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	P	P	C	C	C	 	 	 

	•    Mariculture	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Winery/brewery, small scale	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	C	P	P	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Textile mill products	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	P	P	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Apparel and textile products	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	P	P	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Wood products, except furniture	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	P	P	PU/CS	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Furniture and fixtures	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	P	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Paper and allied products	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	P	P	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Petroleum refining and related products	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	P	P	 	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Rubber and plastics products	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	P	P	 	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Leather and leather goods	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Tannery	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Stone, clay, glass and concrete products	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	P	P	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Primary metal products	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	P	P	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Asphalt plant/concrete batch plant	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Fabricated metal products	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	P	P	C	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Industrial and commercial machinery	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	P	P	 	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Heavy machinery and equipment	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	P	P	 	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Computer and office equipment	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Electronic and electric equipment	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	PU/CS	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Miscellaneous vehicle manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	P	P	C	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Boat building	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	P(5)	P	C	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Tire retreading	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	P	P	 	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Other manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	P	P(6)	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Marijuana cultivation facility	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	 	 	C	 

	•    Marijuana cultivation facility, limited	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	 	 	C	 

	•    Marijuana product manufacturing facility	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	 	 	C	 

	•    Marijuana product manufacturing facility, extract only	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	 	 	C	 

	STORAGE AND WAREHOUSING	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Marine equipment/ commercial fishing gear/material storage	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	PU/CS	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Boat storage	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	 	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Construction materials storage 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	P	C	C	C	 	 	 

	•    Trucking, courier and taxi service facilities	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P(5)	P	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Warehousing and wholesale trade	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P(5)	P	C	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Self-service storage	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	P	C	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Log storage	C      	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	P	P	C	 	P	 	 	 

	•    Freight and cargo services	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P(5)	P	C	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Equipment rental services	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	C	C	P	P	C	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Vehicle rental services	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	P	C	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Natural resource extraction and mining support facilities	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	C	C	 	 	C	 

	•    Storage of explosives	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Bulk fuel storage	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	P: Public Lands District	C-1/C-2: General Commercial and General Commercial/ Mobile Home Districts

	SF: Single-Family District

	SFLD: Single-Family Low Density District	WD: Waterfront District

	R-1: Single-Family/Duplex District	I: Industrial District

	R-1 MH: Single-Family/Duplex/Manufactured Home District	GI: General Island District

	R-1 LDMH: Single-Family/Duplex and Single-Family/Manufactured Home Low Density Districts	LI: Large Island District

	R: Recreational District

	R-2: Multifamily District	OS: Open Space District

	R-2 MHP: Multifamily/Mobile Home District	GP: Gary Paxton Special District

	CBD: Central Business District	C: Cemetery District

P—Permitted

C—Conditional Use Permit Required

PU/CS—Permitted on Unsubdivided Islands and Conditional Use on Subdivided Islands

G.    Manufacturing/Storage Uses Table 22.16.015-5 Footnotes.

1.    Public facilities not otherwise identified may be permitted in the public zone subject to planning commission recommendation and assembly approval subject to findings of fact that show the use is in the public interest, all reasonable safeguards are to be employed to protect the surrounding area, and that there are no reasonable alternative locations for the use.

2.    All uses in the waterfront district are intended to be water-related or water-dependent except that upland uses may be non-water-related.

3.    No industrial use shall be of a nature which is noxious or injurious to nearby properties by reason of smoke, emission of dust, refuse matter, odor, gases, fumes, noise, vibration or similar conditions.

4.    Uses listed as conditional uses in the GI and LI zones may be considered, but not necessarily approved, on a case-by-case basis.

5.    Ferry terminals, barge freight terminals, docks and harbor facilities including float plane facilities, fueling piers and tank farms and other port facilities are permitted principal uses subject to planning commission review and public hearing and assembly approval of a binding site plan.

6.    Automobile wrecking yards, salvage yards, and junkyards are conditional uses and shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet from property lines and be enclosed by fences a minimum of eight feet in height. The setback area may be used for customer parking but not for vehicle storage.

7.    Any uses, except retail and business uses, and natural resource extraction and mining support facilities uses may be approved in accordance with Section 2.38.080.

8.    All uses in the cemetery district are intended to be cemetery-related and conducted with reverence and respect for those interred.

Table 22.16.015-6 Retail and Business Uses  

	ZONES	P(1)	SF	SFLD	R-1	R-1 MH	R-1 LDMH	R-2	R-2 MHP	CBD (8)	C-1	C-2	WD(2)	I(3)	GI(4)	LI(4)	R	OS	GP	C (10)

	RETAIL USES

	•    Building, hardware and garden materials	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	 	P	C	C	 	 	P	 

	•    Bulk forest products sales	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	P	P	 	 	 	P	 

	•    Retail forest products sales	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	 	 	 	 	C	 

	•    Art galleries and sales of art	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Department and variety stores	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P(5)	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Food stores	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P(5)	 	C	C	C(6)	 	C	 

	•    Agricultural product sales	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	 	P	C	C	 	 	P	 

	•    Motor vehicle and boat dealers	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P(7)	P	P	P(5)	 	C	 	 	 	P	 

	•    Auto supply stores	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	 	 	C	C	 	 	P	 

	•    Gasoline service stations	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	P	P	 	P	C	C	 	 	C	 

	•    Apparel and accessory stores	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P(5)	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Furniture and home furnishing stores	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	 	 	C	 	 	 	C	 

	•    Eating and drinking places	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	C	PU/ CS	C	 	 	C	 

	•    Drug stores	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Liquor stores	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P(5)	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Used goods, secondhand stores	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P(5)	 	C	C	 	 	C	 

	•    Sporting goods	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P(5)	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Book, stationery, video and art supply	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P(5)	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Jewelry stores	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P(5)	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Monuments, tombstones and gravestones	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	 	P	C	C	 	 	P	 

	•    Hobby, toy, game stores	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Photographic and electronic stores	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P(5)	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Fabric stores	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Fuel dealers	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	 	P	C	C	 	 	C	 

	•    Florists	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Medical supply stores	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Pet shops	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Sales of goods that are wholly manufactured at Gary Paxton industrial park GPIP	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 

	•    Sales of gifts, souvenirs and promotional materials that bear the logo or trade name of a GPIP permitted use business	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 

	•    Stand alone souvenir and gift shops	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	•    Bulk retail	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	 

	•    Commercial home horticulture	P	C	C	C(9)	C(9)	 	C(9)	C(9)	P	P	P	P	 	PU/ CS(9)	C(9)	P	P	 	 

	•    Horticulture and related structures	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	 	 	 	 	 	P	 

	•    Marijuana retail facility	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	 	 	C	 

	BUSINESS SERVICES	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 

	•    General business services	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P(5)	P	C	C	 	 	C	 

	•    Professional offices	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	P	P	P	P(5)	 	C	C	 	 	P	 

	•    Communications services	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P(5)	 	C	C	 	 	P	 

	•    Research and development services	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	P	P	C(5)	P	C	C	 	 	P	 

	P: Public Lands District	C-1/C-2: General Commercial and General Commercial/ Mobile Home Districts

	SF: Single-Family District

	SFLD: Single-Family Low Density District	WD: Waterfront District

	R-1: Single-Family/Duplex District	I: Industrial District

	R-1 MH: Single-Family/Duplex/Manufactured Home District	GI: General Island District

	R-1 LDMH: Single-Family/Duplex and Single-Family/Manufactured Home Low Density Districts	LI: Large Island District

	R: Recreational District

	R-2: Multifamily District	OS: Open Space District

	R-2 MHP: Multifamily/Mobile Home District	GP: Gary Paxton Special District

	CBD: Central Business District	C: Cemetery District

P—Permitted

C—Conditional Use Permit Required

PU/CS—Permitted on Unsubdivided Islands and Conditional Use on Subdivided Islands

H.    Retail and Business Uses Table 22.16.015-6 Footnotes.

1.    Public facilities not otherwise identified may be permitted in the public zone subject to planning commission recommendation and assembly approval subject to findings of fact that show the use is in the public interest, all reasonable safeguards are to be employed to protect the surrounding area, and that there are no reasonable alternative locations for the use.

2.    All uses in the waterfront district are intended to be water-related or water-dependent except that upland uses may be non-water-related.

3.    No industrial use shall be of a nature which is noxious or injurious to nearby properties by reason of smoke, emission of dust, refuse matter, odor, gases, fumes, noise, vibration or similar conditions.

4.    Uses listed as conditional uses in the GI and LI zones may be considered, but not necessarily approved, on a case-by-case basis.

5.    When associated with a water-related principal use.

6.    Small scale convenience stores subordinate to principal permitted uses.

7.    Motor vehicles and boat dealers permitted on a short-term basis.

8.    Kiosks, outdoor restaurants, portable structures such as food stands and other temporary structures that are clearly incidental to the primary use on the lot are permitted uses. Mobile food carts on wheels are permitted uses on private property. Kiosks, outdoor restaurants, portable structures such as food stands and other temporary structures that are not clearly incidental to the primary use on the lot are conditional uses.

9.    Commercial home horticulture conditional use permits governed by Section 22.24.025.

10.    All uses in the cemetery district are intended to be cemetery-related and conducted with reverence and respect for those interred.

(Ord. 19-15 § 4 (part), 2019; Ord. 16-14 § 4, 2016; Ord. 16-11 § 4 (part), 2016; Ord. 15-42 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 15-08 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 14-38A § 6, 2014; Ord. 14-21 § 4 (part), 2014; Ord. 13-14A § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 12-31A §§ 4(E), (F), 2012; Ord. 11-34 § 4, 2011; Ord. 11-31 § 4, 2011; Ord. 11-04S § 4(A), 2011; Ord. 10-32 § 4, 2010; Ord. 10-12 § 4 (part), 2010; Ord. 09-78 § 4, 2010; Ord. 09-51 §§ 4(A), (B), (D), 2009; Ord. 08-44 § 4,

2008; Ord. 08-30 § 4, 2008; Ord. 07-08 § 4 (part), 2007; Ord. 06-24 § 4, 2006; Ord. 06-09 § 4, 2006; Ord. 06-06 § 4(A), (B), (G), (H), (I), 2006; Ord. 05-47 § 4(B), 2005; Ord. 05-16 § 4(A), (B), (C), (D), (E), (F), (G), (H), (I), (J), (K), (L), (M), (N), 2005; Ord. 05-09 § 4(A), 2005; Ord. 05-03 § 4(A), 2005; Ord. 04-60 § 4(A), (B), (E), (I), (O), (P), (Q), (V), 2004; Ord. 03-1750 § 4 (part), 2003; Ord. 03-1746 § 4 (part), 2003; Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.16.016 Accessory uses.

A.    Intent. Certain uses are incidental and supportive of the principal use. These are indicated for each zoning district in the following table.

Table 22.16.016-1 

Accessory Uses  

	PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES	ZONES

	Accessory buildings such as garages and sheds	All zones

	Required automobile parking in conjunction with permitted principal or conditional uses	All zones

	Off-street parking for one commercial truck or van used for commuting	All residential zones

	Required loading facilities	All zones

	Utility installations except solid waste disposal facilities and water storage dams	All zones

	Home occupations as defined by Section 22.20.060	All residential zones

	Private outside storage of small noncommercial trucks, boats, recreational vehicles in required setbacks no closer than five feet to the property line	All residential zones

	Parks, playgrounds and open space for informal recreation 	All residential zones

	Accessory uses incidental to any permitted use	All nonresidential zones

	One small private recreational cabin per lot in addition to the single principal structure	GI, LI and OS zones

	One single unit watchman or caretaker dwelling	P and I zones

	Boardwalks	R zone

(Ord. 06-06 § 4(F), 2006; Ord. 03-1750 § 4 (part), 2003; Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.16.020 P public lands district.

A.    Intent. The public lands district is intended to contain government-owned lands or lands owned by nonprofit institutions serving the public interest which are utilized for public recreation, education or institutional uses.

B.    Return of Land to Public Domain. Should any such land be sold or returned to the public domain, the zoning classification of the adjacent property having the most restricted classification shall be imposed.

(Ord. 04-60 § 4(H), 2004.)


22.16.030 SF/SFLD single-family residential and single-family low density residential districts.

A.    Intent.

1.    The SF/SFLD districts are intended to include lands suited by topography and other natural conditions for urban development and which are provided with a full range of public utilities including sewer, water, electricity and storm drains or are intended to be provided with such utilities in the near future.

2.    The SF/SFLD districts are very restrictive districts and may also be utilized as holding districts for lands which are located within the urban area but are not presently served by access or utilities until such time as a full-scale development plan can be adopted to allow a more permanent zoning district designation.

3.    For the SFLD, all provisions of the SF district shall apply except that the minimum lot size shall be fifteen thousand square feet.

4.    This district is intended for areas where the lack of utilities or topography makes increased density undesirable.

B.    Prohibited Uses. Short-term rentals are prohibited in SF and SFLD districts. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.16.035 R-1 LDMH single-family or duplex low density or single-family low density manufactured home district.

A.    Intent.

1.    All provisions of the R-1 or R-1 MH district shall apply except that the minimum lot size shall be fifteen thousand square feet.

2.    The minimum lot size for zero lot line developments in this zone shall be seven thousand five hundred square feet. 

(Ord. 10-12 § 4 (part), 2010; Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.16.040 R-1 single-family and duplex residential district.

A.    Intent. The R-1 district is intended to include lands suited by topography and other natural conditions for urban development and which are provided with a full range of public utilities including sewer, water, electricity and storm drains or are intended to be provided with such utilities in the near future.

1.    This district is intended primarily for single-family or duplex residential dwellings at moderate densities, but structures and uses required to serve recreational and other public needs of residential areas are allowed as conditional uses subject to restrictions intended to preserve the residential character of the R-1 district.

2.    The R-1 district, as it is a very restrictive district, may also be utilized as a holding district for lands which are located within the urban area but are not presently served by access or utilities until such time as a full-scale development plan can be adopted to allow a more permanent zoning district designation.

B.    Signs may be allowed in conjunction with any permitted use subject to the provisions of Chapter 22.20 of this title. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.16.045 R-1 MH single-family, duplex and manufactured home zoning district.

A.    Intent. See the intent statement for the R-1 district. The R-1 MH district is intended primarily for single-family, single-family manufactured homes or duplex dwellings, at moderate densities, but structures and uses required to serve recreational and other public needs of residential areas are allowed as conditional uses subject to restrictions intended to preserve the residential character of the R-1 MH district. 

(Ord. 10-12 § 4 (part), 2010; Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.16.050 R-2 multifamily residential district.

A.    Intent. The R-2 residential district is intended to include lands suited by topography and other natural conditions for urban development and which are provided with the full range of public utilities, including sewers, water, electricity, and storm drains or are intended to be provided with such utilities in the near future. This district is intended primarily for single-family and multiple-family residences at moderately high population densities. Structures required to serve governmental, educational, recreational, religious and limited professional office needs are allowed subject to permitted or conditional use restrictions intended to preserve and protect the residential character of the R-2 district.

B.    Open Space. Open or play space shall be provided in all R-2 residential projects. The amount of allowable space shall be reviewed in consultation with the planning staff and planning commission but in any case shall not be less than one hundred square feet per dwelling unit, must have a barrier, and be fenced or separated so as to not be used for other purposes, such as parking, storage, etc. In large projects, exceeding twelve units, a minimum of at least one thousand square feet shall be set aside for recreational purposes. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.16.060 R-2 MHP multifamily and mobile home district.

A.    Intent. All provisions of the R-2 district shall apply except that permitted principal uses shall include mobile home parks. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.16.070 CBD central business district.

A.    Intent. The central business district is designed specifically for concentrated retail, personal and business services of all kinds satisfying all residents in one central location. It should further prohibit exclusive residential or industrial uses which would interfere with the development and continuation of its cohesive business purposes. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.16.080 C-1 general commercial district or C-2 general commercial mobile home district.

A.    Intent. The general commercial district is intended to be served by major essential utilities and to include those areas which are heavily dependent upon vehicular access. The district is intended for those areas surrounding major intersections where personal services, convenience goods and auto-related service facilities are desirable and appropriate land uses. The extension of the general commercial district along the roads in a strip fashion is to be discouraged.

B.    All provisions of the C-1 district apply in the C-2 district, except that permitted uses also include manufactured homes on single lots and manufactured home parks. 

(Ord. 10-12 § 4 (part), 2010; Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.16.100 WD waterfront district.

A.    Intent. The waterfront district is intended to be applied to lands with direct access or close proximity to navigable tidal waters within the urban area of the city and borough. Uses are intended whenever possible to be water-dependent or water-related with particular emphasis on commerce, tourism, commercial or industrial enterprises which derive major economic or social benefit from a waterfront location. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.16.110 I industrial district.

A.    Intent. The industrial district is intended for industrial or heavier commercial uses including warehousing, wholesale and distribution operations, manufacturing, natural resource extraction, contractors’ yards and other such uses that require larger property or larger water and sewer services. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.16.120 GI general island district.

A.    Intent. The general island district is intended to replace the open general district. One of its goals is to protect the residential character of small subdivided islands while providing for commercial uses on small unsubdivided islands. The zoning district lines are intended to, whenever feasible, include unsubdivided islands of modest size and islands containing six lots or less. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.16.135 LI large island district.

A.    Intent. The large island district is intended to replace the open rural low density district. Its goals include protecting the residential character of the larger subdivided islands. It is intended to cover islands such as Middle Island, Long Island, and Galankin. Islands with seven lots or more may be included in this zone. An objective of this zone is to have developments served by access easements built to a defined standard and to have potential moorage areas identified. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.16.150 R recreation district.

A.    Intent. The recreation district is intended to contain both public and private lands to be used for recreation purposes. Lands designated for this district should be evaluated for long-term public benefits to accrue from the protection offered by this designation. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.16.160 OS open space zone.

A.    Intent. The intent of this zone is to serve as a holding zone for large islands or tracts for which specific plans have not been established.

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.16.170 GP Gary Paxton special zone.

A.    Intent. The Gary Paxton special zone is intended to apply to the Gary Paxton industrial park and the associated tidelands portions and adjacent municipal tracts as defined by the zoning maps. It provides development flexibility for this unique site by allowing many uses that are permitted in both the waterfront and industrial zoning districts. 

(Ord. 14-21 § 4 (part), 2014: Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.16.180 C cemetery district. 

A.    Intent. The cemetery district is intended to contain land used for cemeteries and limited accessory uses. All uses in the cemetery district are intended to be cemetery-related and conducted with reverence and respect for those interred. This a highly restrictive district.

(Ord. 19-15 § 4 (part), 2019.)


Chapter 22.20 SUPPLEMENTAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  

Sections:

22.20.010    Application of supplementary regulations.

22.20.020    Use of land and buildings.

22.20.030    Classification of new and unlisted uses.  

22.20.035    Notes to Table 22.20-1. 

22.20.038    Residential demolition guarantee.

22.20.040    Yards and setbacks.

22.20.045    As-built requirements.

22.20.050    Building height.

22.20.055    Communications antennas and towers.

22.20.060    Permitted home occupations.

22.20.070    Fences, walls and hedges.

22.20.080    Visibility at intersections.

22.20.085    Lighting.

22.20.090    Signs.

22.20.100    Off-street parking requirements.

22.20.110    Off-street loading requirements.

22.20.120    Mail delivery.

22.20.130    Large domestic animals.

22.20.150    Short-term rentals.

22.20.160    Accessory dwelling units (ADUs).


22.20.010 Application of supplementary regulations.

In addition to regulations indicated for individual districts in Chapter 22.16 of this code, the regulations in this chapter apply to individual districts, groups of districts and all districts as indicated. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.20.020 Use of land and buildings.

Subject to the provisions of Chapter 22.30 of this code, no land or buildings will be used, erected, altered or converted which are arranged or designed or used for other than those uses specified for the district in which they are located, as set forth in Chapter 22.16, District Regulations. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.20.030 Classification of new and unlisted uses.  

Addition of uses which are not defined or regulated by this title shall be made by the following process:

A.    The administrator shall provide the planning commission with a staff report describing the proposed use addition in the form of an amendment to this title.

B.    The planning commission shall hold a public hearing and, subject to its review, shall recommend an appropriate code amendment to the assembly.

C.    Unless the assembly takes action otherwise within thirty days of the planning commission recommendation, the recommended amendment shall take effect. 

(Ord. 11-04S § 4(B) (part), 2011: Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)

Table 22.20-1 Development Standards(2) 

	 	MINIMUM LOT REQUIREMENTS	MINIMUM SETBACKS	MAXIMUM HEIGHTS(18)	MAXIMUM

BUILDING

COVERAGE	MAXIMUM DENSITY

	ZONES	Width	Area(1, 17)	Front(3)	Rear	Side	Principal Structures	Accessory Structures	 	 

	P	(4)	(4)	20 ft.	15 ft.	10 ft.	40 ft.	16 ft.	35%	 

	SF	80 ft.	6,000 s.f.	14 ft.(8)	8 ft.(9)	5/9 ft.(19)	35 ft.(10)	16 ft.	50%	 

	SFLD	80 ft.	15,000 s.f.	20 ft.(8)	20 ft.(9)	15 ft.	35 ft.(10)	16 ft.	35%	 

	R-1(6)	80 ft.	6,000 s.f.	14 ft.(8)	8 ft.(9)	5/9 ft.(19)	35 ft.(10)	16 ft.	50%	 

	R-1 MH(6)	80 ft.	6,000 s.f.	14 ft.(8)	8 ft.(9)	5/9 ft.(19)	35 ft.(10)	16 ft.	50%	 

	R-1 LD/ LDMH	80 ft.	15,000 s.f.(5)	20 ft.(8)	20 ft.(9)	15 ft.	35 ft.(10)	16 ft.	35%	 

	R-2(6)	80 ft.	6,000 s.f. for the first two units and 1,000 s.f. for each additional unit	14 ft.(8)	8 ft.(9)	5/9 ft.(19)	40 ft.	16 ft.	50%	Maximum density = 24 DU/A

	R-2 MHP(6)	80 ft.	Same as R-2	14 ft.(8)	8 ft.(9)	5/9 ft.(19)	40 ft.	16 ft.	50%	Same as R-2

	CBD(16)	None	None(7)	(11)	(11)	(11)	50 ft.	16 ft.	None	 

	C-1(6)	60 ft.	6,000 s.f.(7)	14 ft.(8)	8 ft.	5 ft.	40 ft.	16 ft.	None, except for setback areas	 

	C-2(6)	60 ft.	6,000 s.f.(7)	14 ft.(8)	8 ft.	5 ft.	40 ft.	16 ft.	Same as C-1	 

	WD(6)	60 ft.	6,000 s.f.(7)	14 ft.(8, 12)	5 ft.(12)	10 

5/9 ft.(12, 19)	40 ft.	16 ft.	Same as C-1	 

	GP	50 ft.	5,000 s.f.	10 ft.	5 ft.(12)	10 ft.(12)	50 ft.	50 ft.	Same as C-1	 

	I	100 ft.	15,000 s.f.	20 ft.(8)	10 ft.	5 ft.	40 ft.	16 ft.	50%(13)	 

	LI	None	1 acre(14)	None(15)	None(15)	None(15)	35 ft.	35 ft.	25%	 

	GI	None	1 acre	None(15)	None(15)	None(15)	35 ft.	35 ft.	None	 

	R	 	 	20 ft.	10 ft.	5 ft.	35 ft.	20 ft.	50%	 

	OS	None	1 acre	None(15)	None(15)	None(15)	35 ft.	35 ft.	None(15)	 

	C	None	None	15 ft.	10 ft.	10 ft.	35 ft.	35 ft.	None, except for setback areas	 

(Ord. 19-16A § 4 (part), 2019: Ord. 19-15 § 4 (part), 2019; Ord. 13-14A § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 11-04S § 4(B) (part), 2011; Ord. 06-06 § 4(C), 2006; Ord. 03-1746 § 4 (part), 2003; Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.20.035 Notes to Table 22.20-1. 

1.    Minimum lot area net of access easements.

2.    All developed lots and parcels shall have access to a public street and circulation within the development to ensure adequate vehicular circulation for parking, freight, and emergency vehicles. Where lots or parcels do not front on and have direct access to streets, a minimum twenty-foot improved driveway with a minimum of a twelve-foot wide developed driveable surface on a legal easement shall provide access between the subject development and the street. 

3.    Front setbacks apply to all lot lines adjacent a public street. Corner lots have two front setbacks.

4.    As determined by the specific use and its parking and loading requirements.

5.    Duplex shall have a minimum of twelve thousand square feet of lot area per unit. 

6.    Zero lot line lots shall be a minimum of seven thousand five hundred feet in area.

    Additional Note: The minimum square footages for each unit of a zero lot line shall be as follows:

    R-1 and R-1 MH	3,000 sq. ft.

    R-1 LD and R-1 LDMH	7,500 sq. ft.

    R-2 and R-2 MHP	3,000 sq. ft.

    C-1, C-2 and WD	3,000 sq. ft.

    Zero lot lines may be allowed on existing lots of record in the R-1 and R-1 MH zones with square footages less than above if the planning commission finds that there is adequate density and parking.

7.    Minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be six thousand square feet for one- and two-family dwellings with an additional one thousand square feet for each additional dwelling unit.

8.    Front yard setback shall be ten feet when lots abutting street rights-of-way are equal to or greater than eighty feet.

9.    Residential docks are exempt from rear yard setback.

10.    Building height as defined by Section 22.20.050.

11.    Subject to site plan approval.

12.    No setbacks are required from property lines of adjacent filled, intertidal, or submerged tidelands.

13.    Additional building coverage may be permitted subject to site plan approval. 

14.    Unless the subject use occupies the entire island.

15.    Where island lots share common property lines, the minimum setback shall be fifteen feet.

16.    A five-foot setback shall be along any property line abutting a public street, alley, or deed access easement. The purpose of this setback shall be to assure that sidewalks, curb and gutter, power pole locations, or other public necessities can be accommodated.

17.    Lot size variances may be allowed for subdivisions that include sidewalks or pathways.

18.    Accessory dwelling units in residential zones shall be limited to a maximum height of twenty-five feet or the height of the existing principal dwelling unit on the property whichever is less.

19.    The split side setback is to allow a property developer to select a larger side setback on one side of the property in order to provide for parking on that side.

(Ord. 19-16A § 4 (part), 2019: Ord. 13-14A § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 06-06 § 4(C), 2006; Ord. 03-1746 § 4 (part), 2003; Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.20.038 Residential demolition guarantee.

Two residential structures may be allowed on one lot in an R-1 and R-2 or related zone upon the execution of a binding financial guarantee that insures and provides a vehicle for the demolition and removal of the older residence at the owner’s expense. Residential demolition guarantees may be permitted in single-family SF and related zone if approved through the conditional use process. (Ord. 13-34 § 4, 2013: Ord. 06-06 § 4(D), 2006; Ord. 03-1746 § 4 (part), 2003.)

Table 22.20-2 Access and Road Development Requirements for Minor Subdivisions

	Minimum Lot Size	Single-Family/

Duplex/

Zero Lot Line	Bed and Breakfast 5 Guest Rooms or Less	Triplex and Above	Bed and Breakfast Over 5 Guest Rooms	Lodge	Retail	Office with 3 or More Nonfamily Employees

	R-1 and related zones	8,000 s.f.	8,000 s.f.	N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A

	R-2 and related zones	8,000 s.f.	8,000 s.f.	9,000 s.f. + 1,000 addition	N/A	N/A	N/A	Conditional use

	Low density zones	15,000 s.f.	N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A

	Commercial zones	6,000 s.f.	6,000 s.f.	6,000 s.f. + 1,000 addition	6,000 s.f.	6,000 s.f.	6,000 s.f.	6,000 s.f.

	Minimum Road Development Requirements for Primary Roads in Easements

	Basic minimum:

    Width—20 ft.

    Room for drainage

    No maximum grade

	Options for Road Development for Multifamily and Commercial Structures in All Zones (developers can choose which standard to use)

	1. Width—20 ft. or more

    Room for drainage

    Developed lanes—one 10 ft. wide driving lane

    Maximum grade—15%

	2. Lane/grade trade-off option:

    Up to 18% grade with 1-1/2 driving lanes (15 ft. driveable surface with additional room for drainage easement)

	3. Development to public right-of-way standard

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.20.040 Yards and setbacks.

The following regulations supplement, define and restrict the meaning of the intent of yard and setback provisions set forth in this chapter:

A.    Projections into Required Yards. Where yards are required as setbacks, they shall be open and unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure from thirty inches above the general ground level of the graded lot upward; provided, however, that fences, boundary walls, poles, posts and other customary yard accessories, ornaments and furniture may be permitted in any yard subject to height limitations and requirements limiting obstruction visibility. Obstructions shall include cantilevered stairs and exits, as well as eaves and roofed entrances. Ramps are considered allowable structures in required yards if they:

1.    Are designed to provide access to a road, sidewalk, or driveway for disabled persons.

2.    Have a slope or grade that can be traversed by disabled persons in wheelchairs.

3.    Have a railing consistent with American/Disabilities Act (ADA) standards.

4.    Do not include an arctic entry or other extension of the building that encroaches into the yard in a manner that violates the other provisions of this title.

B.    Adjoining Lease Tidelands. Yard setback requirements of leased tidelands shall be measured from the limits of the leased area. If, at the end of the lease term, the leaseholder should not renew the lease, then any nonconforming structures shall be removed unless the tidelands are brought under the control of the municipality or a new lessee, at which time conformance to normal yard and setback requirements shall be required.

C.    Residential Lots in Common Ownership. An owner of contiguous or adjacent lots may combine those lots if approved by the planning director into one parcel, thereby measuring lot coverage and setbacks from the outside boundaries of the new combined lot. The impact of the use or number of residential units shall not exceed those previously allowed on a single parcel. In cases where these impacts may be greater than originally intended, the planning director may refer the matter to the board of adjustment for further review under the provisions of Section 22.24.020. Should the property owner revoke the merger either by a declaration of merger or by conveyance of one or more of the affected lots, setback and coverage requirements will again be measured from and by the original boundaries.

D.    Zero lot line single-family detached residential developments are permitted as planned unit developments under Title 21 of this code subject to site plan review. In this type of development, the dwelling unit is permitted to be located at one of the side property lines of the lot. The other side of the dwelling is required to be separated from the adjacent lot by a side yard equal to or greater in width than the combined side yard requirements of the zone. Provisions for front and rear yard setbacks as required by the zone shall be observed, further:

1.    An easement shall be provided on the abutting lot adjacent to each zero lot building that is wide enough to ensure a ten-foot separation between the walls of structures on adjoining lots, except as provided by common wall construction;

2.    The easement shall be free of permanent structures and other obstructions that would prevent normal repair and maintenance of the structure’s exterior;

3.    Buildings utilizing reduced setbacks shall not have doors that open directly onto the private yards of abutting property. Windows in such buildings shall not be oriented toward such private yard areas unless they consist of materials such as glass block, textured glass, or other translucent materials, and shall not be capable of being opened, except for clerestory windows or skylights; 

4.    The final plat and site plan shall show the approximate location of buildings proposed to be placed in a standard setback area. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.20.045 As-built requirements.

As-built surveys may be required through the building permit approval process, consistent with municipal policies, to verify the requirements of this code. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.20.050 Building height.

A.    Building height shall be measured from the average finished grade to the highest point of the roof. The average grade shall be determined by first drawing the smallest square or rectangle which encloses the building profile and then averaging the grade elevations taken at the midpoint of each side of the square or rectangle; provided, that the measured elevations do not include berms. Figure 22.20.050 below illustrates this method. The administrator or his designee shall have the authority to determine the maximum allowable height of a structure for buildings with unusual designs with the owner retaining the right of appeal to the planning commission and the assembly in accordance with Chapter 22.30, Article VI.

Figure 22.20.050 Building Height Measurement


[IMAGE]


B.    Exempted Structures. Roof structures for the housing of fire- or smokestacks, tanks, ventilating fans required to operate and maintain the building and other necessary mechanical equipment may be erected above the permitted height provided nothing increases or provides additional floor space. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.20.055 Communications antennas and towers.

Communications antennas and towers are permitted accessory uses within the R-1, R-1 MH, R-1 LDMH, R-2 and R-2 MHP zoning districts as long as the tower or antenna does not exceed the allowable height of structures allowed within the specific district. If ground-mounted, guy wires shall not exceed the property on which the antenna/tower is located. In all cases, towers and antennas shall be structurally sound and properly constructed. Any request for a tower or antenna exceeding the height limits of the zoning district shall require a variance. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.20.060 Permitted home occupations.

Occupations conducted within a dwelling unit shall be permitted accessory uses in the districts specified under Chapter 22.16; provided, that:

A.    The use of the dwelling unit for purposes of a home occupation is clearly incidental to its primary purposes as a residence. The occupation shall be conducted solely by the resident of the unit. Examples of home occupations include cosmetic or other catalog sales, custom work for sale at a proper retail location, dressmaking, massage therapists, beauty salons, music teacher, jewelry manufacturing, pottery and art products. Beauty salons are limited to only one chair.

B.    No home occupation is to generate traffic in greater volume than would be customarily found in a dwelling or create noise, glare, vibration, fumes, odors or electrical disturbance detectable off the lot in which it is conducted.

C.    There shall be no modifications to the exterior of the building or premises or other major visible evidence of the conduct of a home occupation other than the one sign no larger than two square feet in area as permitted in Section 22.20.090. 

D.    It shall not utilize over twenty percent of the floor area of principal structures located along the road system. Up to fifty percent of the floor area of principal structures may be utilized for properties in the GI and LI zones with allowances for that percentage to be exceeded on an occasional basis as long as adjacent properties are not adversely impacted. 

(Ord. 12-31A § 4(H), 2012: Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.20.070 Fences, walls and hedges.

Property line fences and walls not exceeding eight feet in height may occupy any portion of a yard in residential districts except as provided in Section 22.20.080; and also provided, that such fence, wall or hedge projecting forward of the front yard setback line shall not obstruct visibility of the residence from the street. Fences in the public, commercial, and industrial districts may be no greater than twenty feet in height. Maximum fence height in the C-2 general commercial and mobile home district is eight feet. (Ord. 05-03 § 4(B), 2005; Ord. 04-60 § 4(N), 2004.)


22.20.080 Visibility at intersections.

On corner lots, no fence, wall or hedge or other planting or structure that will impede visibility between a height of two feet six inches and eight feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets shall be erected, planted, placed or maintained. On-street parking within thirty feet of any intersection is prohibited. If the relationship of the surface of a corner lot to the street is such that visibility is already impaired, nothing shall be done to increase the impediment to visibility within the thirty feet mentioned above. 

Figure 22.20.080 Intersection Visibility
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.20.085 Lighting.

Exterior lighting of nonresidential uses shall be controlled so as not to shine on or adversely impact adjacent properties, uses, or vehicular or pedestrian traffic. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.20.090 Signs.

A.    Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to enhance the visual environment of the municipality by establishing standards that regulate the type, number, location, size, and lighting of signs; recognizing the private purposes of signs for the identification of businesses and promotion of products and services; and recognizing the public purposes of signs which includes considerations of traffic safety, economic and aesthetic welfare. 

B.     In all cases, signs shall be located so as not to obstruct pedestrian or vehicular visibility. Maintaining visibility may require that signs be placed farther back from the property lines than otherwise allowed below.

C.    Exempt Signs. The following signs or displays are exempted from the regulations under this chapter:

1.    Historic site markers or plaques, gravestones, and address numbers;

2.    Signs required by law, including but not limited to official or legal notices issued and posted by any public agency or court, or traffic directional or warning signs;

3.    Plaques, tablets or inscriptions indicating the name of a building, date of erection, or other commemorative information, which are an integral part of the building structure or are attached flat to the face of the building, which are nonilluminated, and which do not exceed four square feet in surface area;

4.    Incidental signs, which shall not exceed two square feet in surface area; provided, that said size limitation shall not apply to signs providing directions, warnings or information when established and maintained by a public agency;

5.    State or federal flags;

6.    Religious symbols; and

7.    The flag of a commercial institution; provided no more than one flag is permitted per business premises; and further provided, the flag does not exceed twenty square feet in surface area. 

D.    Prohibited Signs. Except as indicated by this chapter, the following signs or displays are prohibited:

1.    Portable signs including, but not limited to, sandwich/A-frame signs and trailer-mounted readerboard signs, and except that A-frame signs shall be permitted in the CBD zone;

2.    Private signs on utility poles;

3.    Signs which, by reason of their size, location, movement, content, coloring or manner of illumination, may be confused with traffic control signs or signals;

4.    Signs located in the public right-of-way, except where permitted in this chapter; 

5.    Posters, pennants, strings of lights, blinking lights, balloons, searchlights and other displays of a carnival nature; except as architectural features, or on a limited basis as seasonal decorations or on private property in the C-1 and C-2 zones;

6.    Changing message center signs, where the message changes more frequently than every three minutes. 

E.    General Requirements. The following requirements shall govern all signs in the city and borough. Setback distances from property lines are zero unless noted below.

1.    Signs for home businesses not exceeding two square feet in area that contain the name of the occupant and the name of the lawful home occupation are permitted.

2.    “For Sale,” “For Rent” and “For Lease” signs not exceeding four square feet in area are permitted if located five feet from property lines.

3.    Signs identifying multiple-family dwellings, apartments, condominiums, hotels, clubs, lodges, hospitals and other public or quasi-public places are permitted; provided, they are not more than twenty square feet in area, mounted flush against the building or more than five feet back from the front property line and ten feet back from the property line along Halibut Point Road and Sawmill Creek Road.

4.    For their own use, churches and public or charitable organizations may maintain an announcement sign or bulletin board no more than twenty square feet in area.

5.    Permitted signs on business buildings may be of a total combined size no larger than ten percent of the area of the wall upon which they are to be mounted, or one hundred square feet, which is less. Temporary signs in windows, such as sales banners, are not included in this restriction. Signs that exceed these dimensional requirements are prohibited.

6.    The assembly of the city and borough has determined that the size and type of advertising signs usual in other localities does not fit the circumstances of Sitka with its short closed type of road system. Signs designed in large size or specifically designed to attract the motoring public are unnecessary and are prohibited.

7.    In all cases, flashing, rotating, animated or intermittent lighted signs are prohibited in Sitka. Lights that appear on the building face, in windows or elsewhere on the property shall not be placed or designed in such fashion as to distract motorists or adversely impact nearby properties.

8.    Signs and marquees extending over sidewalks must not obstruct vision for the purposes of safe pedestrian or vehicle traffic and the bottom of the sign must be at least eight feet above the pedestrian way and be securely fastened and safely constructed. Marquee signs shall not be permitted for uses in residential zones. In other zones, projecting and awning signs may be used in lieu of wall signs, provided they do not project more than six feet from the supporting building facade and they shall not exceed the number or size permitted for wall signs in a zone. Any projection over property lines into airspace controlled by the municipality must receive written approval by the administrator.

9.    Freestanding signs, such as advertising a business mall or individual business, are permitted with the following restrictions:

a.    There is no minimum height requirement for the signs;

b.    The sign may be no higher than twenty-four feet in total height;

c.    The sign must be located on private property at least five feet off the front property line;

d.    The sign shall not adversely impact safe pedestrian or vehicle traffic and shall not infringe upon visibility in a manner that obstructs the vision of pedestrians or motorists.

10.    Requirements for public signs shall be determined on a case-by-case basis by the administrator. 

11.    Sign Area Calculation. 

a.    Sign area for nonmonument freestanding signs shall be calculated by determining the total surface area of the sign as viewed from any single vantage point, excluding support structures.

b.    Sign area for letters or symbols painted or mounted directly on wall or monument signs shall be calculated by measuring the smallest single rectangle which will enclose the combined letters and symbols.

c.    Sign area for signs contained entirely within a cabinet and mounted on a wall or monument shall be calculated by measuring the entire area of the cabinet. 

12.    Fuel price signs shall not be included in sign area or number limitations, provided such signs do not exceed twenty square feet per street frontage.

13.    Time and temperature signs shall not exceed the maximum sign height permitted in the zone.

14.    Directional signs shall not be included in the sign area or number limitation, provided they shall not exceed six square feet in surface area and are limited to one for each entrance or exit to surface parking areas or parking structure. 

15.    Sign Illumination and Glare.

a.    All signs in the CBD, C-1, C-2, or I zone districts may be illuminated. Signs in all other zones may be indirectly illuminated, provided the light source for indirectly illuminated signs shall be no farther away from the sign than the height of the sign;

b.    Indirectly illuminated signs shall be arranged so that no direct rays of light are projected from such artificial source into residences or any street right-of-way.

16.    Maximum height for wall signs shall not extend above the highest exterior wall upon which the sign is located.

17.    Except as otherwise permitted by this chapter, off-premises directional signs shall not exceed four square feet in sign area.

18.    Mixed use developments in the CBD, C-1, and C-2 zones are permitted one permanent residential identification sign not exceeding thirty-two square feet in addition to the maximum sign area requirements in the zone where the mixed use development is located.

19.    Real Estate Signs. All temporary real estate signs may be single or double-faced signs:

a.    Signs advertising an individual residential unit for sale or rent shall be limited to one sign per street frontage. The sign may not exceed eight square feet in area, and shall not exceed six feet in height. The sign shall be removed within five days after closing of the sale, lease or rental of the property.

b.    Portable off-premises residential directional signs announcing directions to an open house at a specified residence which is offered for sale or rent shall not exceed six square feet in area for each sign, and shall not exceed forty-two inches in height. Such signs shall be permitted only when the agent or seller is in attendance at the property for sale or rent and may be located on the right-of-way outside of vehicular and bicycle lanes.

c.    On-site commercial or industrial property for sale or rent signs shall be limited to one sign per street frontage, and shall not exceed thirty-two square feet in area. The sign shall not exceed twelve feet in height. The sign shall be removed within thirty days after closing of the sale, lease or rental of the property.

d.    On-site residential development for sale or rent signs shall be limited to two signs per development. Each sign shall not exceed thirty-two square feet in area, and shall not exceed twelve feet in height. 

(Ord. 03-1746 § 4 (part), 2003; Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.20.100 Off-street parking requirements.

A.    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate parking and loading in order to lessen traffic congestion and contribute to public safety by providing sufficient on-site areas for the maneuvering and parking of motor vehicles.

B.    Required Automobile Parking Spaces. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided as an accessory use in accordance with the requirements of this section at the time any building or structure is erected, enlarged, or expanded. Consistent with earlier zoning ordinances, off-street parking and loading spaces are not required for properties in the central business district. Property owners are encouraged to provide off-street loading areas as appropriate and feasible.

C.    Size and Access. It is recommended that each off-street parking space be ten feet by twenty feet, exclusive of access drives or aisles, particularly on lots containing six or fewer spaces. The minimum dimensions of each off-street parking space, exclusive of aisles or access drives, shall be no less than nine feet by eighteen feet. The width of access drives and aisles shall be determined by the municipal administrator or his designee. Each space shall be visibly designated and marked for occupancy for one vehicle. There shall be adequate provision for ingress and egress from each parking space.

D.    Location. Off-street parking facilities shall be located as hereinafter specified; where a distance is specified, such distance shall be the walking distance measured from the nearest point of the parking facilities to the nearest point of the building that such facility is required to serve.

1.    For a single-family dwelling or multifamily dwellings, the parking facilities shall be located on the same lot or building site as the building they are required to serve.

2.    For churches, hospitals, large group homes, institutions, rooming and lodging houses, nursing and convalescent homes, community clubs, and club rooms, parking facilities shall be located not farther than one hundred fifty feet from the facility.

3.    For uses other than those specified, parking facilities shall be located not farther than three hundred feet from the facility.

E.    Unit of Measurement. In stadiums, sports arenas, churches, and other places of assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews, or other similar seating facilities, each eighteen inches of width or eighty square feet of open area of such seating facilities should be counted as one seat for the purpose of determining requirements of off-street parking facilities under this code.

F.    Expansions or Enlargements. Where any structure is enlarged or expanded, then off-street parking spaces shall be provided for said expansion or enlargement in accordance with the requirements of subsection I of this section. Nothing in this code shall be construed to require off-street parking spaces for the portion of said building or structure existing at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. A change in use in an existing structure shall require additional off-street parking spaces as set forth in subsection G of this section.

G.    Parking Spaces Required for Particular Uses. There shall be established at the time of construction of any main building, or at the time of an alteration, enlargement or any major change of use of any building, permanently maintained off-street parking facilities for use of the occupants, tenants, employees or patrons. It shall be the total responsibility of the owner to provide for and maintain the spaces. No existing parking area shall hereinafter be relinquished or reduced in any manner below the requirements established. The following minimum off-street parking facilities shall be established:

1.    Residential Uses. For each dwelling unit up to and including four-family buildings: two parking spaces per unit. For five-unit buildings and above: one and one-half spaces per unit. Each dwelling unit must have parking spaces independently accessed.

2.    Automobile repair garage, service station: four parking spaces for each service stall or facility; provided, that all vehicles in the custody of the operator or the business for service, storage, sale or other purpose shall be stored on the premises or on a separate vehicle parking lot and shall not be parked on a public right-of-way.

3.    Motor vehicle sales: one parking space for each four hundred gross square feet of building area; provided, that all vehicles in the custody of the operator or the business for service, storage, sale or other purpose shall be stored on the premises or on a separate vehicle parking lot and shall not be parked on a public right-of-way.

4.    Banks, office buildings, professional offices or clinics: one public parking space per each three hundred square feet of gross floor area, but not less than five spaces for uses where the principal structure is equal to or greater than one thousand five hundred gross square feet in area. For uses having a smaller principal structure, the minimum parking requirement is one space per three hundred gross square feet.

5.    Bowling alley: four parking spaces per each alley or lane.

6.    Churches: one public parking space for each ten seats, based on maximum seating capacity including balconies and choir lofts.

7.    Community buildings, assembly halls, lodges or union or social halls: one parking space for each ten seats or for each ten occupants, based on maximum seating capacity.

8.    Elementary and junior high schools: one off-street parking space per every classroom and adequate space per the code for nonclassroom areas of the building. In addition, adequate off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided for the school buses serving the educational facility.

9.    Food market, grocery store or shopping center: one parking space per each three hundred square feet of gross floor area.

10.    High schools, colleges and other educational facilities: one off-street parking space per every classroom and adequate spaces per the code for nonclassroom areas of the building. In addition, adequate spaces shall be provided for one off-street space for each ten students, based upon the occupancy load of the building.

11.    Hospital: one parking space for each five occupants, based on maximum capacity.

12.    Hotel/motel: one private parking space per each five guest rooms or part thereof, based upon maximum capacity.

13.    Industrial or manufacturing: one space for each four hundred square feet of gross floor area or for every three employees, depending upon the nature of the establishment and necessity for loading or other facilities.

14.    Launderette: one parking space per every two machines.

15.    Retail store or service shop: one parking space for each three hundred square feet.

16.    Warehouses and storage buildings: one parking space for each employee, or one space per two thousand gross square feet whichever is greater but not less than three spaces.

17.    Adult day care centers: three spaces plus one space per each employee plus one space per ten clients.

18.    Establishments for the sale and consumption on the premises of food and beverages, including fraternal and social clubs: one space for each two hundred square feet of gross floor area.

19.    Large group home, institution: one space for each two beds.

20.    Libraries and museums: one space for each two hundred fifty square feet of floor area open to the public.

21.    Theaters: one space for each three seats.

22.    Golf courses: three spaces for each hole.

23.    Golf driving ranges: one space for each tee.

H.    Mixed Uses. Off-street parking and loading spaces may be provided jointly for separate uses. In all cases, the total number of spaces may not be less than the sum of the separate requirements for each use and must comply with all regulations governing the location of accessory spaces, except in the case of a hotel/motel which also has located within it other uses, the number shall not be less than the number required for the highest single use of the premises.

I.    Joint Uses—Use of Parking by More than One Establishment. Notwithstanding the previous subsection, required parking spaces may serve more than one establishment on the same parking lot; provided, that sufficient evidence is presented which shows that the normal business hours or hours of operation of such establishments do not overlap. Joint parking arrangements may be approved by the administrator or his or her designee.

J.    Unspecified Uses. In the case of a use not specifically mentioned in this section, the requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be the same as the use mentioned which, in the opinion of the administrator or a designee, is most similar, subject to the appeal provisions of Chapter 22.30 of this code.

K.    Size and Access of Required Off-Street Parking Space or Area. For all required off-street parking, the typical standard layouts shall be applied.

L.    Parking Access. Access to off-street parking areas shall be limited to several defined locations and in no case should there be unrestricted access along the full length of the street. Public parking areas on streets shall not be counted towards the requirement for off-street parking spaces. An uncovered private parking area may occupy any yard required by this title, unless otherwise specified herein.

M.    Handicapped Parking Spaces. Any building or use required to have more than nine off-street parking spaces shall designate at least one space for handicapped parking. Any parking lot with thirty-five or more spaces shall have at least three handicapped spaces. 

(Ord. 13-14A § 4 (part), 2013; Ord. 06-06 § 4(E), 2006; Ord. 05-03 § 4(C), 2005; Ord. 04-60 § 4(T), 2004; Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.20.110 Off-street loading requirements.

A.    Requirements. No building or structure other than residential dwellings or buildings in the central business district shall be erected, nor shall an existing building or structure other than a residential building be altered, in any other use district, without prior providing for off-street loading space in conformance with the following minimum requirements:

1.    Types of Loading Berths. Required off-street loading space shall be provided in berths which conform to the following minimum specifications:

	Uses	Square Foot of Floor Area	Off-Street Loading Spaces Required

	Schools	Up to and for each additional 15,000	1

	Hospitals (in addition to space for ambulances)	For 10,000—300,000 or major fraction thereof	1

	Commercial	2,500—25,000	1

	Wholesale	25,000—40,000	2

	Manufacturing	40,000—60,000	3

	Storage	60,000—100,000	4

	 	For each additional 50,000 or fraction thereof	1

2.    Size and Location. Each loading space must be not less than ten feet in width, twenty-five feet in length, and fourteen feet in height, and may occupy all or part of a required yard. There must be adequate ingress and egress, and the loading or unloading shall be done in a mariner which will not interfere with any public roadway or sidewalk.

B.    Uses Not Specifically Mentioned. In the case of a use not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street loading facilities shall be the same as the above mentioned use which, in the opinion of the administrator or a designee, is most similar.

C.    Concurrent Different Uses. When any proposed structure will be used concurrently for different purposes, the larger loading space size shall be required.

D.    Location of Required Loading Facilities. The off-street loading facilities required for the uses mentioned in this chapter shall be on the same lot or parcel of land as the structure they are intended to serve. In no case shall the required off-street loading space be part of the area used to satisfy the off-street parking requirements.

E.    Manner of Using Loading Areas. No space for loading or unloading of vehicles shall be so located that a vehicle using loading space projects into any public street, except in the case of a loading space located in the rear of the lot, utilizing part of an alley. Loading space shall be provided with access to an alley or, if no alley adjoins the lot, with access to the street. Any required front, side or rear yard may be used for loading, unless otherwise prohibited by this title. Design and location of entrances and exits for required off-street loading areas shall be subject to the approval of the administrator or his designee.

F.    Modification of Requirements. The planning commission may modify the off-street loading requirements as they apply to any individual case only for good and just cause and set alternate standards based on reasonable safeguards and conditions to ensure that any such modification conforms to the intent of this chapter. Modifications must be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the planning commission that loading operations will not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular use of any public street.

G.    Signs. The owners of property shall provide, locate and maintain loading signs. Such signs shall not be counted against the allowed business sign areas. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.20.120 Mail delivery.

Persons constructing more than three dwelling units on any lot shall provide for centralized mail delivery facilities. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.20.130 Large domestic animals.

A.    No horse, donkey, pony, cow or other large animal that is kept outside shall be allowed in any residential zoning district, excluding island residential zoning districts, without a conditional use permit. Property owners shall be allowed any combination of up to five domestic dogs, cats, feathered fowl, ferrets, rabbits or other small animals living outside. Animals living within a residence are permitted and are excluded from this maximum allowance.

B.    No conditional use permit under this section shall be issued until a site investigation is performed pursuant to Section 22.30.030(C) and a finding of fact is made that keeping of such animals will not unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of neighboring properties. In making such determinations, the planning commission shall consider the size of the premises and the proximity and uses of neighboring properties.

C.    Conditional use permits issued under this section shall set limits upon numbers and species of animals allowed and set minimum standards for odor and noise control.

D.    Violation of any condition or standard set out in a conditional use permit issued under this section may result in revocation of the permit. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.20.150 Short-term rentals.

Short-term rentals including bed and breakfasts as defined in Chapter 22.08 of this code shall be conditional uses in the R-1 single-family and duplex residential district, the R-1 MH single-family, duplex and manufactured home district, the R-1 LD or R-1 LDMH single-family or duplex low density or single-family manufactured home low density district, the R-2 multifamily residential district and the R-2 MHP multifamily mobile home district. Short-term rental in those districts shall be subject to the general rules set out under the provisions of Section 22.24.010. (Ord. 10-12 § 4 (part), 2010; Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.20.160 Accessory dwelling units (ADUs).

A.    The following code section provides for binding standards and regulates the accessory dwelling units (ADUs). ADUs are intended to:

1.    Utilize existing housing stock while preserving the appearance and character of single-family neighborhoods.

2.    Provide additional affordable options for long-term rental housing.

3.    Provide a broader range of more affordable housing.

4.    Provide a mix of housing that responds to changing family needs, smaller households and multi-generational families.

5.    Provide a means for residents, particularly seniors, single parents, and families with grown children, to remain in their homes and neighborhoods and obtain extra income, security, companionship and services.

6.    Encourage a more economic and energy-efficient use of Sitka’s housing supply.

7.    To maintain consistency with city and borough of Sitka’s policies as recommended in the Comprehensive Plan (2.2.15, 2.2.16, 2.4.8.A, 2.5.1.B, 2.5.11, 2.10.3.B).

B.    Creation. An accessory dwelling unit (ADU) is a second dwelling unit that is located on the same parcel as the primary single-family dwelling unit. ADUs must provide a complete, independent residential living space and shall include provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. ADUs can be studio-sized units, and one- and two-bedroom units. An ADU may be created through the following methods:

1.    Constructing a detached ADU on a parcel with an existing single-family home.

2.    Constructing a new single-family home with a detached ADU.

C.    Accessory Dwelling Unit Requirements.

1.    An ADU is a permitted use, on lots served by a publicly maintained right-of-way in the following residential zoning districts: R-1 and R-2 and related districts exclusive of MH and MHP. An ADU shall not be constructed on lots accessed by access easements. They are also not allowed on lots served by rights-of-way that have not been accepted by the municipality or state of Alaska for maintenance.

2.    ADUs are intended for long-term rental use only. Rental of an ADU for a period of less than ninety consecutive days is prohibited. ADUs shall not be used for short-term vacation rentals and/or bed and breakfast purposes. 

3.    ADUs shall meet all development, design, zoning and building requirements at the time of construction (e.g., setback requirements and lot coverage standards) applicable to the primary dwelling unit, except as otherwise noted.

4.    The ADU must be located on the same parcel as the primary dwelling unit.

5.    Only one ADU is allowed per parcel.

6.    Mobile homes, travel trailers and recreational vehicles shall not be used as an ADU.

7.    ADUs shall only be located on a parcel in conjunction with a single-family dwelling unit. ADUs shall not be located on parcels that contain a duplex and shall not be located on parcels that contain two or more dwelling units. 

8.    ADUs shall be designed so that the appearance of the structure maintains, to the greatest extent possible, the appearance of a single-family property.

9.    If a separate external entrance for the ADU is necessary, where possible, it shall be located on the side or rear of the structure. On a corner lot, where there are two entrances visible from either street, where possible, solid screening is required to screen at least one of the entrances from the street. 

10.    Exterior stairs shall be located in the side or rear yard wherever possible and must comply with setback and building code requirements.

11.    The maximum size of an ADU shall be eight hundred square feet.

12.    The following parking requirements are applicable for ADUs:

a.    As part of the application submittal process, the applicant shall submit a parking plan delineating parking space(s) for the ADU and the primary dwelling unit. 

b.    Where parking is located in any portion of the interior side and/or rear setbacks solid screening is required from adjoining properties. 

c.    On-street parking is prohibited.

d.    If additional parking is necessary, new parking space(s) shall utilize existing curb cuts. 

13.    All subdivisions of lots containing ADUs are prohibited unless all minimum lot sizes (exclusive of access easements), setbacks, lot coverage, and other requirements in the zoning and subdivision codes are met.

14.    Variances are prohibited on any lot containing an ADU including, but not limited to, variances for setbacks, lot coverage, building height, and off-street parking requirements.

D.    Conditional use permits may be sought if the above requirements cannot be met. Conditional use permit must be in conformance with Chapter 22.24.

(Ord. 15-08 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 13-14A § 4 (part), 2013.)


Chapter 22.24 SPECIAL USE PERMITS

Sections:

22.24.005    General.

22.24.010    Conditional uses.

22.24.020    Variances.

22.24.025    Commercial home horticulture permits.

22.24.026    Marijuana conditional use permits.

22.24.030    Planned unit developments.

22.24.040    Binding site plan approval.

22.24.050    Nonconforming use permit.


22.24.005 General.

Special permits are necessary for conditional uses, variances, planned unit developments, binding site plans and nonconforming uses. This chapter includes provisions for application, review and approval of these permits. Chapter 22.30, Article III, provides procedural requirements associated with permit processing. (Ord. 15-51 § 4 (part), 2015: Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.24.010 Conditional uses. 

A conditional use is a use that may not be appropriate in a particular zoning district according to the character, intensity, or size of the lot or the surrounding uses. This section establishes decision criteria and procedures for special uses, called conditional uses, which possess unique characteristics. The conditional use permit procedure is intended to afford the municipality the flexibility necessary to make determinations appropriate to individual sites. The commission may attach conditions necessary to mitigate external adverse impacts. If the municipality determines that these impacts cannot be satisfactorily overcome, the permit shall be denied.

A.    Submittal Requirements for Conditional Use Applications. Table 22.24.010-1 provides application requirements for all conditional use permits. 

 

Table 22.24.010-1 

Conditional Use Permit Application Requirements  

	Conditional Uses	Bed and Breakfast Conditional Uses	Short-Term Rental Conditional Uses	Island Conditional Uses

	The applicant may be required to consult with agencies that are responsible for certain portions of the project review. These agencies may include but not be limited to public works and engineering for sewer/water utilities; state DOT/PF; State Department of Environmental Conservation; Army Corps of Engineers; Sitka fire department; local telephone utility; cable television utility; electric department.

Written Documentation

• Legal description of all properties involved in the project;

• Statement of the objectives expected to be achieved by the project;

• Detailed description of all aspects of the project, including land use, building types and sizes, population density, parking and traffic circulation, building coverage and other information which the applicant feels would assist in decision making;

• All comments received from each of the agencies and utilities reviewing the project and a statement by the applicant on how the applicant will resolve or meet any problems or anticipated adverse conditions noted by the utility or agency, the statement to list any unresolved problems or adverse conditions.

Site Plan and Supporting Drawings

• As determined by the administration, details of the proposed project showing land use layout, building locations, vehicular and pedestrian circulation, open space and recreation areas, parking layout, schematic water and sewer layout, and any other information necessary to adequately describe the project;

• Preliminary subdivision plat layout if required;

• Site grading and drainage plan including present and proposed topography;

• Conceptual drawings of proposed buildings, signs, and other features that may be required by the administrator.	Written Documentation

• Legal description of all property involved in the project;

• Statement of the objectives expected to be achieved by the project.

Site Plan and Supporting

Drawings

• As determined by the administration, details of the proposed project showing building locations, vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking layout, and any other information necessary to adequately describe the project; conceptual drawings of proposed buildings or renovations, signs, and other features that may be required by the administrator.	Written Documentation

• Legal description of all property involved in the project;

• Statement of the objectives expected to be achieved by the project.

Site Plan and Supporting

Drawings

• As determined by the administration, details of the proposed project showing building locations, vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking layout, and any other information necessary to adequately describe the project; conceptual drawings of proposed buildings or renovations, signs, and other features that may be required by the administrator.	Written Documentation

• Legal description of all properties involved in the project;

• Statement of the objectives expected to be achieved by the project;

• Detailed description of all aspects of the project, including land use, building types and sizes, population density, building coverage, waterfront use, clearing, changes to existing visual appearance, and other information which the applicant feels would assist in decision making;

• All comments received from each of the agencies and utilities reviewing the project and a statement by the applicant on how the applicant will resolve or meet any problems or anticipated adverse conditions noted by the utility or agency, the statement to list any unresolved problems or adverse conditions.

Site Plan and Supporting

Drawings

• As determined by the administration, details of the proposed project showing land use layout, building locations, open space and recreation areas, waterfront development, clearing, schematic water and sewer layout, and any other information necessary to adequately describe the project;

• Preliminary subdivision plat layout if required;

• Site grading and drainage plan including present and proposed topography; conceptual drawings of proposed buildings, and other features that may be required by the administrator.

1.    Conditional use permit application initiation periods and termination periods are outlined in Table 22.24.010-2.

Table 22.24.010-2 

Initiation and Termination Periods  

	 	Short-Term Rental Conditional Use Permits	Bed and Breakfast Conditional Use Permits	Interim Mobile Homes Conditional Use	All Other Conditional Use Permits

	Period in which the permit must be activated following planning commission approval or permit becomes void	One year	One year	One year	Two years

	If permit is not used during period, permit becomes void after activation	One year	One year	One year	Two years

	Mandatory review period1	Set by planning commission at time of approval	Set by planning commission at time of approval	Set by planning commission at time of approval	Set by planning commission at time of approval

	Number of years after approval that permit sunsets	Set by planning commission at time of approval	Set by planning commission at time of approval	Set by planning commission at time of approval	Set by planning commission at time of approval

	Note (1): It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to submit materials one month prior to the end of any review period. Failure to submit materials within the time specified shall automatically void the approval.

Note (2): It is recognized in land use case law that conditional use permits are grants to a property and run with the parcel and not the owner.

Note (3): Substantial construction progress must be made on a project approved through the variance process within one year of the date of the variance approval or the approval becomes void. In the event it can be documented that other substantial progress has been made, a one-year extension may be granted by the planning commission if a request is filed within eleven months of the initial approval.

B.    Conditional Use Permit Provisions for Bed and Breakfasts.

1.    The information and assurances filed by the applicant for a bed and breakfast conditional use at the time of application shall be binding on all current and future owners of the facility.

2.    There shall be no expansion in the number of guest rooms beyond the number approved.

3.    The number of bed and breakfast sleeping rooms per residence shall be limited to three rooms in an R-1 or related zone and five rooms in an R-2 or related zone.

4.    In no case shall a bed and breakfast be operated in any residence other than an owner-occupied dwelling.

5.    The owner of the residence shall operate the bed and breakfast at all times and shall not contract out the day-to-day management of the operation. In the event the operation or management of the bed and breakfast is conducted by a tenant or party other than the owner who lives in the residence, the conditional use permit shall automatically become void.

6.    Bed and breakfast guestrooms are intended to be spare or surplus guestrooms in owner-occupied single-family dwellings or an owner-occupied unit of a two-family dwelling that are not needed by the owner of the structure for household activities.

7.    Permits shall lapse and become void if the bed and breakfast ceases operation for twelve consecutive months.

8.    There shall be no more than one exterior sign. The sign shall not exceed four square feet.

9.    There shall be a minimum of one off-street parking space for every three guestrooms in bed and breakfast establishments located in single-family residential zones.

10.    Existing bed and breakfasts which do not conform to these rules shall be considered nonconforming uses and subject to the rules relating to nonconforming uses.

11.    It is the intent of the assembly that the provisions of these requirements be strictly followed. However, exceptions may be granted in cases of extreme need or extreme personal or financial hardship. The limitation on the number of the rooms and the use of single-family occupied structures will not be eligible for hardship relief.

12.    For establishment of a bed and breakfast establishment in an existing structure in an R-1 zone, only existing bedrooms may be used for guest rooms.

13.    Limited cooking facilities shall only be allowed inside guestrooms, or inside other rooms that are used solely by the bed and breakfast, such as small toaster ovens, microwaves, and refrigerators.

14.    Timely payment of sales taxes shall be one of the primary indicators of compliance with this section.

15.    When the planning commission approves a permit with the condition referring to the number of children in the facility, the term “children” shall refer to individuals who are fifteen years old or younger.

C.    Conditional Use Permit Provisions for Short-Term Rentals.

1.    Short-term rental establishments as described in subsection F of this section shall be approved as conditional uses in the R-1, R-1 MH, R-1 LD, R-1 LDMH, R-2, and R-2 MHP zoning districts with the following conditions:

a.    Existing short-term rentals operating in conformance with all other applicable regulations prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section may continue operating as nonconforming uses so long as payments of bed taxes and any other fees are current.

b.    The permit application and process will be the same as that required for bed and breakfasts, including submission and review of both interior and exterior site plans.

c.    Increase in density and other impacts on the immediate surrounding neighborhood which would occur as a result of approval of short-term rentals may be a consideration in the granting of the permit.

d.    Cessation of an approved short-term rental operation for twelve consecutive months shall result in revocation of the permit and require reapplication and approval of a new conditional use permit. Timely payment of sales taxes shall be one of the primary indicators of compliance with this section.

e.    When the planning commission approves a permit with the condition referring to the number of children in the facility, the term “children” shall refer to individuals who are fifteen years old or younger.

2.    Short-term rentals shall be allowed in the other zoning districts subject to the following general rules:

a.    There shall be two parking spaces per dwelling unit.

b.    The number of persons per sleeping area shall comply with the municipal fire code.

c.    Upon filing for sales tax and bed tax accounts, an owner shall obtain a life safety inspection by the building department and shall comply with the requirements proposed by the department.

d.    Legal nonconforming short-term rentals shall comply with these general rules within two years.

e.    Short-term rentals may only be approved for mobile homes that are located along streets maintained by the city and borough or the state of Alaska.

D.    Conditional Use Permit Provisions for Mobile Homes on an Interim Basis in the R-1, R-2 and Related Zones.

1.    The city and borough of Sitka, through the conditional use permit process, may issue a permit for a single-family mobile home or travel trailer on a residential lot in an area not otherwise allowing mobile homes on an interim basis for the purposes of facilitating home construction.

2.    The maximum term of the permit is twelve months with a possible six-month extension.

3.    Full utilities must be installed for the mobile home or travel trailer.

4.    Conditions attached to the approval shall include but are not limited to (a) a pledge of the travel trailer, mobile home, or cash of equivalent value as collateral, and (b) in the event a travel trailer or mobile home is pledged as collateral, funds sufficient to cover the cost of removal and disposal of the unit, and (c) the trailer is for the sole occupancy of the lot owner and neither unit shall be occupied by any other party. Other conditions may include requirements of fencing or landscaping.

E.    In evaluating the inputs of a proposed conditional use permit, the municipality may consider a commercial conditional use to be inappropriate for residential neighbors while the same conditional use may be acceptable when it is located along an arterial or collector street. The additional vehicular traffic generated by conditional uses, such as professional offices, may not be able to be adequately mitigated in residential areas.

1.    Criteria to Be Used in Determining Impacts of Conditional Uses.

a.    Amount of vehicular traffic to be generated and impacts of the traffic on nearby land uses.

b.    Amount of noise to be generated and its impacts on surrounding land uses.

c.    Odors to be generated by the use and their impacts.

d.    Hours of operation.

e.    Location along a major or collector street.

f.    Potential for users or clients to access the site through residential areas or substandard street creating a cut through traffic scenario.

g.    Effects on vehicular and pedestrian safety.

h.    Ability of the police, fire, and EMS personnel to respond to emergency calls on the site.

i.    Logic of the internal traffic layout.

j.    Effects of signage on nearby uses.

k.    Presence of existing or proposed buffers on the site or immediately adjacent the site.

l.    Relationship if the proposed conditional use is in a specific location to the goals, policies, and objectives of the comprehensive plan.

m.    Other criteria that surface through public comments or planning commission assembly review.

F.    Evaluation and Approval or Denial of Conditional Use Applications for Island Properties. It is the intent of this code to recognize the unique qualities of islands within Sitka Sound and the substantial differences that exist between individual islands and island groups.

    Specific conditional uses may be fully appropriate in certain circumstances and on specific parcels. Uses that are well designed and/or have low impact may enhance surrounding properties and may not create any impacts. Examples may include structures that are built on larger lots away from exterior property lines, uses that are placed in the middle of parcels, uses that do not materially increase activity on easements or moorage, uses where there is a significant vegetative or terrain buffer between properties, and islands that are separated by substantial distances. In these cases, conditional use requests can and should be handled expeditiously.

    Conditional uses on other properties may be totally inappropriate due to the concerns such as impacts on adjacent properties, lack of vegetative or distance buffers, noise generation, unmitigated increased usage of access easements, available moorage, location on parcels, and design.

1.    Items to be considered in evaluating island conditional use permits include, but are not limited to, the following:

a.    Location on the lot or island.

b.    Generation of noise.

c.    Numbers of guests and employees.

d.    Visibility from adjacent uses including waterborne traffic.

e.    Use of common access easements.

f.    Availability of necessary moorage.

g.    Use of natural or manmade screening or buffers.

h.    Availability of municipal power.

i.    Distance from adjacent parcels or islands.

j.    Removal of excessive amounts of vegetation.

    It is recognized that many applications may be strongly supported after using the criteria above. 

    If adequate mitigation cannot be accomplished or items such as necessary infrastructure are not available, applications may be denied.

(Ord. 15-51 § 4 (part), 2015: Ord. 15-39 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 06-16 § 4, 2006; Ord. 05-16 § 4(O), (P), 2005; Ord. 04-60 § 4(F), (G), (U), 2004; Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.24.020 Variances.

The purpose of this section is to provide a means of altering the requirements of this code in specific instances where the strict application of those requirements would deprive a property of privileges enjoyed by other properties with the identical regulatory zone because of special features or constraints unique to the property involved. The city shall have the authority to grant a variance from the provisions of this code when, in the opinion of the planning commission, the conditions as set forth in Section 22.30.160(D) have been found to exist. In such cases a variance may be granted which is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this code so that the spirit of this code shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done.

A.    Application Requirements. The application shall contain the following data:

1.    Legal description of the property affected;

2.    Plot plan showing the location of all existing and proposed buildings or alterations of such buildings, dimensions to the property lines on all sides from the building(s) and clearly showing the specific relief requested in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 22.30, Zoning Code Administration.

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.24.025 Commercial home horticulture permits.

A.    Application Requirements. Same as conditional use application outlined in Table 22.24.010-1.

B.    Standards, Dimensions, and Setbacks.

1.    Garden stands: maximum shall be size six feet by eight feet with awning.

2.    The annual period of use shall be May 1st through October 30th. Stands must be portable and removed in off season.

3.    Setbacks from lot lines shall be a minimum five feet.

4.    Driveways on adjacent lots shall not be blocked.

5.    Sales are permitted a maximum of four hours a day, twice a week.

C.    Review Criteria. In evaluating applications under this section, the planning commission shall consider the overall plan of operation, potential adverse impacts on adjacent properties including but not limited to odors generated, and adequacy of parking along the right-of-way.

D.    Review Procedure and Authority to Approve. Upon receipt of a completed application for a garden stand under this section, there shall be a four-week notice period to include not less than two planning commission meetings. Notice shall be provided to properties within three hundred feet of the applicant’s property. The planning commission is authorized to approve or deny garden stand conditional use permit applications submitted under this section. Approvals and denials may be appealed to the assembly.

E.    In order to obtain a permit, the applicant must present an Alaska business license and proof of sales tax account registration (business registration) with the city and borough of Sitka. The applicant acknowledges the requirement to remit sales tax in accordance with the city and borough of Sitka sales tax code, Chapter 4.09. The applicant also acknowledges that the sales tax exemption in Section 4.09.100(A) will not be permissible under this section.

F.    Sunset and Revocation. Permits issued under this section shall sunset two years after approval. Permit renewal shall follow the same process as initial application. Permits may be revoked by the planning commission following a public hearing.

G.    This section supersedes other code sections that may be in conflict, including setbacks for garden stands.

(Ord. 14-38A § 7, 2014.)


22.24.026 Marijuana conditional use permits.

A.    Intent. This section shall govern the approval of all conditional use permits for the following uses defined as: Sections 22.08.587(B), Marijuana Establishment; 22.08.587(C), Marijuana Cultivation Facility; 22.08.587(D), Marijuana Cultivation Facility, Limited; 22.08.587(E), Marijuana Product Manufacturing Facility; 22.08.587(F), Marijuana Product Manufacturing Facility, Extract Only; 22.08.587(G), Marijuana Retail Facility; and 22.08.587(H), Marijuana Testing Facility. Such uses shall only be approved where there are no negative impacts that exist or where any negative impacts are mitigated through conditions that shall mitigate any potential negative impacts to preserve the public’s health, safety, and welfare.

B.    Application Requirements. Same as conditional use application in Table 22.24.010-1.

C.    Standard Regulations, Dimensions, and Setbacks.

1.    Owners, operators, and staff of conditional uses shall comply with all state and municipal licensing regulations.

2.    All licensed facilities shall comply with all life and safety regulations as promulgated by the municipal building official.

3.    All licensed manufacturing and cultivation uses shall provide a fire safety plan, material handling plan, and comply with all fire safety regulations that satisfy the fire marshal or their designee and the building official.

4.    All licensed facilities and/or uses shall provide screening from public view of any marijuana related commercial, retail, cultivation, or manufacturing use.

5.    All licensed facilities and/or uses shall establish an active sales account and business registration with the municipality and shall comply with all standard and required accounting practices.

6.    It shall be a standard regulation that all conditional uses comply with all applicable state regulations and licensing laws or it shall be deemed to abandon and extinguish any associated municipal license or conditional use permit.

7.    All approved conditional use permits shall comply with all of the Sitka General Code or shall be deemed to abandon and extinguish any associated municipal license or conditional use permit.

D.    All proposed licensed facilities and/or uses for a conditional use at a specific location shall be reviewed according to the following objective criteria to determine whether the proposed use presents any negative impacts to the public’s health, safety, and welfare:

1.    All criteria listed in Section 22.24.010(E)(1);

2.    Any impact or criteria that surfaces through public comment, planning staff review, or planning commission review.

E.    Findings of Fact. Upon review and considerations of the required criteria, the planning commission shall determine whether the proposed use(s) at the proposed project location are found to not present a negative impact to the public’s health, safety, and welfare.

1.    If such a finding can be made, then the proposed use shall be approved with standard regulations, dimensions, and setbacks.

2.    In the alternative, where the planning commission finds negative impacts are present, the planning commission shall only approve conditional use permits where the negative impacts can be adequately mitigated by conditions of approval that preserve the public’s health, safety, and welfare. These conditions of approval shall be case-by-case specific and in addition to the standard regulations.

3.    If negative impacts to the public’s health, safety, and welfare cannot be mitigated through conditions of approval then the planning commission shall so find and deny the proposed conditional use permit.

(Ord. 16-11 § 4 (part), 2016.)


22.24.030 Planned unit developments.

A.    Purpose. Planned unit developments are land use overlays intended to encourage the enhancement and conservation of lands having scenic, environmental, cultural and historical significance; create alternatives to typical subdivision development patterns; provide for more efficient use of land; and encourage harmonious and coordinated development considering natural features, community facilities, pedestrian and vehicular circulation, and land use relationships with surrounding properties and the general community.

B.    General Conditions. Planned unit developments shall be granted consistent with the provisions of the underlying residential, commercial or industrial zoning.

C.    Application Requirements. Planned unit development application and approval procedures are governed by Title 21 of this code, Subdivisions. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.24.040 Binding site plan approval.

A binding site plan is required for all projects noted in this chapter. Applications for approval shall include:

A.    All information required for a preliminary or minor subdivision plat;

B.    The size and location of all structures;

C.    A landscape plan indicating the location of existing vegetation to be retained, location of vegetation and landscaping structures to be installed, the type of vegetation by common name and the size of new plantings at the time of installation;

D.    Schematic plans and elevations of proposed buildings with samples of finish materials and colors, the type and location of exterior lighting, signs and accessory structures;

E.    Inscriptions, covenants, or other attachments defining the limitations and conditions of development;

F.    Phasing plans; and

G.    Assurances that the development will be completed in conformance with the site plan. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.24.050 Nonconforming use permit.

A.    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish decision criteria and procedures to allow reasonable limited expansion and continuance of nonconformities as defined in Section 22.08.640. Nonconformities including lots of record, buildings, and uses of land require a special degree of control to ensure compliance with applicable regulations and compatibility with the comprehensive plan, adjacent uses and the character of the surrounding areas. Limited exceptions, expansions or changes of use are allowed after approval of a nonconforming use permit by the city or after approval of an administrative nonconforming use permit. Nonconformities which do not comply with the provisions of this section shall be abandoned pursuant to city action.

1.    Nonconforming Use Permit. Exceptions to the development standards of this title are allowed after approval from the city through a nonconforming use permit. The city may impose such conditions as deemed necessary to ensure proposals conform to the intent of the comprehensive plan and this code.

B.    Prior Construction. No provision of this chapter shall be construed to require any change in plans, construction, alteration or designed use of a building for which a building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title; provided, that the construction has been diligently begun and prosecuted within one month of the date of permit issuance and is completed according to plans filed with the application for the building permit within one year of the date of issuance of the building permit. 

C.    Nonconforming Lots of Record.

1.    Notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this title, a one- or two-family structure may be erected on a single nonconforming lot of record. Such lot of record shall not have contiguous frontage with more than one other such nonconforming lot of record in the same ownership. All other structures shall comply with this title or obtain relief through the conditional use process. This section shall apply even though the lot fails to meet requirements for lot area, lot width, or both. Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained through the proper procedure as set forth in Section 22.24.020.

2.    If three or more undeveloped existing non-conforming lots of record with contiguous frontage are held in a single ownership, the lands involved will be considered to be an undivided parcel and no portion shall be sold or used which does not meet the requirements for area and width. Any such series or combination of land ownership shall be required to resubdivide the property in order to conform to existing requirements.

D.    Nonconforming Uses of Land. Where, at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this title, lawful uses of land existed that would not be permitted under the regulations imposed by this title, the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful; provided, that:

1.    No such nonconforming uses of land shall be enlarged or increased nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the date of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title.

2.    No such nonconforming uses of land shall be moved, in whole or part, to any portion of land or lot or parcel other than that occupied on the date of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title.

3.    If, for any reason whatsoever, the nonconforming use of land ceases for a period of twelve consecutive months or one year, any subsequent use of the land shall conform to the regulations specified in this title for the district in which the land is located.

4.    No additional structures not conforming to the requirements of this title shall be erected in connection with such a nonconforming use of land.

E.    Reconstruction of Nonconforming Structures.

1.    If a nonconforming structure is damaged by any natural disaster such as fire, flood, landslide, avalanche or earthquake or any other inadvertent occurrence, not including normal weathering, so that the cost of the repair or replacement of the structure exceeds two-thirds of the replacement value of the entire structure, exclusive of foundations, using new materials, then such structure shall not be rebuilt, unless the structure and its intended use comply with this title. 

2.    Nonconforming structures may be replaced or reconstructed on the same footprint of the original structure, with the exception of encroachments into public rights-of-way or adjacent property, provided the intended use of the structure is the same as, or less intensive than, the prior use and is a permissible use in the district. Projections beyond the footprint, including architectural features, roof eaves, foundation footings, porches, decks, terraces, patios, unenclosed stairways and fire escapes, and attached structures, may also be replaced or reconstructed as they existed on the original structure with the exception of encroachments into public rights-of-way or adjacent property.

3.    The determination of whether a structure is destroyed to the extent described shall be made by the building official. If the building official determines that the foundation of the structure is not reusable due to damage or substantial noncompliance with the Sitka General Code Title 19, the building regulations code, then the structure may be replaced or reconstructed to the same footprint and the footprint shall be relocated on the lot so as to reduce, to the extent reasonably feasible, the occurrence or severity of any nonconforming setbacks, taking into consideration topography, shape and size of the lot, and all other relevant factors. However, if such relocation is not reasonably feasible, the structure may be replaced or reconstructed to the same footprint on the original location.

4.    An as-built survey or other proof of the footprint and location of the original structure and projections beyond the footprint is to be provided to the municipality prior to issuance of a building permit. A structure may be replaced or reconstructed under this subsection with the same number of off-street parking spaces as were provided for the original structure.

5.    Nothing in this subsection waives any other applicable laws or regulations, including, but not limited to, Title 19 of this code, the building regulations code.

6.    It is recognized that the extreme weathering conditions hastens the involuntary destruction of steps, stairs, and decks. Said structures, including carports with only one exterior wall, may be reconstructed in their original footprint without gaining relief through the variance process. This provision only applies to structures that were in compliance with zoning regulations when they were originally constructed.

F.    Extension of Nonconforming Structures and Uses. Substantial alterations, expansions creating a material change in use or impacting adjacent properties, or moving of nonconforming structures or uses shall be subject to the following:

1.    Variances are required for extensions of nonconforming single-family structures including mobile/manufactured homes and nonconforming accessory buildings on lots containing single-family structures, when the proposed extensions are within the required setbacks of the zoning district. 

2.    Conditional use permits are required for all other proposed changes to nonconforming structures and uses not covered in subsection (F)(1) of this section. This applies when a nonconforming use is to be changed to another equally nonconforming use. Conditional use permits granted in accordance with this section shall not change the fact that the use is still nonconforming and subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this title.

G.    Abandonment. An exception to these provisions may be granted by the city for special cases when the nonconforming use was discontinued for a period of time greater than one year subject to city approval of evidence provided by the applicant showing that the discontinuance was beyond the applicant’s control. The city may consider circumstances such as, but not limited to, the following below:

1.    The property or structure has been involved in litigation;

2.    Attempts to lease the site are ongoing due to length of time involved for marketing of premises;

3.    The structure is a specialized type of building requiring a specialized type of use due to equipment, processes or configuration; or

4.    There is an uniqueness to the property giving the use special operating characteristics such as its location in relationship to transportation facilities, open spaces needed for operations or its proximity to other critical activities such as mineral extraction. 

(Ord. 04-60 § 4(C), 2004; Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


Chapter 22.30 ZONING CODE ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

Article I. Introduction

22.30.010    Introduction.

Article II. Administration

22.30.020    Roles and responsibilities.

22.30.030    Administrator.

22.30.040    Assembly.

22.30.050    Planning commission.

22.30.060    Board of adjustment.

Article III. Consolidated Application Process

22.30.070    Applications.

22.30.080    Pre-application meetings.

22.30.090    Content of applications.

22.30.100    Fees.

Article IV. Public Notice Requirements

22.30.110    Notice of administrative approvals.

22.30.120    Notice of public hearings.

22.30.130    Notice of appeal hearings.

22.30.140    Notice of decision.

Article V. Review and Approval Process

22.30.150    Administrative approvals without notice.

22.30.160    Planning commission review and decision.

22.30.170    Assembly actions.

22.30.180    Procedures for public hearings.

22.30.190    Reconsideration.

22.30.200    Remand.

22.30.210    Effective date.

Article VI. Appeals

22.30.220    Appeals to the planning commission.

22.30.230    Appeals to the assembly.

22.30.240    Judicial appeal.

Article VII. Enforcement

22.30.250    Violation of restrictions or conditions.

22.30.260    Violation not condoned by permit issuance.

22.30.270    Enforcement duty.

22.30.280    Injunctions.

22.30.290    Civil action for violation—Damages.

22.30.300    Penalties.

22.30.310    Remedies deemed cumulative.

22.30.320    Schedule of fees, charges and expenses.

22.30.330    Inspection warrant.

22.30.340    Emergency powers.

Article VIII. Amendments

22.30.350    Purpose.

22.30.360    Amendment standards—Administrative permits.

22.30.370    Amendment standards—Special use permits.

22.30.380    Amendment standards—Development regulations, official map and other official controls.

Article I. Introduction


22.30.010 Introduction.

A.    Intent. The purpose of this chapter is to combine and consolidate the application, review, and approval procedures for land development in the city and borough of Sitka so that these procedures are clear, concise, and understandable. It is further intended to assist in combining and expediting development review and integrating review procedures. 

B.    Rules of Interpretation. 

1.    For the purposes of the development code, all words used in the code shall have their normal and customary meanings, unless specifically defined otherwise in this code.

2.    Words used in the present tense include the future.

3.    The plural includes the singular and vice versa.

4.    The words “will” and “shall” are mandatory.

5.    The word “may” indicates that discretion is allowed.

6.    The word “used” includes designed, intended, or arranged to be used.

7.    The masculine gender includes the feminine and vice versa.

8.    Distances shall be measured horizontally unless otherwise specified.

9.    The word “building” includes a portion of a building or a portion of the lot on which it stands. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)

Article II. Administration


22.30.020 Roles and responsibilities.

A.    The regulation of land development is a cooperative activity involving different elected and appointed boards and city staff. The specific responsibilities of these bodies are set forth below.

B.    Applicants are expected to read and understand the city development code and be prepared to fulfill the obligations placed on applications for development approvals defined in Title 21 and this title of the Sitka General Code.

(Ord. 15-51 § 4 (part), 2015: Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.30.030 Administrator. 

The term “administrator” shall mean the city and borough administrator, or an individual operating with his/her express knowledge on his/her behalf. Said individual may include, but is not limited to, the planning director or planning assistant. The administrator is responsible for the administration of this title and shall review and act on the following:

A.    Administrative Interpretation. Upon request or as determined necessary, the administrator shall interpret the meaning or application of the provisions of said titles and issue a written administrative interpretation. All administrative determinations shall be reported to the planning commission within a reasonable period of time following their issuance.

B.    Nonconforming use permits.

C.    Administrative approvals as set forth in Section 22.30.150.

D.    Permit Procedures. The administrator shall determine the proper procedure for all development applications.

(Ord. 15-51 § 4 (part), 2015: Ord. 04-60 § 4(D) (part), 2004; Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.30.040 Assembly. 

In addition to its legislative responsibility, the assembly shall review and act on the following subjects:

A.    Recommendations of the planning commission.

B.    Appeal of planning commission recommendations and decisions.

(Ord. 15-51 § 4 (part), 2015: Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.30.050 Planning commission. 

The planning commission shall be constituted in accordance with Chapter 2.18 and the Sitka Home Rule Charter and shall have the responsibility of reviewing and acting on the following:

A.    Recommendations to the assembly on approvals of subdivisions, planned unit developments, and binding site plans.

B.    Recommendations to the assembly on amendments to the comprehensive plan.

C.    Recommendations to the assembly on amendments to the subdivision code, Title 21.

D.    Recommendations to the assembly on amendments to the zoning code, this title, or the official map.

E.    Approve variances with appeals possible to the assembly.

F.    Approve conditional use permit applications with appeals possible to the assembly.

G.    Other actions requested or remanded by the assembly.

(Ord. 15-51 § 4 (part), 2015: Ord. 04-60 § 4(R), (S), 2004.)


22.30.060 Board of adjustment.

The assembly of the city and borough shall function as the board of adjustment with the authority to:

A.    Consider appeals of variances or conditional use permits.

B.    Hear appeals of administrative approvals or denials.

(Ord. 15-51 § 4 (part), 2015: Ord. 04-60 § 4(R), 2004.)

Article III. Consolidated Application Process


22.30.070 Applications.

A.    The city shall strive to consolidate development application and review as appropriate in order to integrate the development permit review process, while avoiding duplication of the review processes.

B.    All applications for development permits, design review approvals, variances and other municipal approvals under the code shall be submitted on forms provided by the city. All applications shall be signed by the property owner or his/her agent. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.30.080 Pre-application meetings.

Applicants for development are encouraged to participate in an informal meeting prior to preparation of an application. The purpose of the meeting is to discuss the proposed development, city design standards, design alternatives, and required permits and application and approval procedures. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.30.090 Content of applications.

A.    All applications for approval under Title 21 and this title shall include the information specified in the applicable title. The administrator may require such additional information as reasonably necessary to fully and properly evaluate the proposal.

B.    The applicant shall apply for all permits required by the city as identified in the pre-application meeting or as determined by the administrator. Other permits required by other jurisdictions are the applicant’s responsibility to determine.

C.    The city may require applications to be supplemented with additional information during review by the staff, planning commission or assembly. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.30.100 Fees.

The municipality shall establish fees for all aspects of the application and review process including, but not limited to, applications for permits, meetings, plan checking, inspections, testing, general facilities charges, impact mitigation, and other administrative activities. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)

Article IV. Public Notice Requirements


22.30.110 Notice of administrative approvals. 

A.    Notification of Preliminary Approval. The administrator shall notify the adjacent property owners of his intent to grant approval at least seven days prior to the effective date of the approval. Notification shall be made by first class mail only. The notice shall include:

1.    A description of the preliminary approval granted, including any conditions of approval.

2.    A place where further information may be obtained.

3.    A statement that final approval will be granted unless an appeal requesting a public hearing is filed with the city clerk within ten days of the date of the notice.

B.    The administrator may approve, approve with conditions, or deny certain applications without notice, as described elsewhere in this title. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.30.120 Notice of public hearings. 

A.    Notification. Notices required by this title shall include the date, time and location of the hearing as well as a description of the action requested and the property for which the action has been requested. The names of the property owners and the parties filing the application shall also be included. The following notices shall be given:

1.    General circulation within the city and borough on at least two occasions prior to the meeting. These two publications shall be at least three and five calendar days before the meeting;

2.    By sending notices by first class mail at least five days but not more than twenty days prior to the date of hearing to all property owners within one hundred feet along the abutting streets, using the names and addresses as they appear on the records of the city and borough assessor;

a.    In lieu of the requirement in subsection (A)(2) of this section, notices shall not be required to be sent to property owners over two thousand feet from a project when all the property is in common ownership.

3.    The proceedings related to any approval action subject to public notice shall not be invalidated due to persons not receiving such public notice via U.S. mail. 

B.    Application Available for Public Action. From the time of filing such application until the time for such public hearing, the application, together with all relevant data, plans or maps, shall be available for public inspection in the office of the planning director.

C.    Consideration of Evidence. The planning commission shall hear and consider evidence and facts from any person at the public hearing or receive written comments from any person relative to the matter brought before the commission. The right of any person to present evidence shall not be denied for the reason that such person was not required to be informed of such a public hearing.

D.    If, for any reason, a meeting or hearing on a pending action cannot be completed on the date set in the public notice, the meeting or hearing may be continued to a date certain and no further notice under this section is required. 

(Ord. 03-1746 § 4 (part), 2003; Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.30.130 Notice of appeal hearings. 

In addition to the posting and publication requirements of chapter, notice of appeal hearings shall be as follows:

A.    For appeals of administrative approvals, notice shall be mailed to adjacent property owners.

B.    For appeals of planning commission recommendations, notice shall be mailed to parties of record from the commission hearing. Parties of record include persons receiving public notice and persons attending or testifying at public hearings. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.30.140 Notice of decision. 

A written notice for all final decisions shall be sent to the applicant and other parties as determined by the administrator. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)

Article V. Review and Approval Process


22.30.150 Administrative approvals without notice. 

A.    The administrator may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the following without notice: 

1.    Boundary (lot) line adjustments.

2.    Extension of time for approval.

3.    Minor amendments or modifications to approved developments or permits. Minor amendments are those which may affect the precise dimensions or location of buildings, accessory structures and driveways, but do not (a) affect overall project character, (b) increase the number of lots, dwelling units, or density, or (c) decrease the quality or amount of open space.

4.    Home occupations and other accessory uses in single-family zones.

5.    Minor adjustment to yard requirements in residential zones, C-1 general commercial, C-2 general commercial mobile home, WD waterfront, and I industrial zones where the administrator may allow development to encroach up to two feet into a required yard setback when it is determined that strict application of the setback requirement may cause an undue hardship and there are not impacts on adjacent properties.

6.    Required Findings for Nonconforming Use Permits. The city shall grant a nonconforming use permit if documentary evidence is provided by the applicant to support the planning commission’s findings that:

a.    Granting a nonconforming use permit is necessary to adapt the nonconforming use and associated structures to changes in technology, merchandising, or other generally recognized trends which affect the utility of structures or the applicant’s ability to compete;

b.    Granting a nonconforming use permit will not introduce any (additional) hazards or interfere with the potential development of nearby properties in accordance with present zoning regulations;

c.    The nonconforming use and associated structures will comply with the requirements of Section 22.24.050(B);

d.    The applicant’s proposal will result in improvements in functionality or safety, or in exterior appearance, screening, access and other features which will make the use or structure more compatible with allowed uses; and

e.    Granting a nonconforming use permit will not detract from the intent of the comprehensive plan and any implementing regulation.

B.    Administrator’s decisions under this section shall be final on the date issued. 

(Ord. 16-28 § 4, 2016: Ord. 04-60 § 4(J), 2004; Ord. 03-1746 § 4 (part), 2003; Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.30.160 Planning commission review and decision. 

Planning commission decision and action authority is defined in Section 22.30.050.

A.    Staff Report. The administrator shall prepare a staff report on the proposed development or action summarizing any comments, analysis, and recommendations of city departments, affected agencies and special districts, evaluating the development’s consistency with the comprehensive plan, code, and other adopted plans and regulations. The staff report may include findings, conclusions or proposed recommendations for disposition of the development application.

B.    Hearing. The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing on development proposals for the purpose of taking testimony, hearing evidence, considering the facts germane to the proposal, and evaluating the proposal for consistency with the city’s comprehensive plan, code, and other adopted plans and regulations. Notice of the planning commission hearing shall be in accordance with Article IV of this chapter.

C.    Required Findings for Conditional Use Permits. The planning commission shall not approve a proposed development unless it first makes the following findings and conclusions:

1.    The city may use design standards and other elements in this code to modify the proposal. A conditional use permit may be approved only if all of the following findings can be made regarding the proposal and are supported by the record that the granting of the proposed conditional use permit will not:

a.    Be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare;

b.    Adversely affect the established character of the surrounding vicinity; nor

c.    Be injurious to the uses, property, or improvements adjacent to, and in the vicinity of, the site upon which the proposed use is to be located.

2.    The granting of the proposed conditional use permit is consistent and compatible with the intent of the goals, objectives and policies of the comprehensive plan and any implementing regulation.

3.    All conditions necessary to lessen any impacts of the proposed use are conditions that can be monitored and enforced.

4.    The proposed use will not introduce hazardous conditions at the site that cannot be mitigated to protect adjacent properties, the vicinity, and the public health, safety and welfare of the community from such hazard.

5.    The conditional use will be supported by, and not adversely affect, adequate public facilities and services; or that conditions can be imposed to lessen any adverse impacts on such facilities and services.

6.    Burden of Proof. The applicant has the burden of proving that the proposed conditional use meets all of the criteria in subsection B of this section.

    The city may approve, approve with conditions, modify, modify with conditions, or deny the conditional use permit. The city may reduce or modify bulk requirements, off-street parking requirements, and use design standards to lessen impacts, as a condition of the granting of the conditional use permit. In considering the granting of a conditional use, the assembly and planning commission shall satisfy themselves that the general criteria set forth for uses specified in this chapter will be met. The city may consider any or all criteria listed and may base conditions or safeguards upon them. The assembly and planning commission may require the applicant to submit whatever reasonable evidence may be needed to protect the public interest. The general approval criteria are as follows:

1.    Site topography, slope and soil stability, geophysical hazards such as flooding, surface and subsurface drainage and water quality, and the possible or probable effects of the proposed conditional use upon these factors;

2.    Utilities and service requirements of the proposed use, including sewers, storm drainage, water, fire protection, access and electrical power; the assembly and planning commission may enlist the aid of the relevant public utility officials with specialized knowledge in evaluating the probable effects of the proposed use and may consider the costs of enlarging, upgrading or extending public utilities in establishing conditions under which the conditional use may be permitted;

3.    Lot or tract characteristics, including lot size, yard requirements, lot coverage and height of structures;

4.    Use characteristics of the proposed conditional use that affect adjacent uses and districts, including hours of operation, number of persons, traffic volumes, off-street parking and loading characteristics, trash and litter removal, exterior lighting, noise, vibration, dust, smoke, heat and humidity, recreation and open space requirements;

5.    Community appearance such as landscaping, fencing and screening, dependent upon the specific use and its visual impacts.

D.    Required Findings for Variances.

1.    Required Findings for Variances Involving Major Structures or Expansions. Before any variance is granted, it shall be shown:

a.    That there are special circumstances to the intended use that do not apply generally to the other properties. Special circumstances may include the shape of the parcel, the topography of the lot, the size or dimensions of the parcels, the orientation or placement of existing structures, or other circumstances that are outside the control of the property owner;

b.    The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right or use possessed by other properties but are denied to this parcel; such uses may include the placement of garages or the expansion of structures that are commonly constructed on other parcels in the vicinity;

c.    That the granting of such a variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property, nearby parcels or public infrastructure;

d.    That the granting of such a variance will not adversely affect the comprehensive plan.

2.    Required Findings for Minor Expansions, Small Structures, Fences, and Signs.

a.    The municipality finds that the necessary threshold for granting this variance should be lower than thresholds for variances involving major structures or major expansions;

b.    The granting of the variance is not injurious to nearby properties or improvements;

c.    The granting of the variance furthers an appropriate use of the property.

E.    Required Findings for Appeals. Appeals of any decisions regulated by this title shall only be granted when the designated appeal body determines that the subject permit approval or denial was in error. The appeal body shall base its decision on new evidence or proof of procedural error in the prior action. The appellant shall bear the burden of proof of proving that the decision was in error.

F.    Required Findings for Code Amendments. Article VIII of this chapter contains standards for amendments to administrative permits, special use permits, the development standards, and the official map.

(Ord. 15-51 § 4 (part), 2015: Ord. 04-60 § 4(J), (K), (L), 2004; Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.30.170 Assembly actions.

A.    Actions. Upon receiving a recommendation from the planning commission or notice of any other matter requiring the assembly’s attention, the assembly shall perform the following actions as appropriate:

1.    Hold a public hearing and make a decision on the following matters:

a.    Appeal of administrative interpretations.

b.    Appeal of administrative approvals.

c.    Appeal of enforcement actions by the administrator.

d.    Other matters not prohibited by law.

e.    Amendments to the comprehensive plan, zoning code, official map, or subdivision code.

B.    Decisions. The assembly shall make its decision by motion or ordinance as appropriate.

1.    An assembly decision on a planning commission recommendation or following a public hearing shall include one of the following actions:

a.    Approve as recommended.

b.    Approve with additional conditions.

c.    Modify, with or without the applicant’s concurrence; provided, that the modifications do not:

i.    Enlarge the area or scope of the project.

ii.    Increase the density or proposed building size.

iii.    Significantly increase adverse environmental impacts as determined by the responsible official.

d.    Deny (reapplication or resubmittal is permitted).

e.    Deny with prejudice (reapplication or resubmittal is not allowed for one year).

f.    Remand for further proceedings.

2.    An assembly decision following a closed record appeal hearing shall include one of the following actions:

a.    Grant the permit or appeal in whole or in part.

b.    Deny the permit or appeal in whole or in part.

c.    Remand for further proceedings. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.30.180 Procedures for public hearings. 

Public hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the hearing body’s rules of procedure and shall serve to create or supplement an evidentiary record upon which the body will base its decision. The chair shall open the public hearing and, in general, observe the following sequence of events:

A.    Staff presentation, including submittal of any administrative reports. Members of the hearing body may ask questions of the staff.

B.    Applicant presentation, including submittal of any materials. Members of the hearing body may ask questions of the applicant.

C.    Testimony or comments by the public germane to the matter. Questions directed to the staff or the applicant shall be posed by the chair at its discretion.

D.    Rebuttal, response or clarifying statements by the staff and the applicant.

E.    The evidentiary portion of the public hearing shall be closed and the hearing body shall deliberate on the matter before it.

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.30.190 Reconsideration. 

A party to a public hearing or closed record appeal may seek reconsideration only of a final decision by filing a written request for reconsideration with the administrator within fourteen calendar days of the oral announcement of the final decision. The assembly shall consider the request at its next regularly scheduled meeting. If the request is denied, the previous action shall become final. If the request is granted, the assembly body may immediately revise and reissue its decision or may call for argument in accordance with the procedures for closed record appeals. (Ord. 04-60 § 4(M), 2004.)


22.30.200 Remand. 

In the event the assembly determines that the public hearing record or record on appeal is insufficient or otherwise flawed, the assembly may remand the matter back to the hearing body. The assembly shall specify the items or issues to be considered and the time frame for completing the additional work. The assembly may hold a public hearing on a closed record appeal only for the limited purposes identified in the remand. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.30.210 Effective date.

The final decision of the assembly or hearing body shall be effective on the date stated in the decision, motion, or ordinance. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)

Article VI. Appeals


22.30.220 Appeals to the planning commission.

A.    Filing. Every appeal to the planning commission shall be filed with the municipal clerk within ten days of the date of the recommendation or decision of the matter being appealed. Appeals of enforcement actions by the administrator shall be made directly to the assembly.

B.    Contents. The notice of appeal shall contain a concise statement identifying:

1.    The decision being appealed.

2.    The name and address of the appellant and his interest(s) in the matter.

3.    The specific reasons why the appellant believes the decision to be wrong. The appellant shall bear the burden of proving the decision was wrong.

4.    The desired outcome or requested changes to the decision.

C.    Appeals of enforcement actions by the administrator shall be made in manner outlined above. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.30.230 Appeals to the assembly. 

A.    Filing. Every appeal to the assembly shall be filed with the municipal clerk within ten days after the date of the recommendation or decision of the matter being appealed. 

B.    Contents. The notice of appeal shall contain a concise statement identifying:

1.    The decision being appealed.

2.    The name and address of the appellant and his interest(s) in the matter.

3.    The specific reasons why the appellant believes the decision to be wrong. The appellant shall bear the burden of proving the decision was wrong.

4.    The desired outcome or requested changes to the decision. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.30.240 Judicial appeal.

A.    Appeals from the final decision of the assembly, or other city board or body involving Title 21 SGC, and for which all other appeals specifically authorized have been timely exhausted, shall be made to superior court within thirty days of the date the decision or action became final, unless another time period is established by state law or local ordinance.

B.    Notice of the appeal and any other pleadings required to be filed with the court shall be served on the municipal clerk, administrator, and city attorney within the applicable time period. This requirement is jurisdictional.

C.    The cost of transcribing and preparing all records ordered certified by the court or desired by the appellant for such appeal shall be borne by the appellant. The appellant shall post with the municipal clerk prior to the preparation of any records an advance fee deposit in the amount specified by the municipal clerk. Any overage will be promptly returned to the appellant. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)

Article VII. Enforcement


22.30.250 Violation of restrictions or conditions.

A.    When it is determined by the planning department (department) that a person is violating or is about to violate a provision of a permit, or a term or condition of a permit issued by the municipality under this section, the department will notify the person of its determination by personal service or certified mail.

B.    The recipient of the determination must file with the department, no less than ten days and no more than thirty days, a report stating what measures have been and are being taken, or are proposed to be taken, to correct or control the conditions outlined in the notice.

C.    After the report is filed under subsection B of this section or the time period specified for it has elapsed, the department will issue a compliance order or a report. A copy of the compliance order shall be served personally or sent by certified mail to the person affected. A compliance order is effective upon receipt.

D.    Within ten days after receipt the recipient may request a hearing before the assembly to review the compliance order. Failure to request a hearing within ten days after the receipt of a compliance order constitutes a waiver of the recipient’s right of review.

E.    The assembly may hold a hearing within forty-five days after receipt of a request under subsection D of this section. The assembly shall rescind, modify or affirm the compliance order. If the compliance order is modified or affirmed, it shall take effect at the time determined by the assembly. Any appeal shall be filed in superior court within thirty days, and there shall not be any stays in effect during the interim. 

F.    The city attorney may seek enforcement of a compliance order. 

(Ord. 03-1746 § 4 (part), 2003; Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.30.260 Violation not condoned by permit issuance.

The issuance or granting of any building permit or approval of plans or specifications under the authority of the building code shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit or approval of any violation of any restriction, condition of any of the provisions of this title or any amendment thereto. No permit appearing to give authority to violate this title shall be valid except insofar as the work or use does not violate this title. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.30.270 Enforcement duty.

It shall be the duty of the administrator or designee to enforce the provisions of the building code permitting the erection, construction, moving, conversion, or alteration of buildings or to the occupancy of land or buildings or any addition thereto. It shall further be the duty of the administrator or designee to enforce the provisions of this title pertaining to the use of land or any building for which any permit, variance, or zoning exception is required by this title. Whenever a violation occurs, any person may file a complaint in regard thereto that feels he or she is aggrieved. Complaints shall be brought to the attention of the administrator or a designee who shall cause the complaint to be immediately investigated and reported thereon. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.30.280 Injunctions.

The superior court has jurisdiction to enjoin a violation of this title or of a lawful order of the department or permit, approval or term or condition of a permit, or approval issued under this title. In actions brought under this section, temporary or preliminary relief may be obtained upon a showing of imminent threat of continued violation, and probable success on the merits, without the necessity of demonstrating physical irreparable harm. The balance of equities in actions under this section may affect the timing of compliance, but not the necessity of compliance within a reasonable period of time. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.30.290 Civil action for violation—Damages.

A.    A person who violates or causes or permits to be violated a provision of this title or a regulation, a lawful order of the department, or a permit, approval or term or condition of a permit or approval issued under this title is liable, in a civil action, to the municipality for a sum to be assessed by the court of not less than twenty-five dollars nor more than one thousand dollars for the initial violation, nor more than five hundred dollars for each day thereafter on which the violation continues; or in the case of operating without an appropriate notice, permit, or for violations which are related to public health, safety and welfare, or cause substantial adverse effects on the environment, not less than five hundred dollars nor more than five thousand dollars for the initial violation nor more than two thousand dollars for each day thereafter on which the violation continues and which, in either case, shall reflect, when applicable:

1.    Reasonable compensation in the nature of liquidated damages for any adverse public health, safety, welfare or environmental effects caused by the violation, which shall be determined by the court according to the sensitivity of the receiving property, neighborhood or environment and the degree to which the violation degrades existing neighborhood environmental quality;

2.    Reasonable costs incurred by the municipality in detection, investigation and attempted correction of the violations; and

3.    The economic savings realized by the person in not complying with the requirement for which a violation is charged.

B.    Actions under this section may not be used for punitive purposes, and sums assessed by the court must be compensatory and remedial in nature.

C.    The court, upon motion of the department or upon its own motion, may defer assessment of all or part of that portion of the sum imposed upon a person under this section conditioned upon the person complying, within the shortest feasible time, with the requirement for which a violation is shown.

D.    As used in this section, “economic savings” means that sum which a person would be required to expend for the planning, acquisition, siting, construction, installation and operation of the facilities necessary to effect compliance with the standard violated. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.30.300 Penalties.

A.    Violations of the provisions of this title or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violations of restrictions or conditions, shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this title or fails to comply with any of its requirements is, upon conviction, punishable by a fine not more than five hundred dollars and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.

B.    The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor or agent who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided.

C.    Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city and borough from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.30.310 Remedies deemed cumulative.

All remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.30.320 Schedule of fees, charges and expenses.

Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full, including any property taxes due on the subject property, no action may be taken on any application or appeal. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.30.330 Inspection warrant.

The department is authorized to seek administrative search warrants pursuant to this code for the purpose of investigating actual or suspected sources of damage caused by violations of this title or to ascertain compliance or noncompliance with this title or a permit or term or condition thereof issued under this title. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.30.340 Emergency powers.

A.    When the department finds, after investigation, that a person is causing, engaging in, or maintaining a condition or activity which, in the judgment of the department, presents an imminent or present danger to the health, safety or welfare of the people of the municipality or would result in or be likely to result in irreversible or irreparable damage to the natural resources or environment, and it appears to be prejudicial to the interests of the people of the municipality to delay action until an opportunity for a hearing can be provided, the department, without proper hearing, shall, upon concurrence of the municipal administrator, order that person by notice to discontinue, abate or alleviate the condition or activity. The proscribed condition or activity shall be immediately discontinued, abated or alleviated.

B.    Upon receipt of an order of the department made under subsection A of this section, the person affected has the right to be heard and to present proof to the department that the condition or activity does not constitute an actual or potential source of irreversible or irreparable damage to the public heath, safety or welfare or to natural resources or environment, or that the order may constitute a substantial private hardship.

C.    In the department’s discretion or upon application made by the recipient of an order within fifteen days of receipt of the order, the department shall schedule a hearing at the earliest possible time. The hearing shall be scheduled within five days of the receipt of the application. The submission of an application or scheduling of a hearing does not stay the operation of the department’s order made under subsection A of this section.

D.    After a hearing the commission shall affirm, modify or set aside the order. An order affirmed, modified or set aside after a hearing is subject to judicial review. The order is not stayed pending judicial review unless the commission so directs. If an order is not immediately complied with, the municipal attorney, upon request of the department, may seek enforcement of the order. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)

Article VIII. Amendments


22.30.350 Purpose. 

The purpose of this section is to define types of amendments to the development regulations, comprehensive plan, and other official controls and to identify procedures for those actions. (Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.30.360 Amendment standards—Administrative permits. 

The following provisions include methods for amending conditions of approval and final development plans that have received an administrative permit:

A.    Minor Amendments. The following procedures shall be required for all minor amendments:

1.    Requests for minor amendments shall be in writing from the property owner or the owner’s authorized agent.

2.    Minor amendment applications may be circulated to any city department or agency with jurisdiction at the discretion of the administrator.

3.    Minor amendments may be approved or modified with conditions of approval by the administrator provided all of the following requirements are met:

a.    Any proposal that results in a change of use must be permitted outright in the current zone classification.

b.    A change to a condition of approval does not modify the intent of the original condition.

c.    The perimeter boundaries of the original site shall not be extended by more than five percent of the original lot area.

d.    The proposal does not add more than ten percent gross square footage of structures on the site.

e.    The proposal does not increase the overall impervious surface on the site by more than ten percent.

f.    Any additions or expansions approved through minor amendments that cumulatively exceed the requirements of this section shall be reviewed as a major amendment.

4.    Minor amendment decisions shall be in writing and attached to the official file.

5.    Copies of the decision shall be mailed to all parties of record.

B.    Major Amendments.

1.    Any modification exceeding the provisions established by the administrator shall follow the same procedure required for the original application.

2.    A finding that addresses the applicability of any specific conditions of approval for the original permit shall be required.

3.    Any modification that requires a permit other than the type granted for the original application shall require the new permit type. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.30.370 Amendment standards—Special use permits. 

The following provisions include methods for amending conditions of approval and final development plans that have received a special use permit including planned unit developments, conditional uses, variances and binding site plans:

A.    Minor Amendments. The following procedures shall be required for all minor amendments:

1.    Requests for minor amendments shall be in writing from the property owner or the owner’s authorized agent.

2.    Minor amendment applications may be circulated to any city department or agency with jurisdiction at the discretion of the administrator.

3.    Minor amendments may be approved or modified with conditions of approval by the administrator provided all of the following requirements are met:

a.    Any proposal that results in a change of use must be permitted outright in the current zone classification.

b.    A change to a condition of approval does not modify the intent of the original condition.

c.    The perimeter boundaries of the original site shall not be extended by more than five percent of the original lot area.

d.    The proposal does not add more than ten percent gross square footage of structures on the site.

e.    The proposal does not increase the overall residential density of the site.

f.    The proposal does not change or modify housing types.

g.    The proposal does not reduce designated open space.

h.    The proposal does not increase the overall impervious surface on the site by more than ten percent.

i.    Any additions or expansions approved through minor amendments that cumulatively exceed the requirements of this section shall be reviewed as a major amendment.

4.    Minor amendment decisions shall be in writing and attached to the official file.

5.    Copies of the decision shall be mailed to all parties of record.

B.    Major Amendments.

1.    Any modification exceeding the provisions established by the administrator shall follow the same procedure required for the original application.

2.    A finding that addresses the applicability of any specific conditions of approval for the original permit shall be required.

3.    Any modification that requires a permit other than the type granted for the original application shall require the new permit type. 

(Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)


22.30.380 Amendment standards—Development regulations, official map and other official controls. 

This section is intended to provide the method for adopting amendments to the text and official map of the city’s development regulations and other official controls.

A.    Initiation of an Amendment. An amendment to the zoning code or other official controls may be initiated by:

1.    The assembly requesting the planning commission to set the matter for hearing and recommendations.

2.    The planning commission with the concurrence of the administrator.

3.    One or more property owners directly affected by a proposal through a petition to the city.

4.    Citizen advisory committees or organizations through a petition to the city.

5.    The municipal administrator or his designee.

B.    Application Required. An application for an amendment shall be in the form of letter filed with the administrator. The letter shall contain information necessary for full assessment of the need, hardship, or other justification for the proposal. For official map amendments, the application shall contain a legal description of the subject property, owner’s name, address, and contact person, and an analysis showing the public benefit of the proposed amendment as well as the proposal’s consistency with the comprehensive plan. No application for an amendment shall be processed until the administrator has determined that the application is complete.

1.    Except for the extension of existing zoning district boundaries, no change in district mapping shall be considered that would result in spot zoning or that would be inconsistent with proper and well-defined physical boundaries such as streets, major creeks, changes in topography or other physical features.

C.    Staff Report. The administrator shall prepare a written report on each amendment pending before the planning commission. The report shall be transmitted to the planning commission and to the applicant before the public hearing. Each report shall contain:

1.    Any factual findings pertaining to the amendment.

2.    Any comments from city departments or other agencies with jurisdiction.

3.    The staff’s recommendation.

D.    Public Hearing by the Planning Commission. The planning commission shall give notice and hold a public hearing prior to the recommendation for adoption or amendment of any official control to the city council. See Article IV of this chapter for hearing procedures and rules.

E.    Adoption by Assembly. Amendments to the development regulations or other official controls shall be adopted by the assembly by ordinance after a public hearing on the planning commission’s recommendation.

1.    Official map amendment actions by the assembly shall not become effective except by a majority vote of five members when the actions are protested by owners of twenty-five percent or more of the subject area.

a.    Written protests must be filed in person, with the city clerk, ten days prior to the assembly’s public hearing. Protests must be signed by legal property owners and contain legal descriptions of the ownership interests in the subject amendment area.

F.    Resubmittals. Proposed amendments which have been denied by the city shall not be resubmitted until one year from the effective date of the denial.

G.    Exception for Moratorium on Short-Term Rentals. The procedures set out in this section for considering amendments to the text of the city and borough’s development regulations and other official controls do not apply to an amendment adopted by the assembly establishing a moratorium on short-term rentals for a specific period.

(Ord. 05-09 § 4(B), 2005; Ord. 03-1746 § 4 (part), 2003; Ord. 02-1683 § 4 (part), 2002.)

 


Title 23 PARKS AND RECREATION

Chapters:

23.10    General Public Use of Municipal Park and Recreation Facilities, Land, and Trails

23.20    Commercial Recreational Use of Municipal Lands and Facilities

23.30    Public Use of Parks and Recreation Facilities

23.40    Municipal Landscaping and Trees


Chapter 23.10 GENERAL PUBLIC USE OF MUNICIPAL PARK AND RECREATION FACILITIES, LAND AND TRAILS

Sections:

23.10.010    Park activities.

23.10.020    Park scheduling—Permits and fees.

23.10.030    Park hours.


23.10.010 Park activities.

Both active and passive recreational activities are permitted in municipal parks within designated areas. This shall include field sports in the ball fields area; tennis and basketball in their respective courts; playground activities in the playground area; picnics and gatherings in the picnic shelters; and special events and hiking on trails. (Ord. 2004-39 § 4 (part), 2004.)


23.10.020 Park scheduling—Permits and fees.

A.    Park and recreation facilities are available for public use whenever possible when there is no conflict with municipal programs. Reservations or scheduling for use of facilities is required for any community special or private event and is done by contacting the parks and recreation office.

B.    A written permit is required for special uses including: fires outside of a designated fire ring, overnight camping, wood cutting, removal of any natural resources from park property, or use outside of normal hours. A permit may be obtained by submitting a written application to the office of the director of public works at least ten days in advance of the date of intended use. The application must specify the time, place, and nature of the intended use, and the person or organization responsible for the activity. An application shall be approved or denied no later than five working days after submission of the application.

C.     Certain facilities within the parks, such as the ball fields or the Pioneer Park picnic shelter, may be reserved for use by individuals or organizations. These facilities, when reserved, are closed to the general public. Reservations are made by contacting the parks and recreation office. User fees may be required for reserved facilities and special events. These fees will be set by the city and borough assembly.

(Ord. 2004-39 § 4 (part), 2004.)


23.10.030 Park hours.

A.    Municipal parks are open to the public from six a.m. to ten p.m. The parks are closed to public use from ten p.m. to six a.m., and no members of the public shall enter a closed park without written permission from the director of public works. Goddard Hot Springs area is excluded from this regulation.

B.    A violation of this section is an infraction punishable by a fine of up to two hundred and fifty dollars.

(Ord. 2004-39 § 4 (part), 2004.)


Chapter 23.20 COMMERCIAL RECREATIONAL USE OF MUNICIPAL LANDS AND FACILITIES

Sections:

23.20.010    Policy.

23.20.020    Lands regulated. 

23.20.030    Permit required for commercial activities.

23.20.040    Commercial recreational use permit fees.

23.20.050    Insurance and indemnification.

23.20.060    Permit duration.

23.20.070    General operating requirements. 

23.20.080    Enforcement and penalties.

23.20.090    Definitions.


23.20.010 Policy.

A.     The policy of the city and borough of Sitka concerning the commercial recreational use of municipal lands is to:

1.    Maintain and improve municipal lands including parks, open spaces, recreation areas, boardwalks and trails for their primary use by the public and preserve them from activities inconsistent with that primary use;

2.    Preserve and maintain these public assets for all users; preserve the recreational experience unique to each area; consider impacts upon other users and neighboring property; and ensure public safety on municipal lands;

3.    Establish rules to minimize environmental damage and mitigate impacts from the commercial recreational use of municipal lands;

4.    Charge for commercial recreational use of municipal lands and facilities, including lands beyond the Sitka road system, at a fair rate which reflects the cost of providing any improvements, maintenance, services, and administration necessary for the use;

5.     Establish and enforce uniform rules for commercial recreational use of municipal lands and facilities.

(Ord. 12-40 § 4 (part), 2012; Ord. 06-14 § 4 (part), 2006: Ord. 04-39 § 4 (part), 2004.)


23.20.020 Lands regulated.

This title applies to all municipal lands and facilities related to commercial recreational use, including Baranof Warm Springs and other locations beyond the Sitka road system. This title also applies to all trails owned by and easements held by the city and borough of Sitka for parks and recreation purposes. This title also applies to trails for which the city and borough holds joint jurisdiction with an agency of the state of Alaska or the United States government. (Ord. 12-40 § 4 (part), 2012: Ord. 06-14 § 4 (part), 2006: Ord. 04-39 § 4 (part), 2004.)


23.20.030 Permit required for commercial activities.

A.     No person may conduct commercial recreational activities on city and borough of Sitka lands subject to this title except as authorized by a permit issued by the administrator.

B.     The administrator may issue a permit for commercial recreational activities on city and borough lands that are recommended by the parks and recreation committee after public hearing and notice, subject to such conditions as the administrator may impose and only upon a determination that the use as proposed:

1.    Will not pollute or degrade the environment, resources, facilities, or atmosphere of the area; and

2.    Will not endanger the public health, safety, and welfare; and 

3.    Will not significantly interfere with the use and enjoyment of the area by other members of the public.

C.     A permit may contain conditions reasonably required for the protection and use of the area for which the permit is granted, including limitations as to time, area, equipment, user loading, traffic, parking, discharges, noise, and other factors.

D.     The administrator may deny a proposed use upon a written determination that the use, alone or in combination with other uses, would cause an unreasonable level of environmental degradation, or other disturbance to the area. In making such determination, the administrator shall consider the nature and extent of the use, the number of users, and the impacts likely to result from the use, including traffic, noise, public access, loading, the availability of parking and other factors.

E.     A permit is transferable only with the permittee’s entire business interest in activities conducted under the permit and only to a person who has successfully completed the permit application process. No credit will be given for any permit payments made by the previous holder of the permit.

(Ord. 06-14 § 4 (part), 2006: Ord. 04-39 § 4 (part), 2004.)


23.20.040 Commercial recreational use permit fees.

The applicant for a commercial recreational use permit shall pay a fee established by the city and borough assembly that will give the city and borough a fair and reasonable return in light of the cost of administering the activity permitted under the permit, the impact of the proposed activity on the area, the cost of any improvements required, and the value of the benefit conferred upon the user. The fee shall be paid prior to the commencement of the permitted activity and should be based on the applicant’s best estimate of the number of clients and number of days of permitted activity that he/she expects for that season. Reconciliation is done at the end of the season and can result in a credit being carried over to the following season or additional charges. The minimum fee is one hundred dollars, regardless of whether a commercial operator’s service days add up to that amount.

(Ord. 06-14 § 4 (part), 2006: Ord. 04-39 § 4 (part), 2004.)


23.20.050 Insurance and indemnification.

A.     General Liability Insurance. Each permittee receiving a permit under Section 23.20.030 shall at all times during the period of operations maintain a current commercial general liability insurance policy in the amount of not less than one million dollars combined single limit, which policy shall name the city and borough and its officers and employees as additional insureds. The policy shall not contain any self-insured retention or deductible in excess of one thousand dollars, and shall include a provision requiring written notification to be given to the city and borough by the insurance company not less than thirty days before the policy is canceled, modified or terminated for any reason. Permittees shall submit a copy of the policy, or, at the option of the city and borough, a certificate of the policy, to the city and borough prior to beginning any operations or setting up of operations under the permit.

B.     Vehicle Liability Insurance. No permit issued under Section 23.20.030 shall be issued or continued in effect unless there is in full force and effect a liability insurance policy for each vehicle used to transport persons or materials to, from or within the permit area. The policy shall be issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state of Alaska. The limits of coverage provided shall be not less than one million dollars for each occurrence (combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage.) The policy shall contain a provision for notification to the city and borough of cancellation thirty days prior to such cancellation.

(Ord. 04-39 § 4 (part), 2004.)


23.20.060 Permit duration.

A.     Permits may be issued for a period not to exceed one year.

B.     Permits are valid only for the dates, times, activities, and areas specified.

C.     Permits are not automatically renewable. Issuance of a permit shall not entitle the permit holder to any priority or preferential consideration for subsequent, new, or additional permits for the same or related uses or areas. A new application must be submitted each year for each permit.

D.     The administrator may issue a temporary permit at any time, valid for not more than thirty days. The application process for a temporary permit shall be the same as for other permits.

(Ord. 06-14 § 4 (part), 2006; Ord. 04-39 § 4 (part), 2004.)


23.20.070 General operating requirements. 

A.     Permit holders shall have a copy of the permit immediately available for inspection at all times while engaged in activities pursuant to the permit. 

B.     Permit holders shall be responsible to the city and borough for their actions and those of their agents, employees or customers while engaged in permit activities. The following operating requirements apply to activities conducted under the permit unless otherwise specified in a permit:

1.    No one may obstruct traffic, litter, use glass containers, nor disturb, damage, deface or remove natural objects including trees, plants, moss, rock, gravel, or minerals, nor disturb or remove cultural, archaeological, or historical material;

2.    Activities conducted under the permit shall be confined to the area stipulated in the permit application except as required for safety reasons;

3.    No alterations or improvements to the permitted area are allowed, nor may anything be posted or signs of any kind be installed in the area unless expressly allowed by written permission of the administrator;

4.    No one may fish or hunt under this permit unless expressly allowed by written permission of the administrator. No one may harass wildlife. Camping or lighting fires may be permitted in designated areas or areas stipulated in the permit application and subject to approval of the administrator;

5.    The permit holder shall promptly notify the administrator of any accident, injury, or claim relating to the permitted activity;

6.    The permit holder shall promptly notify the parks and recreation manager of any repair or maintenance needed in the permitted area, or any natural condition which constitutes a hazard. The permit holder shall not make any repair or alteration to the area unless required by an emergency and shall promptly report such repair or alteration to the parks and recreation manager;

7.    Permit holders shall comply with all state, federal, and local laws applicable to their activities;

8.    Permit holders shall properly dispose of all litter and waste;

9.    The permit holder shall reimburse the city and borough of Sitka for any damage to municipal property caused by the permit holder while engaged in permit activities, including the cost of litter abatement, removal of structures or remediation of the site to its original condition;

10.    No pets shall accompany any person engaged in permit activities unless the pet is restrained on a leash and all fecal material is promptly removed and properly disposed of;

11.    No equipment or supplies may be stored at any municipal facility or permit area unless written approval of the administrator is secured in advance;

12.    All vehicles under the ownership or control of the permit holder shall be lawfully operated or legally parked while the permit holder is engaged in permit activities. The permit holder shall be responsible for following all parking restrictions and requirements imposed by permit conditions. 

(Ord. 06-14 § 4 (part), 2006: Ord. 04-39 § 4 (part), 2004.)


23.20.080 Enforcement and penalties.

A.    A permit may be suspended by the administrator without advance notice if any activities conducted under the permit present an immediate danger to the public health, welfare, or safety or if the suspension is found to be in the best interests of the city and borough of Sitka.

B.    A permit may be suspended or revoked by the administrator upon written findings that the permit holder has violated these regulations. The permit holder shall be provided at least ten days’ notice and an opportunity to be heard at an informal hearing on the suspension or revocation. The administrator’s decision may be appealed to the city and borough assembly by filing a notice of appeal setting forth the reasons the decision is appealed with the city and borough assembly no later than ten days after the administrator’s decision.

C.    Any commercial recreational entity found to be operating on municipal lands without a permit from the city and borough of Sitka will be subject to prosecution for an infraction and subject to a fine for that infraction of not more than five hundred dollars.

(Ord. 06-14 § 4 (part), 2006: Ord. 04-39 § 4 (part), 2004.)


23.20.090 Definitions.

As used in this chapter:

“Commercial recreational use” or “commercial purpose” means the sale, delivery, or solicitation to provide goods or services in exchange for valuable consideration. The term includes a service offered in conjunction with another sale of goods or services whether or not it is incidental to, advertised with, or specifically offered in the other sale. All guide, outfitter, and transportation services are commercial activities if any payment or valuable consideration through barter, trade, cash or other commercial means is required, expected or received beyond the normal and customary, equally shared cost of food and fuel for any portion of activities conducted on city lands, trails, boardwalks or easements. Commercial recreational use also includes but is not limited to: fishing; hunting; hiking; biking; photography; nature or cultural history tours; etc.

“Municipal lands” means any real property and improvements owned by the city and borough of Sitka.

“Permittee” or “permit holder” means the business entity or its authorized representative conducting commercial activities in a recreation area according to a permit issued under these regulations.

“Trail” means footpaths, bridle paths, bicycle paths, ski trails, dog sled trails, motorized vehicle trails, a road or street that is open to public and used as a trail and other paths and trails along highways, streets, roads or boardwalks maintained by the city and borough of Sitka. (Ord. 12-40 § 4 (part), 2012; Ord. 06-14 § 4 (part), 2006: Ord. 04-39 § 4 (part), 2004.)


Chapter 23.30 PUBLIC USE OF PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES

Sections:

23.30.010    Parks and recreation facilities regulated.

23.30.020    Conditions for use of park and recreation facilities.

23.30.030    Public use fees.

23.30.040    Public use permit requirements.


23.30.010 Parks and recreation facilities regulated.

This chapter applies to developed parks and recreation facilities on city and borough land and listed in the recreation facilities survey as adopted by the city and borough assembly and maintained for public inspection by the city and borough clerk, the city and borough public works director, and the city and borough parks and recreation coordinator. This chapter is applicable to only the city and borough of Sitka facilities for which a public use fee is charged for noncommercial uses. The facilities regulated by this chapter include:

A.    The Tom Young Memorial Cabin at Goddard Hot Springs.

(Ord. 05-13 § 4 (part), 2005.)


23.30.020 Conditions for use of park and recreation facilities.

A.    A person may not use or occupy a city and borough of Sitka park facility that is managed on a fee and reservation basis without first obtaining a permit from the city and borough of Sitka and paying the required fee, in person, at the city and borough of Sitka municipal offices. Each day of unauthorized use is a separate offense subject to a fifty-dollar fine.

B.    Permittee must have permit and the fee receipt in possession while using the city and borough of Sitka public use facility as directed by the city and borough of Sitka director of public works.

C.    Dogs and other pets must be on a leash around developed facilities, with the exception of the Tom Young Memorial Cabin and off-leash areas designated in Section 8.04.032. Pets are to be under control at all times. Pet owners are required to clean up after pets.

D.    No discharge of firearms, unless in defense of life, is allowed within a half-mile of a developed facility.

E.    It is unlawful to cut standing or live trees. Only dead and down wood can be used for fires.

F.    Littering is prohibited by Section 10.52.010(H).

G.    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, no dog is allowed on the following designated sports fields or municipal playgrounds except off-leash areas listed in Section 8.04.032, except service dogs with the dog keeper and/or custodian. “Service dogs” is defined by Section 8.04.010(P) or state and federal laws. Designated sports fields and municipal playgrounds where non-service dogs will not be allowed include the following: 

1.    Moller Park fenced ball field;

2.    Lower Moller and Kimsham (Krueger) Multiuse Fields; 

3.    Sports fields at Kimsham Recreational Complex except fenced Kimsham Field One, Baranof, Vilandre and Keet Gooshi Heen ball fields as listed as “off-leash areas” under Section 8.04.032; and 

4.    Municipal playgrounds to include Crescent Harbor Park and Moller Park East and West.

H.    Designated areas listed in subsection G of this section will be posted with signs regarding the ban on non-service dogs and fines. In addition to applicable fines or charges for violating other code provisions, including defecation or off-leash offenses, fines for violating subsection G of this section are as follows:

1.    Three hundred dollars for violating subsection (G)(1) of this section, Moller Park fenced ball field;

2.    One hundred dollars for designated areas in subsections (G)(2) and (G)(4) of this section; and

3.    One hundred dollars for a non-service dog on fenced Kimsham Field One, Baranof, Vilandre and Keet Gooshi Heen ball fields as listed as “off-leash areas” during scheduled sports events, school activities or when the area is in use by students or players.

I.    Definitions. For purposes of this section, the terms shall have the following meanings:

    “Ball field” or “sports field” means an area used by schools or organized teams recognized by the city and borough of Sitka for regulation play of sports including baseball, soccer, football, and softball. “Ball field” or “sports field” does not include the following areas: parking lots; roads; bleacher and concession areas; walkways or track adjacent to the ball field.

    “Municipal playgrounds” means municipal property used for outdoor play or recreation, especially by children, containing recreational equipment such as swings and slides.

(Ord. 13-18 § 4, 2013; Ord. 12-42 § 4, 2012; Ord. 05-13 § 4 (part), 2005.)


23.30.030 Public use fees.

A.    The applicant for a parks and recreation public use permit shall pay a fee established by the city and borough assembly.

B.    The city and borough of Sitka assembly shall establish the fee for the use of a city and borough of Sitka park facility that requires a public use permit. The fee for the Tom Young Memorial Cabin will be forty dollars per permit day.

C.    Fees are not refundable within five days of the first day of reservation. Reservations may be changed one time only for a service fee of ten dollars.

(Ord. 05-13 § 4 (part), 2005.)


23.30.040 Public use permit requirements.

A.    Permits are issued for noncommercial uses only and on a first-come, first-served basis.

B.    A permit day begins at twelve noon on the assigned day and ends at twelve noon on the following day.

C.    A permit may be obtained up to ninety days in advance of desired date.

D.    Public use cabins may be reserved a maximum of three days by the same party.

E.    Permits are only issued to persons eighteen years of age and over.

F.    Persons acquiring a permit must be a member of the party for the duration of use of the cabin or park facility.

G.     Public use permit holders are responsible for any damages to the cabin, associated facilities, or park resources.

(Ord. 05-13 § 4 (part), 2005.)


Chapter 23.40 MUNICIPAL LANDSCAPING AND TREES

Sections:

23.40.010    Definitions.

23.40.020    Purpose.

23.40.030    Requirements.

23.40.040    General tree and landscaping standards.

23.40.050    Installation of landscaping for municipal projects.

23.40.060    Tree planting recommendations and guidelines.

23.40.070    Municipal tree care.

23.40.080    Tree removal and tree topping on municipal property.

23.40.090    Tree pruning on municipal property or right-of-way.


23.40.010 Definitions.

The terms and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

A.    “Landscaping” means an area in which plants and/or landscape features or hardscape elements have been placed or constructed, and may include mounds and berms but doesn’t include turf.

B.    “Roadways” means any highway, street, alley, or lane.

C.    “Urban forest or street tree” means trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation located in named municipal parks and rights-of-way and on municipal building grounds and/or identified in the parks division’s tree inventory.

D.    “Woody vegetation” means a plant that produces wood as its structural issue. It may have one or many hard, woody stems and includes trees, shrubs or bushes.

E.    “Turf” means a surface layer of soil containing a dense growth of grass and its matted roots, including sod or lawn.

F.    “Right-of-way” means the land covered by and adjacent to the roadway that the municipality maintains, is used as legal access and is reserved for the purposes of maintenance or expansion of existing services. This also includes easements on lands over which power lines and other utilities extend (e.g., utility easements).

G.    “Tree topping” means removal of the leader stem of a tree or the severe cutting back of limbs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to stubs to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.

(Ord. 15-34 § 4 (part), 2015.)


23.40.020 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to guide the planting and maintenance of trees and landscaped areas in the city and borough of Sitka’s urban forest. The chapter establishes guidelines and standards for the care of and the installation of trees and landscape materials on municipal projects. (Ord. 15-34 § 4 (part), 2015.)


23.40.030 Requirements.

Tree and landscape planting requirements shall be based on standards set out in this chapter and shall apply to new or existing landscaping and any associated with publicly accessible municipal buildings that are constructed or renovated. (Ord. 15-34 § 4 (part), 2015.)


23.40.040 General tree and landscaping standards.

A.    Trees and landscaping for municipal projects shall be planned in consultation with parks and recreation division staff. Installation and maintenance shall be directed by the public works director or designee and according to the Sitka urban forest management plan and associated best management practices and standards for tree planting and care outlined in this document.

B.    The municipality shall encourage at least one staff person to be a certified arborist.

(Ord. 15-34 § 4 (part), 2015.)


23.40.050 Installation of landscaping for municipal projects.

Consultation with municipal parks and recreation division staff will occur during project planning and implementation including changes. Landscaping and turf for municipal projects shall be installed according to standards established in the Sitka urban forest management plan and industry standard best management practices. (Ord. 15-34 § 4 (part), 2015.)


23.40.060 Tree planting recommendations and guidelines.

Tree planting on municipal lands shall conform to the Sitka urban forest management plan and industry standard best management practices. (Ord. 15-34 § 4 (part), 2015.)


23.40.070 Municipal tree care.

The municipality shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs along all roadways and on municipal land as may be necessary to ensure public safety and for municipal purposes. Consultation with the parks and recreation division staff should occur prior to removal of any urban tree, insofar as practicable. (Ord. 15-34 § 4 (part), 2015.)


23.40.080 Tree removal and tree topping on municipal property.

A.    The city and borough of Sitka will continue to maintain ROW and utility easements to ensure public safety and to protect CBS infrastructure which at times does include removal of hazardous trees.

B.    Tree Topping. Tree topping on municipal property is not permitted.

(Ord. 15-34 § 4 (part), 2015.)


23.40.090 Tree pruning on municipal property or right-of-way.

Pruning shall be conducted according to this chapter.

A.    Tree pruning on municipal property shall conform to standards established in the Sitka urban forest management plan for tree care operations and under the general supervision of the parks and recreation staff person who is a certified arborist.

B.    No one other than qualified utility employees or contractors shall prune any plant within ten feet of an overhead utility line.

C.    Any person growing a tree adjacent to municipal roadways, sidewalks or within access rights-of-way is:

1.    Responsible for removing all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs, which constitute a menace to the safety of the public.

D.    The municipality shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or intersections or to ensure public safety.

(Ord. 15-34 § 4 (part), 2015.)


Title 24 NONDISCRIMINATION 

Chapters:

24.05    Nondiscrimination 


Chapter 24.05 NONDISCRIMINATION 

Sections:

24.05.010    Definitions. 

24.05.020    Policy. 

24.05.030    Discrimination in employment. 

24.05.040    Discrimination in the provision of housing or realty. 

24.05.050    Discrimination in public accommodations. 

24.05.060    Lawful practices. 

24.05.070    Unlawful intimidation or retaliation. 

24.05.080    Aiding, abetting, or coercing a violation. 

24.05.090    Cause of action. 


24.05.010 Definitions. 

For purposes of this chapter:

A.    “Disability” means, with respect to a person:

1.    A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of a person’s major life activities;

2.    A record of having such impairment; or

3.    Being regarded as having such an impairment. “Disability” does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance in violation of applicable state law. However, a person may be considered to be disabled if that person:

a.    Has successfully completed a supervised drug rehabilitation program; and

i.    Is no longer engaging in the illegal use of a controlled substance;

ii.    Is not currently addicted to a controlled substance; or

iii.    Has otherwise been rehabilitated successfully and is no longer engaging in use of a controlled substance and is not currently addicted;

b.    Is participating in a supervised rehabilitation program and is no longer engaging in illegal use of controlled substances; or

c.    Is erroneously regarded as currently illegally using, or being addicted to, a controlled substance.

B.    “Employer” includes any person who employs four or more persons exclusive of that person’s parents, spouse or children.

C.    “Employment agency” includes any person undertaking for compensation to procure opportunities to work or to procure, recruit, refer or place employees.

D.    “Familial status” means marital status, changes in marital status, pregnancy, or parenthood.

E.    “Financial institution” means bank, banking organization, mortgage company, insurance company, investment company, or other lender to whom application is made for financial assistance for the purchase, lease, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair, maintenance, or improvement of real property, or an individual employed by or acting on behalf of or as agent of any of these.

F.    “Gender identity” means a person’s gender-related self-identity appearance, expression, or behavior, regardless of the person’s assigned sex at birth. A person’s gender identity may be shown by evidence of medical history, care or treatment of the gender identity, consistent and uniform assertion of the gender identity, or other evidence that the gender identity is sincerely held, core to a person’s gender-related self-identity, and not being asserted for an improper purpose.

G.    “Gender expression” means the external appearance of one’s gender identity, usually expressed through behavior, clothing, haircut or voice, and which may or may not conform to socially defined behaviors and characteristics typically associated with being either masculine or feminine.

H.    “Housing for older persons” means housing:

1.    Provided under any state or federal program that the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development has determined is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons;

2.    Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons fifty-five years of age or older; or

3.    Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person fifty-five years of age or older per unit.

I.    “Individual” means one or more individuals.

J.    “Labor organization” includes any organization which exists for the purpose, in whole or in part, of collective bargaining or of dealing with employers concerning grievances, terms or conditions of employment, or for other mutual aid or protection in relation to employment.

K.    “National origin” includes ancestry.

L.    “Person” includes one or more individuals, partnerships, associations, unincorporated organizations, corporations, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, legal representatives, trusts, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, and receivers.

M.    “Place of public accommodation” means all places or businesses offering or holding out to the general public services or facilities for the comfort, health and safety of the general public, including public places providing food, shelter, recreation and amusement.

N.    “Sexual orientation” means actual or perceived heterosexuality, homosexuality, bisexuality, or asexuality.

(Ord. 17-42 § 4 (part), 2017.)


24.05.020 Policy. 

It is the policy of the city and borough to eliminate unlawful discrimination based on race, color, age, religion, sex, familial status, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, or national origin. Such discrimination poses a threat to the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city and borough. (Ord. 17-42 § 4 (part), 2017.)


24.05.030 Discrimination in employment. 

A.    It shall be a prohibited discriminatory employment practice:

1.    For an employer to fail or refuse to hire, to discharge, bar from employment, or otherwise to discriminate against any individual with respect to compensation or the terms, conditions, or privileges of employment because of race, color, age, religion, sex, familial status, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, or national origin;

2.    For a labor organization to exclude or expel from membership, or otherwise to discriminate against, any applicant or member, because of race, color, age, religion, sex, familial status, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, or national origin of any applicant or member;

3.    For an employment agency to fail or refuse to refer for employment, or otherwise to discriminate against, any individual because of race, color, age, religion, sex, familial status, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, or national origin of said individual;

4.    For an employer, labor organization, or employment agency to print or circulate or cause to be printed or circulated any statement, advertisement, or publication, or to make any inquiry in connection with prospective employment, which expresses directly or indirectly a preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination because of race, color, age, religion, sex, familial status, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, or national origin, unless based upon a bona fide occupational qualification;

5.    For an academic, professional or vocational school to exclude or expel from enrollment, or otherwise to discriminate against, any applicant or student, because of the student’s race, color, religion, familial status, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, or national origin;

6.    For an academic, professional or vocational school to print or circulate, or cause to be printed or circulated, a statement, advertisement or publication, or to use any form of application for admission to said school, or to make any inquiry in connection with prospective enrollment in said school, which expresses directly or indirectly a preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination because of race, color, religion, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, familial status, disability, or national origin;

B.    Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to require an employer, employment agency, labor organization, or joint labor-management committee subject to this chapter to grant or accord preferential treatment to an individual or group because of the race, color, religion, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, familial status, disability, or national origin of such individual or group because of an imbalance that may exist with respect to the total number or percentage of persons of any race, color, religion, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, familial status, disability, or national origin employed by an employer, referred or classified for employment by an employment agency or labor organization, admitted to membership or classified by a labor organization, or admitted to or employed in an apprenticeship or other training program in comparison with the total number or percentage of persons of such race, color, religion, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, familial status, disability, or national origin in this community or in the available work force in this community.

(Ord. 17-42 § 4 (part), 2017.)


24.05.040 Discrimination in the provision of housing or realty. 

A.    It shall be a prohibited housing or realty practice:

1.    For a person, including a banking, money lending, credit securing or other financial institution, or an officer, agent or employee thereof, to discriminate against an individual because of race, color, age, religion, sex, familial status, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, or national origin, with respect to the granting or withholding of credit or financial assistance, or modifying of rates, terms, conditions, privileges or other provisions of credit or financial assistance, in connection with the transfer or prospective transfer of any interest whatsoever in realty, or in connection with the construction, repair, improvement, or rehabilitation of realty;

2.    For a real estate broker, salesperson, or agent, or an employee thereof, or any other person seeking financial gain thereby, directly or indirectly to induce or solicit, or attempt to induce or solicit, the transfer of any interest whatsoever in realty, by making or distributing, or causing to be made or distributed, a statement or representation concerning the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, age, religion, sex, familial status, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, or national origin;

3.    For a person to refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling to a person because of race, color, age, religion, sex, familial status, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, or national origin;

4.    For a person to discriminate against another person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, age, religion, sex, familial status, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, or national origin;

5.    For a person to make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published, a notice, statement, or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on race, color, age, religion, sex, familial status, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination;

6.    For a person to represent to another person because of race, color, age, religion, sex, familial status, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, or national origin that a dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is, in fact, available for such purpose; and

7.    For a person to deny another person access to or membership or participation in a multiple-listing service, real estate brokers’ organization, or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against another person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation, on account of race, color, age, religion, sex, familial status, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, or national origin.

B.    For purposes of this section, with respect to persons with disabilities, the term “prohibited discriminatory practices” includes:

1.    Refusal to permit, at the expense of a person with a disability, or another person on behalf of a person with a disability, reasonable modification of existing premises occupied by or to be occupied by the person with disabilities if the modification may be necessary or desirable to afford the person with a disability full enjoyment of the premises, except that in the case of a rental unit the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted; and

2.    A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services, when accommodation may be necessary to afford the person an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling.

(Ord. 17-42 § 4 (part), 2017.)


24.05.050 Discrimination in public accommodations. 

A.    It shall be a prohibited discriminatory public accommodation practice for any person, including any owner, lessee, manager, proprietor, custodian, agent, or employee of a place of public accommodation, to discriminate against any individual because of race, color, age, religion, sex, familial status, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, or national origin, with respect to the terms, conditions, and privileges of access to or with respect to the uses, services, and enjoyment of a place of public accommodation.

B.    To publish, circulate, issue, display, post, or mail a written or printed communication, notice, or advertisement that states or implies:

1.    That any of the services, goods, facilities, advantages, or privileges of the public accommodation will be refused, withheld from, or denied to a person of a certain race, color, age, religion, sex, familial status, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, or national origin; or

2.    That the patronage of a person belonging to a particular race, color, age, religion, sex, familial status, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, or national origin is unwelcome, not desired, or solicited.

C.    Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a physical fitness facility may limit public accommodation to a single gender to protect the privacy interests of its users. Public accommodation may be limited under this subsection only to those rooms in the facility that are primarily used for weight loss, aerobic, and other exercises, or for resistance weight training. Public accommodation may not be limited under this subsection to rooms in the facility primarily used for other purposes, including conference rooms, dining rooms, and premises licensed under AS 04.11. This subsection does not apply to swimming pools or golf courses.

(Ord. 17-42 § 4 (part), 2017.)


24.05.060 Lawful practices. 

A.    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to preempt federal law with respect to a federally recognized tribe granting preference in employment or housing to tribal citizens.

B.    The provisions of Section 24.05.040(A)(3) shall not apply to rental of a room or rooms in a dwelling unit actually occupied by the owner or lessee as the owner’s or lessee’s residence, or actually occupied by a member of the owner’s or lessee’s immediate family as the family member’s residence. For purposes of this section, “immediate family member” means the owner’s or lessee’s spouse, minor child, dependent, or a regular member of the owner’s or lessee’s household; provided, that the owner or lessee rents not more than three rooms within the residence.

C.    The provisions of Sections 24.05.040 and 24.05.050 regarding age and familial status shall not apply with respect to housing for older persons.

D.    Nothing in this chapter prohibits a religious organization, association, or society, or a nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such a person. Neither shall anything in this chapter prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for club purposes and not for profit, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members.

E.    This chapter shall not apply with respect to the employment of individuals whose positions would fall within the “ministerial exemption” as described by the United States Supreme Court in Hosanna-Tabor Evangelical Lutheran Church and School v. EEOC, 132 S.Ct 694 (2012).

F.    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to diminish the protections afforded employees of the city and borough under City and Borough of Sitka Personnel Policies Handbook Section 3.4.

G.    Notwithstanding the prohibition against employment discrimination on the basis of familial status under Section 24.05.030:

1.    An employer may, without violating Section 24.05.030, provide greater health and retirement benefits to employees who have a spouse or dependent children than are provided to other employees;

2.    A labor organization may, without violating Section 24.05.030, negotiate greater health and retirement benefits for employees of an employer who have a spouse or dependent children than are provided to other employees of the employer.

H.    Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the establishment of a same-sex shelter or residential facility for the care and lodging of persons in need of special medical, rehabilitative, social, or psychological support, including, but not limited to: emergency shelters for victims of domestic violence and sexual assault; halfway houses; drug treatment centers; detoxification facilities; and shelters for the homeless; provided, that such establishment does not discriminate based on race, color, age, religion, familial status, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, or national origin.

I.    It shall not be an unlawful practice for any financial institution or other commercial institution extending credit to engage in any practice permitted by federal statute or regulation applicable to financial or credit transactions of the same character as those covered by Section 24.05.040(A)(1).

(Ord. 17-42 § 4 (part), 2017.)


24.05.070 Unlawful intimidation or retaliation. 

It shall be a prohibited discriminatory practice for a person, directly or indirectly, to discriminate, coerce, intimidate, threaten, interfere with, or retaliate against a person because the person has:

A.    Opposed any practice made unlawful by this chapter; or

B.    Exercised the person’s rights or encouraged another to exercise his or her rights under this chapter.

(Ord. 17-42 § 4 (part), 2017.)


24.05.080 Aiding, abetting, or coercing a violation. 

It is unlawful for any person to aid, abet, incite, compel, or coerce the doing of an act forbidden under this chapter or to attempt to do so. (Ord. 17-42 § 4 (part), 2017.)


24.05.090 Cause of action. 

A.    A person aggrieved by a discriminatory practice prohibited under this chapter may, within three hundred days of any violation of this chapter, petition in court to enjoin a violation of this chapter or seek remedy for a violation.

B.    Remedy may include such relief as the court deems just and proper, and may include one or more of the following:

1.    Requiring training concerning discriminatory practices;

2.    An accommodation for a person with a disability;

3.    Removal of or changes to a personnel record;

4.    Posting of signs;

5.    Back pay;

6.    The hiring, reinstatement, or upgrading of an employee with or without back pay;

7.    The payment of front pay for a period of not more than one year if hiring, reinstatement, or upgrading of an employee is inappropriate because a vacancy does not exist, the employer’s discriminatory practice rendered the employee incapable of returning to work, or the relationship between the employer and employee has so deteriorated as to make working conditions intolerable;

8.    Restoration to membership in a labor organization;

9.    Admission to or participation in an apprenticeship training program, on-the-job training program, or other retraining program;

10.    Restoration of seniority;

11.    The sale, lease, or rental of the housing accommodation to the aggrieved person if it is still available, or the sale, lease, or rental of a like accommodation owned by the respondent if one is still available, or the sale, lease, or rental of the next vacancy in a like accommodation, owned by the respondent; and

12.    Actual damages incurred as a result of the unlawful practice or violation.

C.    An order for back pay or front pay under subsections (B)(5) through (7) of this section must be reduced by the amount the employee could have earned or could earn by making reasonably diligent efforts to obtain similar employment.

(Ord. 17-42 § 4 (part), 2017.)



-----------------------------

The Sitka General Code is current through Ordinance 19-33, passed August 13, 2019.

Disclaimer: The City and Borough Clerk's Office has the official version of the Sitka General Code. Users should contact the City and Borough Clerk's Office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City and Borough Website: http://www.cityofsitka.com/ City and Borough Telephone: (907) 747-1811

Code Publishing Company