CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF BESSEMER, ALABAMA 
____________ 
Published in 2009 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
BESSEMER, ALABAMA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Edward E. May 
Mayor 
____________ 
Earl J. Cochran, President 
Jesse Matthews, Pro Tem 
Sarah W. Belcher 
Louise Alexander 
Dorothy Davidson 
Albert Soles 
James A. Stephens 
City Council 
____________ 
Aaron Killings Jr. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Travis A. Brooks 
Acting City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Bessemer, Alabama. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1995 Code, as supplemented through May 20, 2000, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1995 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Code Attorney, and K. Barrington, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Aaron Killings Jr., City Attorney, and Travis A. Brooks, City Clerk/Treasurer, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Bessemer, Alabama. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Bessemer, Alabama. 
(c)  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Bessemer, Alabama. 2009. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
  
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. 3419 11- 3-2009 Include 1 3431  3-23-2010 Include 1 3436  5- 4-2010 Include 1 3455 11- 1-2010 Include 1 3459  4-19-2011 Include 1 3463  5- 3-2011 Include 1 3465  6-21-2011 Include 1 3468  8-16-2011 Include 1 3472 10- 4-2011 Omit 1 3474  4- 3-2012 Include 1 3476  5-15-2012 Include 1 3481  8-14-2012 Include 1 3482  9-11-2012 Include 1 3488 12- 4-2012 Include 1 3489 12- 4-2012 Include 1 3490  2-19-2013 Include 1 3492  4- 2-2013 Include 1 3493  4-16-2013 Include 1 3494  4-16-2013 Include 1 3499  7-16-2013 Include 1 3514  1-21-2014 Include 1 3522  9- 2-2014 Include 2 3526 10-21-2014 Include 2 3527 11- 3-2014 Include 2 3529 12-16-2014 Include 2 3530  3-31-2015 Omit 2 3531  4- 7-2015 Include 2 3532  5- 5-2015 Omit 2 3536  6-16-2015 Omit 2 3538  9- 1-2015 Omit 2 3540  9-15-2015 Include 2 3548  6-21-2016 Include 2 3549  7-19-2016 Include 2 3556 12- 6-2016 Include 2 3558  2-21-2017 Include 2 3559  4-18-2017 Include 2 3561  5- 2-2017 Include 2 3562  5-16-2017 Include 2  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated and cited as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Bessemer, Alabama." The Code may also be cited as the "Bessemer City Code" or in the provisions which follow, as "this Code." 
(Code 1973, § 1-1; Code 1995, § 1-1) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to provide for the revision and codification of its ordinances and for the adoption of a Code, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-7. 
Sec. 1-2. - Seal of the city. 
    The common lawful seal of the city shall be a large circle enclosing a smaller circle and between the outer and inner circle the words, "City of Bessemer, Alabama," and across the face of the smaller circle the word "Seal." Such seal may be broken or altered at the pleasure of the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 1-8; Code 1995, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Seals generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-40-1. 
Sec. 1-3. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and all ordinances the following rules of construction and definitions shall be observed unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council, or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Generally. All provisions shall be liberally construed to effectuate their purposes. When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general. All provisions shall be liberally construed so the intent of the city council may be effectuated. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words, technical phrases and words and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings. Provisions shall be interpreted and applied so as to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. In the event of conflicts between provisions the more stringent provision controls. It is intended that no provision of this Code conflict with any federal or state law intended to preempt municipal jurisdiction with respect to the subject matter contained in this Code and the provisions of this Code shall be construed, whenever possible, to avoid such conflict. 
    Acts. References to acts are to acts of the Alabama Legislature, as published in the Acts of Alabama. Acts passed after 1978 are referenced to the act number, which number includes the last two digits of the year of enactment. All other acts are referenced to act number and year of enactment. All references to acts are followed by a parenthetical reference to the page number in the Acts of Alabama upon which the act begins. The page number reference is for information purposes only. All references to acts are to such acts as amended. 
    Board of health. The term "board of health" means the Jefferson County Board of Health. 
    Bond. The term "bond" means an obligation, in writing, binding the signatory to pay a sum certain upon the happening or failure of an event. 
    Building. The term "building" means any structure intended to have walls and a roof. 
    Business. The term "business" means any profession, trade, occupation and any other commercial enterprise conducted for monetary reward. 
    Chief of police. The term "chief of police" means the head of the police department of the city. 
    City. The term "city" means the City of Bessemer, in the County of Jefferson and State of Alabama. 
    City council or council. The term "council" or "city council" means the city council of the City of Bessemer, Alabama, constituting the governing body of the city. 
    City limits. The term "city limits" means within the city and includes only the corporate limits of the city. 
    City officers, officials and/or departments. Whenever reference is made to an officer or a department, the reference shall be construed as if followed by the term "of the City of Bessemer, Alabama." Reference to a specific officer shall include his authorized deputies, agents and representatives. 
    Clerk and treasurer. The term "clerk and treasurer" means the official designated as the city clerk and treasurer. 
    Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Bessemer, Alabama, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Code of Ala. 1975. The term "Code of Ala. 1975" means the Code of Alabama 1975, as amended. 
    Computation of time. In computing any period of time, the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day that is not a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
    Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either ... or" the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either ... or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
    County. The term "county" means Jefferson County, Alabama. 
    Definitions. The definitions given within a chapter or article shall apply only to words or phrases used in such chapter or article, unless otherwise provided. 
    Fire chief. The term "fire chief" means the head of the fire department of the City of Bessemer, Alabama. 
    Gender. Words in any section importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter, as well as the masculine. 
    Health officer. The term "health officer" means the county health officer or any person designated by the city council to perform the city health functions and duties. 
    Joint authority. The term "joint authority" means that authority given to several persons or officers also vests in a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Keeper. The term "keeper" means one in possession of or who has the care, custody or superintendence of a thing, place or business whether or not the owner or proprietor and includes any person, firm, association, corporation, club and co-partnership, whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or employee. 
    License inspector. The term "license inspector" means the person designated in the city revenue department to enforce the provisions of the city license code. 
    Licensee. The term "licensee" means any person to whom a city license is issued. 
    May. The term "may" is permissive and discretionary. 
    May not. The term "may not" states a prohibition. 
    Mayor. The term "mayor" means the elected mayor of the City of Bessemer, Alabama. 
    Minor. The term "minor" means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Number. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
    Oath. The term "oath" means any form of attestation by which a person signifies that he is bound in conscience to perform an act or to speak faithfully and truthfully, and includes an affirmation or declaration in cases where by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
    Occupant. The term "occupant" means tenant or person in actual possession. 
    Officer, department or agency. Designation of an officer, department, or agency, without qualifying words, shall refer to such officer or agency of the City of Bessemer, Alabama. 
    Operate. The term "operate" means carry on, keep, conduct, maintain, manage, direct or superintend. 
    Ordinances. The term "ordinances" means the ordinances of the City of Bessemer, Alabama, and all amendments and supplements thereto. 
    Owner. The term "owner" means one who has complete dominion over particular property and who is the one in whom legal or equitable title rests; when applied to a building or land, the term "owner" means any part owner, joint owner, owner of a community or partnership interest, life tenant, tenant in common, or joint tenant, of the whole or part of such building or land. 
    Permittee. The term "permittee" means any person to whom a city permit is issued. 
    Person. The term "person" means any governmental or political subdivision or public agency, or any individual, natural person, joint stock company, partnership, voluntary association, society, club, firm, company, corporation, business trust, organization, or any other group acting as a unit, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, partner, member, director, officer or employee of any of them including an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or other representative appointed according to law. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" means any money, goods, movable chattels, things in action, evidence of debt, all objects and rights which are capable of ownership, and every other species of property except real property. 
    Preceding and following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The term "property" means real and personal property. 
    Proprietor. The term "proprietor" means an owner of the property or premises including any person, firm, association, corporation, club, partnerships or other group acting as a unit whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or employee. 
    Public place. The term "public place" means any park, lake, stream, stadium, athletic field, playground, school yard, street, avenue, plaza, square, bus, train or railroad depot, station, terminal, cemetery, open space adjacent thereto or any other place commonly open to the public. 
    Real property. The term "real property" means land, together with all things attached to the land so as to become a part thereof. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property along the margin of street or other highway, designed, constructed and intended for the use of pedestrians to the exclusion of vehicles. 
    Signature and subscription. The term "signature" and "subscription" mean the name of a person, mark or symbol appended by him to a writing with intent to authenticate the instrument as one made or put into effect by him. 
    State. The term "state" means the State of Alabama. 
    Statutes. The term "statutes" means the latest published edition of the Statutes of Alabama. 
    Street. The term "street" means all streets, highways, avenues, boulevards, parkways, roads, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto; docks built on the public street, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, sidewalks, recreation and parklands used for vehicular traffic; or other public ways or thoroughfares in this city, over which it has jurisdiction, which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state. 
    Tenant. The term "tenant" means any person occupying the premises, building or land of another in subordination to such other person's title and with his express or implied assent, whether he occupies the whole or a part of those premises, building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, past and present, where applicable, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
    Time. All references to the time of day or night are based upon the prevailing standard of time, Central Standard Time or Central Daylight Time, observed during that time of the year in the city. 
    Treasurer. The term "treasurer" means the city clerk and treasurer. 
    Watercourse. The term "watercourse" means any drain, ditch and stream, flowing in a definite direction or course in a bed with banks. 
    Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
    Writing and written. The terms "writing" and "written" mean any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise, capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1973, § 1-5; Code 1995, § 1-3) 
State Law reference- Definitions and rules of construction, Code of Ala. 1975, § 1-1-1 et seq.; computation of time, Code of Ala. 1975, § 1-1-4, Ala. R. Civ. Procedure § 6(a); legal holidays, Code of Ala. 1975, § 1-3-8. 
Sec. 1-4. - Authority of Code. 
    This Code is a recodification of the general ordinances of the city which have been enacted and published in accordance with the authority granted in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-7. 
(Code 1973, § 1-6; Code 1995, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Acts by deputy or designee. 
    Whenever a power is granted to or a duty is imposed upon a public officer or employee, the power may be performed by an authorized deputy or designee or by any person authorized pursuant to law or ordinances, unless this Code expressly provides otherwise. 
(Code 1973, § 1-10; Code 1995, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinances; revival. 
(a)  Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal hereby of any ordinance of this city shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violation of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the date of adoption of this Code, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or penalty at the effective date due and unpaid under such ordinance, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinance relating to the collection of any such license or penalty or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof, required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and obligations thereof appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(b)  Whenever any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision is repealed, such repeal shall not be construed as reviving such former ordinance, clause or provision, unless expressly provided therein. 
(Code 1973, § 1-13; Code 1995, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-7. - Catchlines of sections, history notes, editor's note, etc., references to Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, or as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Cross references, state law references and editor's notes which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles or sections are to chapters, articles, or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1973, § 1-16; Code 1995, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the expression "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a public offense, an offense against the city or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor, an offense, a public offense, an offense against the city or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the expression "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00, imprisonment or confinement at hard labor for a term not exceeding six months or any combination thereof. The penalty imposed upon a corporation shall consist of the fine only, plus costs of court. No penalty shall exceed the maximum established by state statute for the commission of a substantially similar offense. For violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(d)  Any person being punished for a violation of Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-191, as adopted by ordinance, shall be punished by fine of not less than $1.00 and not more than $5,000.00 or by imprisonment in the city jail or hard labor for a period not exceeding one year or by any combination thereof. 
(e)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise. 
(f)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
(Code 1973, § 1-26; Code 1995, § 1-11) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-9. 
Sec. 1-9. - Notices to be written and in English language. 
    All notices, reports, statements, applications or records required or authorized by this Code shall be made in writing in the English language, unless specifically provided otherwise. 
(Code 1973, § 1-20; Code 1995, § 1-12) 
Sec. 1-10. - Notices; service and proof. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically provided, whenever a notice is required to be given pursuant to any section of this Code such notice shall be given either by personal delivery to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records or other records pertaining to the matter for which such notice is served or by any other method of delivery approved by law. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office or any United States mailbox. 
(b)  Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of this city or by affidavit of any person over the age of 18 years who actually accomplished personal service in conformity with this Code or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned, or by a return receipt signed by the recipient notified by United States mail. 
(Code 1973, § 1-21; Code 1995, § 1-13) 
Sec. 1-11. - Procedure for same offense punishable by different sections of Code. 
    In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different sections of this Code, the city attorney may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense. 
(Code 1973, § 1-23; Code 1995, § 1-14) 
Sec. 1-12. - Search warrant or access warrant. 
(a)  Any officer designated by the city to inspect records, buildings or premises may, upon affidavit, apply to the judge of competent jurisdiction for a search warrant setting forth factually the actual conditions and circumstances that provide a reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance or violation of this Code may exist, including one or more of the following: 
(1)  The premises or records require inspection according to the cycle established by the inspecting official or the city council for periodic inspections of records, buildings or premises of the type involved. 
(2)  Observation of external conditions of the premises and its public areas has resulted in the belief that violations of this Code exist. 
(b)  If the judge is satisfied as to the matters set forth in the affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance of a search warrant permitting access to and inspection of that part of the premises on which the nuisance or violation may exist. 
(Code 1973, § 1-24; Code 1995, § 1-15) 
Sec. 1-13. - Inspections and right of entry. 
(a)  All records, buildings, and premises subject to inspection under this Code shall be inspected from time to time by the designated officer of the city. 
(b)  All records, rooms and areas, if in a building or premises, shall be available and accessible for such inspection which shall be made during usual business hours if the premises are used for nonresidential purposes; provided, however, that inspections may be made at other times if: 
(1)  The premises are not available during the hours mentioned in this subsection for inspection; 
(2)  There is reason to believe that violations are occurring on the premises which can only be apprehended and proved by inspection during other than the prescribed hours; or 
(3)  There is reason to believe a violation exists of a character which is an immediate threat to health or safety requiring inspection and abatement without delay. 
(c)  Emergency inspections may be authorized without warrant if the city has reason to believe that a condition exists which poses an immediate threat to life, health, or safety. Such procedure shall take place only where the time required to apply for and secure the issuance of a warrant would render ineffective the immediate action necessary to abate the condition. 
(d)  Where an authorized city employee is refused entry or access or is otherwise impeded or prevented by the owner, occupant, or operator from conducting an inspection of the premises, such person shall be in violation of this Code and subject to the penalties under this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 1-25; Code 1995, § 1-16) 
Sec. 1-14. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections, and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the sections of this Code may be made by amending such sections by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Bessemer, Alabama, is hereby amended to read as follows: ... ." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section, article, or chapter not existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of Ordinances, City of Bessemer, Alabama, is hereby amended by adding a section, article or chapter to be numbered ____________ , which section reads as follows: ... ." The new section, article, or chapter may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, divisions, articles, or chapters desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1995, § 1-17) 
Sec. 1-15. - Code provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code insofar as they relate to the same subject matter and are substantially the same as those provisions of the last Code and ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be considered as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1973, § 1-11; Code 1995, § 1-18) 
Sec. 1-16. - References include amendments; construction. 
(a)  Any reference in this Code to an ordinance or provision of this Code shall mean such ordinance or provision as may now exist or is hereafter amended. 
(b)  Any references in this Code to chapters, articles, divisions, or sections shall be to the chapters, articles, divisions, and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1973, § 1-15; Code 1995, § 1-19) 
Sec. 1-17. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings, and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1995, § 1-20) 
Sec. 1-18. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance or other official act of the city council, which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1995, § 1-21) 
State Law reference- Tampering with government records, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-10-12. 
Sec. 1-19. - Severability. 
    It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and words of this Code are severable. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or word is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the lawful judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, its unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and words of this Code, since the sections or parts of sections would have been enacted by the city council without and irrespective of any unconstitutional or otherwise invalid section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or word being incorporated into this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 1-22; Code 1995, § 1-22) 
Sec. 1-20. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city before the day this Code shall become law. 
(2)  The administrative ordinances of the city council not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of the Code. 
(3)  The annual appropriation ordinances. 
(4)  Any franchise or right established, conferred or accruing by ordinance before the day this Code shall become law. 
(5)  Any ordinance relating to the salaries of the city officers or employees. 
(6)  Any special, temporary or noncontinuing ordinance. 
(7)  Any ordinance dedicating, accepting, opening, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, paving, widening, vacating or closing any street or public way, park or square. 
(8)  Any ordinance of the city providing for local improvements or levying assessments for local improvements. 
(9)  Any ordinance levying or imposing any tax. 
(10)  Any ordinance establishing or changing boundaries of the city. 
(11)  Any ordinances annexing territory to and from the city. 
(12)  Any ordinance adopting and incorporating by reference any maps, plans, diagrams and illustrations which are not published in this Code. 
(13)  Any existing ordinances for the purchase, acquisition or disposition of any property, real or personal. 
(14)  Any ordinance accepting gifts or bequests. 
(15)  Any ordinance transferring or appropriating funds. 
(16)  Any ordinance accepting, releasing or abandoning easements. 
(17)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street. 
(18)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision. 
(19)  Any city zoning ordinance, together with any amendments. 
(20)  The city license Ordinance No. 2418, adopted on December 22, 1987, and amendments thereafter adopted. 
(21)  Any sign ordinance. 
(22)  Any ordinance ordering an election. 
(23)  Any ordinance making appointments to positions, offices or boards. 
(24)  Ordinances authorizing deeds, leases, contracts or other such instruments. 
(25)  Any ordinance concerning the civic center board and civic center. 
(26)  Any ordinance concerning warrants issued by the city. 
(27)  Any ordinance concerning the public educational building authority. 
(28)  Any ordinance concerning the form of government, elections, districts and polling places in the city. 
(29)  Any ordinance concerning subdivisions. 
(30)  Any civil defense ordinance. 
(31)  Any ordinance regarding parks, park board and committee. 
(32)  Any ordinance establishing or relating to any public corporation or board not in this Code. 
(33)  Any ordinance adopted for purposes which have been consummated. 
(34)  Any ordinance concerning personnel rules or regulations, including but not limited to alcohol and illegal drug policies. 
(35)  Any ordinance concerning sewer rates or charges. 
(36)  Any zoning ordinance or amendments thereto, and any ordinance establishing a board of zoning appeals or planning commission, including joint commissions. 
(37)  Any ordinance or resolution assessing a fee, charge or fine, unless superseded by legislation of the city council. 
(38)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing any one-way street, traffic device, signal or marking, parking regulation, speed limit or other limitation placed upon the use of any specific street for vehicles or pedestrians. 
(39)  Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; or which is referred to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect. 
(40)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing or regulating business licenses or establishing a schedule of annual business license fees for the various exhibitions, trades, businesses, vocations, occupations, or professions engaged in or carried on in the city and the police jurisdiction thereof. 
All such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 1-23) 
Sec. 1-21. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as allowing any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 1-24) 
Sec. 1-22. - Establishment of fees, charges, and penalties. 
(a)  Wherever a municipal fee, charge, or penalty is imposed by the city in this Code, that fee, charge, or penalty may be established by resolution of the city council, unless state law requires it to be established by ordinance. 
(b)  This section in no way prohibits the city council from delegating the authority to establish municipal fees, charges, or penalties to a city official or department head. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipalities generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-40-1 et seq.; mayor and council governments generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-1 et seq.; mayor-council form of government for the City of Bessemer, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43D-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Liability of city for city employees and officials. 
    The city agrees to pay on behalf of all employees, public officials, and city councilmembers all sums which the members of boards, employees, elected and appointed officials of the city become legally obligated to pay as damages because of bodily injury, property damage or negligent and wrongful acts caused by an occurrence arising out of and in line and scope of their legal duties; that the city council shall have the right and duty to defend any suit against employees, public officials and councilmembers of the city, which suit seeks damages on account of negligent or wrongful acts performed in the line and scope of their duties. Such payments shall include court costs and attorneys' fees. The city council shall make such investigation and settlement of any claim or suit as it deems expedient. However, the city shall not be obligated to pay any claim or judgment or defend any suit after the applicable limit of the city's liability, as provided by state statute, has been exhausted by payment of judgment or settlements. The city shall not be obligated to pay any claims, demands, damages, losses or expenses that are covered by worker's compensation benefits, motor vehicle insurance, medical insurance, disability benefit law, or any similar law on insurance, or to damages sustained by any fulltime or parttime employees of the city directly or indirectly related to his employment. 
(Code 1995, § 2-1; Ord. No. 2301, 2-25-1986) 
State Law reference- Compensation of officers, disposition of collected fees, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-6; municipal liability, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-190 et seq. 
Sec. 2-2. - [Donations of personal property.] 
(a)  A donation or gift of personal property to the City of Bessemer, whether for a general or specific purpose, shall be irrevocable. 
(b)  In the event that a specific purpose for which personal property has been donated to the City of Bessemer cannot reasonably be accomplished or completed, the donated property shall become a part of the general fund or, if not money equivalent, treated as a general asset. 
(c)  In the event that personal property has been donated to the City of Bessemer for a specific purpose in a specified council district and the specific purpose cannot reasonably be accomplished or completed, at the request of the councilmember from that district, the city council shall make a reasonable effort to redirect said donation towards another project or use in said council district. 
(Ord. No. 3474, §§ 1-3, 4-3-2012) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3474, §§ 1-3, adopted April 3, 2012, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 2-2 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 2-3-2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- City council generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-40 et seq.; majority of all councilmembers required to establish a quorum, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-48; holding of regular meetings and calling of special meetings, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-50. 

Sec. 2-21. - Deliberations and meetings. 
    The order of procedure in all instances for meetings of the council shall be as follows: 
(1)  [Governing.] The rules or order of procedure herein contained shall govern deliberations and meetings of the City Council of the City of Bessemer, Alabama. 
(2)  Meetings to be open. All meetings of the council and all meetings of a quorum of a committee or subcommittee of the council shall be open to the public and news media, except on those occasions when the council, a committee or a subcommittee thereof may choose to go into executive session for the purposes authorized by and in accordance with the Alabama Open Meetings Act, Act No. 2005-40, Acts of Alabama. 
(3)  Regular meetings. The council shall hold regular public meetings in the council chamber at city hall as follows: 
a.  Regular scheduled meetings. The council shall hold regular public meetings in the council chamber at city hall on the first Tuesday of each month at 6:00 p.m.; and the third Tuesday of each month at 9:00 a.m. Each council meeting will be preceded by a pre-council conference one hour before the regularly scheduled meeting in the council conference room. 
b.  Planning sessions. The council shall hold a planning session, open to the public, in the council conference room at city hall on the second Tuesday of each month at 9:00 a.m. 
c.  All meetings of the council shall be held in such council chamber except when otherwise ordered or adjourned; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall preclude conferences and meetings of the council outside the council chamber so long as they are scheduled and noticed in accordance with the Alabama Open Meetings Act. 
d.  The mayor shall be given notice of all council meetings and shall have the privilege of attending the meetings of the council and of taking part in the deliberations thereof. The mayor shall not have the right to vote on any matter that is presented to the council. 
e.  Posting of notice. Notice of all regular meetings shall be posted within the time provided by the Alabama Open Meetings Act on the bulletin board located near the front entrance of city hall along 3rd Avenue North in the City of Bessemer and on the bulletin board located in the lobby of city hall. The notice required by this section shall include the following: 
1.  The time of the meeting; 
2.  The date of the meeting; 
3.  The place of the meeting; and 
4.  If a preliminary agenda is not available, a general description of the nature and purpose of the meeting; or 
5.  If a preliminary agenda is created, it shall be posted, as soon as practicable, next to the notice required by this subsection. 
(4)  Special or called meetings. 
a.  The council may hold such special or other called meetings as the business of the city may require as provided by Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-50. Special or other called meetings of the council shall be called as follows: 
1.  By the president of the council, by written notice, whenever, in his or her opinion, the public business may require it; or 
2.  On the written request of the mayor; or 
3.  On the written request of any two council members. 
b.  Written notice. The written notice shall be filed with the city clerk and shall specify the time, place and purpose of the meeting. Notice of the call of such special meetings shall be given in writing by the city clerk to the mayor, the city attorney, the council attorney, and to each council member, not less than 24 hours before such special meeting shall commence, or not less than 48 hours if the notice has been properly addressed and placed in the United States mail with correct postage thereon, before such meeting shall commence. Such notice shall be spread on the minutes of the meeting, unless there is entered a waiver of notice signed by all council members. 
c.  Posting of notice. The City Clerk of the City of Bessemer shall post a notice of the special or called meeting described in this section as soon as practicable after the meeting is called, but in no event less than 24 hours before the meeting is scheduled to begin, on the bulletin board located near the front entrance of city hall along 3rd Avenue North in the City of Bessemer and on the bulletin board located in the lobby of city hall. The notice shall include the following: 
1.  The time of the meeting; 
2.  The date of the meeting; 
3.  The place of the meeting; and 
4.  If a preliminary agenda is not available, a general description of the nature and purpose of the meeting; or 
5.  If a preliminary agenda is created, it shall be posted, as soon as practicable, next to the notice required by this subsection. 
d.  Emergency meeting; posting of notice. In the event a special or called meeting is called under emergency circumstances requiring immediate action to avoid physical injury to persons or damage to property or to accept the resignation of a public official or employee, in such situations notice shall be posted on said bulletin board as soon as practicable, but in no case less than one hour before the meeting is to begin. The notice shall include the following: 
1.  The time of the meeting; 
2.  The date of the meeting; 
3.  The place of the meeting; and 
4.  If a preliminary agenda is not available, a general description of the nature and purpose of the meeting; or 
5.  If a preliminary agenda is created, it shall be posted, as soon as practicable, next to the notice required by this subsection. 
(5)  Recessed and reconvened meetings. The City Council of the City Bessemer, Alabama may recess a duly convened meeting and reconvene said meeting on a subsequent date provided that prior to recessing, the council shall specify: 
a.  The date that the meeting will be reconvened; 
b.  The time that the meeting will be reconvened; 
c.  The place where the meeting will be reconvened; and 
d.  Proper notice of the reconvened meeting is given in accordance with the Alabama Open Meetings Act. 
Only matters appearing on or otherwise added to the agenda of the original meeting shall be discussed at the reconvened meeting. 
(6)  Preparation and distribution of agendas. 
a.  The mayor and any member of the council shall have the authority to place items on the agenda provided that each such person shall provide a cover page with the submission providing the name of the person submitting the item, the date of the submission, a short description of the item and what action on the item the proponent proposes the council to take. 
b.  All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contract documents or other matters to be submitted to the council shall be delivered to the council secretary by 4:00 p.m. on the Thursday prior to the next regular meeting or planning session of the council. 
c.  The council secretary shall immediately prepare a list of such matters according to the order of business and furnish each member of the council, the mayor, the city attorney, and the council attorney with a copy of such lists, together with copies of matters to be presented to the extent that such copies are available, prior to the regular, special or called council meeting and as far in advance of the meeting as time for preparation will permit. 
d.  The city clerk shall assure that scheduled public hearings have been duly advertised. 
e.  The council secretary shall post a copy of the agenda next to the notice of meeting on the bulletin boards designated for such purpose. 
(7)  Quorum. The quorum for the transaction of any business by the council shall be determined as provided by Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-48. 
(8)  Presiding officer. 
a.  The president of the council or, in his absence, the president pro tempore, shall preside over regular, special and called meetings of the council. In the absence of the president and the president pro tempore at the hour appointed for any meeting, the city clerk or his assistant shall call the council to order, whereupon a temporary chairman shall be elected by the members of the council present. Upon the arrival of the president or the president pro tempore, the temporary chairman shall relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the business immediately before the council. 
b.  The president and president pro tempore of the council shall be elected by the members of the council and shall serve one-year terms and may be re-elected for another one-year term. 
c.  The presiding officer shall possess the powers and perform the following duties: 
1.  Preserve strict order and decorum at all meetings of the council. 
2.  Announce the business before the body in the order in which it is to be acted upon. 
3.  Recognize the speakers entitled to the floor and guide and direct the proceedings of the body. 
4.  State every question given before the council. 
5.  Direct the clerk to call the roll. 
6.  Put to vote all questions which are regularly moved or otherwise arise in the course of the proceedings. 
7.  Record the vote on all matters which the recording of yeas and nays is required by law, or with respect to which any council member requests such recording. 
8.  Announce the decision of the council on all subjects. 
9.  Decide all points of order, subject to appeal, unless the presiding officer submits the question to the decision to the council. 
10.  Use the Roberts Rules of Order, unless point of order is specified herein, as a guide for the conduct of all meetings of the council. 
(9)  Roll call. Before proceeding with the business of the council, the city clerk or his assistant shall call the roll of the members, and the names of those present and absent shall be entered in the minutes. 
(10)  Order of business. 
a.  All meetings of the council shall be open to the public. Promptly at the hour set by law on the day of each regular meeting, all council members shall take their regular stations in the council chambers. The mayor, the city clerk, city attorney, council attorney, public works director, finance director, public safety director, and such other department heads or employees of the City of Bessemer, when requested, shall attend all meetings of the council, and remain available for such length of time as the council is in session, or they are excused by the council. 
b.  The business of the council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in the following order, unless the order is suspended by unanimous consent: 
1.  Call to order. 
2.  Invocation. 
3.  Roll call-City clerk. 
4.  Approval of minutes of the previous meeting. 
5.  Presentations, awards, announcements and recognitions. 
6.  Reports of standing committees, and new committee assignments. 
7.  Reports of special committees. 
8.  Reports from members, mayor or department directors. 
9.  Reading of petitions, applications, complaints, appeals, communications, etc. 
10.  Public hearings. 
11.  Consent agenda. 
12.  Consideration of ordinances for final passage (laid over from previous meeting). 
13.  Consideration of resolutions for final passage (laid over from previous meeting). 
14.  Ordinances being first introduced. 
15.  Resolutions being first introduced. 
16.  Old business 
17.  New business. 
18.  Presentations of petitions and other communications to the council. 
19.  Announcements. 
20.  Public comments. 
21.  Adjournment. 
(11)  Reading of minutes. Unless a reading of the minutes of a city council meeting is requested by a member, such minutes may be approved without reading. The clerk shall furnish each council member with a written copy of the minutes of each meeting. 
(12)  Motions. Motions shall be reduced to writing when required by the presiding officer of the council or any member of the council. 
a.  A main motion presents an ordinance, resolution, or other proposition for the passage, adoption, or rejection. The question is usually stated in the positive form, as follows: motion to adopt; motion to approve; motion to pass; motion to concur. 
b.  No motion made at any council meeting shall be debated or put to a vote unless seconded. When seconded, the proposer shall have the floor and the matter subject to debate. In the absence of a second, the motion fails. Main motions are debatable, amendable, and can be reconsidered after adoption. 
c.  Each resolution or ordinance introduced at a council meeting shall be in writing and read by the clerk at the time it is introduced. Motions shall be reduced to writing when required by the presiding officer of the council or any member of the council. 
d.  Motion for reconsideration. A motion for reconsideration is permissible to reconsider previous action of the council, whether a negative vote on a matter or a favorable vote on a matter, at the same meeting or a subsequent meeting, under the following procedure: 
1.  The motion must be made by a member who voted on the prevailing side. 
2.  The motion is inappropriate after the action taken has gone into effect or after it is too late, for any reason, to reverse the action taken. 
3.  Before any action can be reconsidered, there must first be a motion for reconsideration, a second and the affirmative vote of at least four members of the council. 
4.  Should the motion for reconsideration pass, the item to be reconsidered is then immediately before the council to be acted upon or scheduled for hearing at a subsequent meeting. 
5.  Should the motion for reconsideration fail, the item to be reconsidered remains as adopted. 
6.  A motion to reconsider must be made not later than the next regular meeting following the action taken. 
7.  When the matter the subject of reconsideration requires notice before it can be acted upon, a vote to reconsider the matter must be scheduled on a date and time in compliance with all rules requiring public notice. 
8.  Debate on the motion to reconsider shall be limited to the merits of whether the reconsideration and not the merits of the question to be reconsidered. 
(13)  Rules of debate and points of order. 
a.  The presiding officer of the council may move, second and debate from the chair, subject only to such limitations of debate as are by this article imposed on all council members, and shall not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a council member by reason of his acting as the presiding officer. 
b.  Every council member or official desiring to speak shall address the chair, and upon recognition by the presiding officer, shall address himself to the question under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous language. 
c.  A council member or official, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking, unless it be to call him to order or as herein otherwise provided. If a member, while speaking, is called to order, he shall cease speaking until the question of order is determined, and if in order, he shall be permitted to proceed. 
d.  No persons shall speak more than twice on any matter before the council, except by unanimous consent, and then not until every council member desiring to speak has had an opportunity to do so. No person shall speak more than three minutes on any subject, except by permission granted by majority vote. However, the council member moving the adoption shall have the privilege of closing debate, and shall not be limited on the answering of questions pertinent to the matter proposed. 
e.  When a question is under debate, the following motions shall be in order and shall have precedence over each other in the order stated: 
1.  To adjourn to a day certain. 
2.  To adjourn. 
3.  To take a recess. 
4.  To lay on the table. 
5.  To previous quest on. 
6.  To refer to a committee. 
7.  To amend. 
8.  To postpone to a time certain. 
9.  To postpone indefinitely. 
Motions 1 through 5 shall be decided without debate. 
f.  Debate may be closed immediately by a "call for the question." When a call for the question is made, the presiding officer shall ask if there is any objection. If there is no objection, the presiding officer shall immediately call the question. If there is an objection, the presiding officer shall call for a second and, if made, shall immediately take a vote on whether to order the call for the question. If the call for the question passes by at least four affirmative votes, the debate ends and a vote on the matter under consideration shall proceed. The call for the question is neither amendable nor debatable and can be reconsidered. 
g.  The minutes of the city council are recorded in summary form not verbatim. If council members desire that their comments on a particular subject be recorded in their entirety, the city clerk should be informed at the time the comments are made. 
(14)  Communication with council. 
a.  Public hearings. Where required by law, or by unanimous consent of the council, public hearings on matters before the council shall be held by the council at which taxpayers or residents of the city or their authorized legal representatives shall be permitted to present oral statements for or against the matter made a subject of the hearing. 
1.  Requests to appear at such a public hearing may be filed in writing with the city clerk, who shall refer the same to the president of the council prior to the hearing. Persons making these requests in writing shall, together with witnesses requested to appear by the council, be heard prior to other persons who appear at the hearing. 
2.  Each person addressing any public hearing shall, when called, step up in front of the rail, give his name and address in an audible tone of voice for the records. No person shall speak more than twice on any matter before the council, except by unanimous consent, and then not until every council member desiring to speak has had an opportunity to do so. 
3.  No person shall speak more than three minutes on any subject, and rebuttal speakers shall be limited to two minutes, after an issue has been discussed by both sides, except by permission granted by majority vote. Those speaking on any subject will be limited to two spokespersons on each issue, unless permission is granted by unanimous consent of the council members present to allow others to speak. 
4.  The president must notify each speaker, before he/she has begun to speak, that said speaker will be limited to three minutes on any subject, and additionally must also notify rebuttal speakers, before said speaker has begun to speak, that he/she will be limited to two minutes on any subject. 
b.  Other than public hearings; citizens comments. Except for public hearings or unless waived by the unanimous consent of the council, a person not a member of the council may be allowed to address the council while it is in session, provided that said person has completed a request to address the council form prior to the close of the agenda for the meeting at which said person desires to address the council. 
1.  Time limit. A person permitted to address the council by the presiding officer shall be limited to three minutes which period shall include the person's comments, questions from members of the council and any response thereto. 
2.  Disruptions, good name and character. No person permitted to address the council shall be disruptive by either speaking on matters not before the council or by loud talk or disruptive actions. Further, no person addressing the council shall be permitted to discuss the good name and character of an individual. 
3.  Removal from the meeting. The presiding officer shall have the right to have a disruptive person removed from the room in which the council meeting is conducted. 
(15)  Decorum. 
a.  While a council is in session, the members shall preserve order and decorum; and, a member shall neither, by conversation or otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the council nor disturb any member while speaking or refuse to obey the orders of the council or its presiding officer, except as otherwise herein provided. 
b.  Any person not a member of the council, making personal, impertinent or slanderous remarks or who shall become boisterous while the council is in session, shall be forthwith, by the presiding officer, barred from further audience before the council, unless permission to continue is granted by a majority vote of the council. 
c.  The chief of police or those members of the police department as he may designate shall be sergeant-at-arms of the council meetings. He or they shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the council meeting. Upon instructions of the presiding officer, it shall be the duty of the sergeant-at-arms or any of them present to place any person who violates the order and decorum of the meeting under arrest and cause him to be prosecuted upon complaint to be signed by the presiding officer. 
(16)  Committees. 
a.  Special committees. A special committee is an ad hoc committee appointed to work on a single subject matter. The fact that such subject would ordinarily be within the jurisdiction of a standing committee does not prohibit its referral to a special committee in the manner prescribed by ordinance. Special committees shall consist of a chairperson and two committee members; such committees shall be created and its members appointed by the council president as needed. 
b.  Standing committees. The council shall maintain three standing committees which shall make recommendations to the council as appropriate. The three standing committees shall be: (1) finance committee; (2) public safety committee; and (3) public works committee. All standing committees shall consist of a chairperson and two additional committee members, all appointed by the council president. 
(17)  Recording meetings. A meeting of the City Council of the City of Bessemer, Alabama or a meeting of a quorum of a committee or subcommittee thereof, except while in executive session, may be openly recorded by any person in attendance by means of a tape recorder or any other means of sonic, photographic, or video reproduction provided: 
a.  Multi-purpose room. When such meetings are held in the multi-purpose room on the ground floor of the Bessemer City Hall, said recording shall be conducted from the approximately 12 by nine-foot area of the northeast corner of the multi-purpose room, said area being herein designated as the multi-purpose room recording area; and 
b.  Council chambers. When such meetings are held in the council chambers of the Bessemer City Hall, said recording shall be conducted from the seats located on the back row of seating along the east wall or the area between said seats on the back row of seating of the council chambers, said area being herein designated as the council chambers recording area. 
Recordings shall be performed in the designated areas subject to the following reasonable restrictions: 
a.  All recordings shall be performed in a manner that is not unreasonable obtrusive or disruptive of the proceedings or in violation of any federal or state or any law or regulation governing the safety of persons or property; 
b.  The equipment utilized for recording should operate silently, and while cellular telephone video recording is permitted, cellular telephones with video recording capability shall be silent; 
c.  Absent special approval by the governing body, no additional artificial lighting shall be permitted; 
d.  Stationary equipment, once positioned, shall not be moved during the public meeting; 
The president of the city council or the individual presiding at a public meeting, shall have the authority to require noncompliant operators or disruptive recording operators to either turn off the recording device or otherwise have the recording device removed from the meeting room. 
(18)  Executive sessions; procedure. Executive sessions are not required, but may be held by the governing body only as authorized by Alabama Open Meetings Act. 
(18B)  Reappointment to boards; procedure. Whenever a board member's term shall expire on a board or commission appointed by the governing body of the City of Bessemer, the following policy shall be adhered to: 
a.  Notification of city clerk. Any member of a board desiring to be reappointed due to the expiration of the term of office shall tender a written notice of the desire to be reappointed to the city clerk of the City of Bessemer, Alabama. Upon receipt of notification of the desire to be reappointed, the city clerk shall provide a copy of the notice to the council secretary. 
b.  Notification of the city council. Upon receipt of notification of the desire to be re-appointed from the board member, the council secretary shall give prompt notice of same to each member of the council by placing a copy of the notice in the next general correspondence (the "council packet") to be delivered to the members of the council. 
c.  Consideration by the city council. At the next regular meeting following receipt of notification of the desire to be reappointed from the board member, the city council shall either re-appoint the board member for an additional term or authorize a notice of vacancy and invite interested persons to submit resumes to fill the position as hereinafter set forth. 
d.  Advertisement of vacancy: resumes. Upon the city council authorizing a notice of vacancy, the city council shall invite interested persons to submit resumes to fill the vacancy. 
1.  The notice of vacancy shall be published in a newspaper authorized by the city council and, where possible, posted on the official website of the City of Bessemer for a period of two weeks. 
2.  The resume shall identify the person submitting it and provide the educational, civic and work background of the respondent for at least the last five years. 
3.  The resumes shall be submitted to the council secretary and received not later than the close of business on the day specified by the council (to be established as near as possible on a day two weeks after the last day the notice is published in the designated newspaper). 
4.  The council secretary shall provide each member of the city council with a copy of the resumes in the next general correspondence (the "council packet") to be delivered to the members of the council. 
e.  Filling of vacancy: agenda. The filling of the vacancy shall be placed on the next council agenda, or as soon thereafter as is possible, following the receipt of resumes. 
(19)  No person not a member of the council shall be allowed to address the same while in session without permission of the presiding officer. 
(20)  Whenever it shall be required by one or more members, the "yeas" and "nays" shall be recorded any member may call for a division on any question. 
(21)  The rules of the council may be amended in the same manner as any other ordinance of general and permanent operation. 
(22)  The chairman of each respective committee, or the council member acting for him or her, shall submit or make all reports to the council when so requested by the presiding officer or any member of the council. 
(23)  Robert's Rules of Order is hereby adopted as the rules of procedure for this council and those situations which cannot be resolved by the rules set out in this section. 
(Code 1995, § 2-26; Ord. No. 2032, § 1, 10-10-1978; Ord. No. 3255, 8-3-2004; Ord. No. 3314, §§ 1-22, 10-2-2006; Ord. No. 3455, §§ 1-23, 11-1-2010; Ord. No. 3494, § 1, 4-16-2013; Ord. No. 3527, §§ 1-23, 11-3-2014; Ord. No. 3548, § 1, 6-21-2016; Ord. No. 3558, §§ 1-3, 2-21-2017) 
State Law reference- Council meetings open to the public, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-49. 
Sec. 2-22. - Establishing qualifications for mayor and councilmembers. 
(a)  The mayor shall be elected by the whole electorate of the city and shall be a resident and qualified elector of the city and shall reside within the limits of the city during his term of office. 
(b)  There shall be one councilmember elected by the electorate of each district, said councilmember shall be a resident and qualified elector of the district and of the city and shall reside within the limits of the district in which he was elected during the term of the councilmember's office. 
(Code 1995, § 2-28; Ord. No. 2624, § 2, 6-21-1994) 
Sec. 2-23. - Qualification fees. 
(a)  A qualification fee in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time shall be fixed and imposed upon all candidates seeking election as mayor of the city, except as hereinafter provided for. 
(b)  A qualification fee in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time shall be fixed and imposed upon all candidates seeking election as councilmember of the city, except as hereinafter provided for. 
(c)  The qualification fee shall be paid to the city clerk and deposited to the general fund of the city at or prior to the time of taking out qualification papers by any such candidates. 
(d)  Any person desiring to qualify who is not financially able to pay the required fee may qualify provided such prospective candidate furnishes the clerk with an affidavit stating that he is financially unable to pay the required fee fixed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 3178, §§ 1-4, 5-7-2002) 
Sec. 2-24. - Establishing the procedure for qualifying as a candidate for mayor and councilmembers from districts. 
    Any person desiring to become a candidate for mayor or councilmember shall meet the qualifications as hereinabove set out in section 2-22 and shall file a statement of candidacy on or before 5:00 p.m. on Tuesday, July 19, 1994, with the clerk of the city. The form for the statement of candidacy is available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1995, § 2-29; Ord. No. 2624, § 3, 6-21-1994) 
Sec. 2-25. - Districts. 
    The city is hereby divided into seven single-member districts, each district being described as follows and depicted on the map attached hereto and made a part of as though fully set out herein. 
(1)  District 1. Begin at the intersection of Woodward Railroad right-of-way and Ninth Avenue (Bessemer Superhighway) and run southwesterly along the centerline of Ninth Avenue to 32nd Street; thence turn left and run along the centerline of 32nd Street to Eighth Avenue; thence turn right and run southwesterly to Fifteenth Street turn right and run northwesterly to Ninth Avenue; thence turn left and run Southwesterly along Ninth Avenue to the centerline of the Southern Railway right-of-way; thence turn left and run south along the centerline of the Southern Railroad right-of-way (abandoned) to the railroad's intersection with Tuscaloosa Road; thence turn right and follow the centerline of Tuscaloosa Road to 8th Avenue; thence turn left and follow the centerline of Eighth Avenue north to the road's intersection with Fifth Street; thence follow the centerline of Fifth Street north to the intersection of Fifth Street North and 6th Avenue North; thence turn southeasterly continuing to follow the centerline of 5th Street north to the road's intersection with the aforementioned Southern Railroad right-of-way; thence follow the centerline of the right-of-way south until the right-of-way's intersection with 4th Street; thence follow the centerline of 4th Street northwesterly until it intersects with 3rd Avenue North; thence proceed southwesterly to the intersection of 1st Street North and 3rd Avenue North; thence follow the centerline of 1st Street North southeasterly until 1st Street North intersects with Center Street; thence follow the centerline of Center Street easterly until it intersects with Black Avenue; thence proceed north until the intersection of Black Avenue and 4th Street North; thence proceed West until reaching the intersection of 4th Street North and Alabama Avenue; thence follow the centerline of Alabama Avenue northeasterly until the road intersects with 9th Street North; thence follow the centerline of 9th Street North until it intersects with Carolina Avenue; thence proceed along the centerline of Carolina Avenue until intersection with 13th Street North; thence proceed northerly until intersection with Alabama Avenue; thence proceeding along the centerline of Alabama Avenue until intersection with 21st Street North; thence proceed along the centerline of 21st Street North southeasterly until intersection with Carolina Avenue; thence proceeding along the centerline of Carolina Avenue until intersection with 32nd Street North; thence proceed Northwesterly along the Centerline of 32nd Street North until intersection with Norfolk Southern right-of-way; thence follow Norfolk Southern right-of-way until intersection with Woodward Railroad right-of-way; thence turn left and run northwesterly along the Woodward Railroad right-of-way to the point of beginning. 
(2)  District 2. Begin at the intersection of the Woodward Railroad right-of-way and Ninth Avenue (Bessemer Superhighway) and run northeasterly along the eastern right-of-way line of Ninth Avenue north to the centerline of Stratford Street; thence run east along the centerline of Stratford Street, being the municipal limits of the City of Bessemer, along the outer boundary of the subdivision of Broadmoor Estates to the point where Broadmoor Estates and Ninth Avenue intersect at Valley Creek; thence turn left and follow the municipal limits of the City of Bessemer along Ninth Avenue and Valley Creek to 18th Avenue at or near I-59; thence run along the municipal limits of the City of Bessemer along 18th Avenue, Interstate 59 and Jaybird Road and follow the municipal limits of the City of Bessemer back to 18th Avenue North (property includes the old Woodward Iron Company property); thence follow the municipal limits of the City of Bessemer along 18th Avenue North to Valley Creek; thence turn right and follow the centerline of Valley Creek to its intersection with the L and N railroad; thence turn left and run south along the L and N Railroad to its intersection with 18th Avenue North; thence run along the centerline of 18th Avenue North until its intersection with 18th Street North; thence run along the centerline of Eighteenth Street North to its intersection with I-59/20; thence run along in a southwesterly direction the eastern centerline of I-59/20 until its intersection with Halls Creek; thence along centerline of Halls Creek to 9th Street North; thence easterly run along the centerline of 9th Street North until its intersection with the abandoned Southern Railroad right-of-way; thence run along the Southern Railroad right-of-way Northerly to its intersection with 9th Avenue North; thence run Northeasterly along the centerline of 9th Avenue North, to its intersection with 15th Street North; thence run along the centerline of 15th Street North Southeasterly to the intersection with 8th Avenue North; thence proceed along the centerline of 8th Avenue North Northeasterly to 32nd Street North; thence run along 32nd Street North westerly to its intersection with Ninth Avenue North; thence run along 9th Avenue North until the point of beginning. 
(3)  District 3. Begin at the intersection of Carolina Avenue and 22nd Street South and run southeasterly along the centerline of 22nd Street to Fairfax Avenue; thence turn right and run southeasterly along the centerline of Fairfax Avenue to 21st Street; thence run along the centerline of 21st Street southeasterly to Granville Avenue; thence run along the centerline of Granville Avenue South to 20th Street; thence proceed along the centerline of 20th Street in a southeasterly direction; thence following the municipal boundary of Bessemer encompassing the area known as Asbury Howard; thence follow the meandering of the municipal limits of Bessemer to the intersection of Dartmouth Avenue and 36th Street South; thence continue Northwesterly following the municipal limits of Bessemer to a point where the municipal limits intersect the right-of-way of the Norfolk-Southern Railroad; thence turn left and run Southwesterly along the Norfolk-Southern Railroad right-of-way and Carolina Avenue until 22nd Street, being the point of beginning. 
(4)  District 4. Begin at the intersection of 21st Street North and Fairfax Avenue and run southeasterly along the centerline of 21st Street to Granville Avenue; thence follow centerline of Granville Avenue in a southerly direction to intersection of 20th Street North; thence follow 20th Street North to intersection of Holbrook Avenue; thence go east and follow the meandering of the present boundary lines of the City of Bessemer around the communities of New Village, Morgan, Greenwood, Parkwood and Hopewell to the intersection of Park Street and Elrie Boulevard; thence proceed North to Collins Street following the centerline of Collins Street to the intersection of Raimund-Muscoda Road; thence follow Raimund-Muscoda Road to the intersection of 7th Street; thence run along the centerline of 7th Street to Avenue J; thence run along the centerline of Avenue J southeasterly until Avenue J begins to run easterly; thence proceed toward the northwest to the intersection of Hyde Street and Center Street; thence run along the centerline of Center Street West to the intersection of Fairfax and Center Street; thence run along the centerline of Fairfax Avenue to the point of beginning. 
(5)  District 5. Begin at the intersection of Black Avenue and Center Street and run south along the centerline of Black Avenue to Clifton Street; thence following the centerline of Clifton Street proceed east to Owen Avenue; thence run along the centerline of Owen Avenue south to Deadrick Street; thence run along the centerline of Deadrick Street to Fairfax Avenue; thence run Northerly along Fairfax Avenue to Center Street; thence run along the centerline of Center Street to Hyde Street; thence proceed in a Southwesterly direction to Avenue J; thence run along Avenue J northeasterly to 7th Street South; thence proceed southeasterly to the east boundary of Mountainview Industrial Park; thence southerly along the east boundary of Mountainview Industrial Park, approximately 814 feet; thence turning west for approximately 164 feet to Raimund-Muscoda Road; thence follow the centerline of Raimund-Muscoda to Collins Street; thence run along the meandering route of Collins Street to a point halfway between Republic Avenue and Park Avenue; thence run westerly to the intersection of Park Avenue and Elrie Boulevard; thence continue along the meandering boundaries of the City of Bessemer until the boundary intersects McCalla Road at a point at or near the northern boundary of Perimeter Industrial Park; thence run along the centerline of McCalla Road northerly to the intersection of Hickory Road and Academy Drive; thence run along the Centerline of Academy Drive in a northerly direction to I-59/20; thence proceed along the eastern right-of-way of I-59/20 to the new interchange of I-59/20 to Vision Land Parkway; thence proceed east to the intersection of Barclay Drive and 9th Avenue North; thence run along the centerline of 9th Avenue North in a northeasterly direction to Circle Heights; turn left and follow the centerline of Circle Heights in a northwesterly direction to the intersection of Cedar Hill Drive; thence run east to the intersection of 9th Avenue North and 9th Street North; thence run along the centerline of 9th Street North to 8th Avenue North; thence run along the centerline of 8th Avenue North southerly to 5th Street North; thence run along the centerline of 5th Street North to its end; thence proceed South to the intersection of 4th Street North and 2nd Avenue North; thence run Westerly along 4th Street North to 3rd Avenue North; thence follow the centerline of 4th Street North northwesterly until it intersects with 3rd Avenue North; thence proceed Southwesterly to the intersection of 3rd Avenue North and 1st Street North; thence run along the centerline of 1st Street North to its intersection with Center Street; thence run along the centerline of Center Street to the point of beginning. 
(6)  District 6. Begin at the intersection of Hickory Road and Academy Drive, run along the centerline of McCalla Road southerly to Eastern Valley Road, then follow the meandering of the municipal boundary of the City of Bessemer around the community of Flint Hill; the property of USX and Vulcan Materials; the community of McNeil and Pipe Shop to the intersection of the 18th Avenue North and 19th Street; thence run along the centerline of 19th Street until it becomes 18th Street; thence run along the centerline of Eighteenth Street to its intersection with I-59/20; thence run along I-59/20 to the intersection with Hall's Creek; thence proceed easterly along Hall's Creek to the intersection of Cedar Hill Road and Lakewood Circle; thence run along the centerline of Lakewood Circle to 9th Avenue; thence run along the centerline of 9th Avenue to a point north of West Lake Lodge Apartments; thence proceed due West to I-59/20; thence run along the eastern right-of-way to the intersection of I-59/20 and Academy Drive; thence run along the centerline of Academy Drive to the intersection of Academy Drive and Hickory Road, the point of beginning. 
(7)  District 7. Begin at the intersection of 22nd Street North and Fairfax Avenue and run northwesterly along the centerline of 22nd Street North to Carolina Avenue; thence turn left and run along Carolina Avenue to 21st Street; thence turn right on 21st Street and run along the centerline to Alabama Avenue; thence turn left and run along the centerline of Alabama Avenue to 14th Street; thence proceed due south to Carolina Avenue; thence run along the centerline of Carolina Avenue to 9th Street; thence turn right on 9th Street to Alabama Avenue; thence turn left and run along the centerline to the intersection of Alabama Avenue and 4th Street South; thence run east along the centerline of 4th Street to Black Avenue; thence run south along the centerline of Black Avenue to Clifton Street; thence following the centerline of Clifton Street proceed east to Owen Avenue; thence run along the centerline of Owen Avenue South to Deadrick Street; thence run along the centerline of Deadrick Street to Fairfax Avenue; thence follow the meandering route of Fairfax Avenue to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 3189, 7-2-2002) 
Secs. 2-26-2-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Officers, election or appointment, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-45; terms of officers generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-46. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-54. - Request for outside employment. 
    Employees of the city shall not accept employment or do any work for an employer other than the city during the time the employee is employed by the city without first obtaining from the head of the department for which he works a clearance that the proposed work will not interfere with the employee's efficiency in the discharge of his duties with the city. 
(Code 1973, § 2-1; Code 1995, § 2-46) 
Sec. 2-55. - Investigation of request; determination. 
(a)  Heads of departments of the city shall investigate requests of employees within their department who seek permission to work for employers other than the city. If upon investigation they find that the proposed work will not interfere with the efficiency of the employee's discharge of his duties with the city, they shall give a written authorization to such employee. 
(b)  If the head of a department determines that such proposed work will interfere with the efficiency of the employee in the discharge of his duties with the city, or the head of a department determines at any time that work that has been cleared for the employee does in fact interfere with the efficiency of the employee in the discharge of his duties with the city, he shall advise the employee. After such notice, no city employee shall accept or do such work for an employer other than the city. 
(Code 1973, § 2-2; Code 1995, § 2-47) 
Sec. 2-56. - Dismissal. 
    Any employee who accepts or does work for an employer other than the city without first clearing with his department head, or who is notified by his department head to discontinue work for an employer other than the city and fails to do so, may be dismissed as an employee of the city by the head of the department. 
(Code 1973, § 2-3; Code 1995, § 2-48) 
Sec. 2-57. - Compensation for lost time. 
    No money shall be paid to any official or employee of the city for any time lost by such official or employee from the actual discharge of his duties as such official or employee, except as may be provided by the rules and regulations of the county personnel board, or by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 2-5; Code 1995, § 2-49) 
Sec. 2-58. - Strikes or slowdowns. 
    Any strike of employees of the city, or any concerted stoppage or slowdown of work by employees of the city, is prohibited. No employee of the city shall participate in any strike or concerted stoppage or slowdown of work against the city. 
(Code 1973, § 2-6; Code 1995, § 2-50) 
Sec. 2-59. - Discharge of employees for striking. 
    Any person who violates section 2-58 shall be immediately discharged from his employment with the city as of the date of such violation and shall not be re-employed by the city for a period of one year thereafter. Any employee of the city who has attained permanent status within the meaning of the applicable civil service law and who violates this section shall be discharged in accordance with the provisions of such law. 
(Code 1973, § 2-7; Code 1995, § 2-51) 
Sec. 2-60. - Picketing. 
    No person, group of persons, association, corporation or union shall picket, or cause, aid, abet or participate in, picketing of the city, or of the city hall or other buildings or place in or at which work or affairs of the city are customarily carried on or conducted, for the purpose of: 
(1)  Achieving or gaining any objective of any strike or concerted stoppage or slowdown of work prohibited by section 2-58; 
(2)  Coercing the city to grant or accede to any demand or request in respect of grievances or of wages or of employment or of hours or conditions or terms of employment of any employee or former employee of the city; 
(3)  Causing or inducing any person to cease work for the city or to refrain from working for the city; 
(4)  Notifying the public of a labor dispute or that the city or its city council or any officer thereof is unfair; or 
(5)  Anything in relation to any employee or former employee or prospective employee of the city or in relation to terms of employment with the city. 
(Code 1973, § 2-8; Code 1995, § 2-52) 
Secs. 2-61-2-78. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CLERK AND TREASURER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Clerk generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-100 et seq.; treasurer generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-120 et seq.; bond required, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-43-104, 11-43-120. 

Sec. 2-79. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section II of Ord. No. 3499, adopted July 16, 2013, repealed § 2-79 which pertained to offices of clerk and treasurer consolidated, and derived from the 1973 Code, § 2-23; and the 1995 Code, § 2-66. 
Sec. 2-80. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section II of Ord. No. 3499, adopted July 16, 2013, repealed § 2-80 which pertained to duties, and derived from the 1973 Code, § 2-24; and the 1995 Code, § 2-67. 
Sec. 2-81. - Designation of banking institutions. 
    The mayor shall, by letter to either the clerk and treasurer or the utilities manager, as may be proper, designate which banking institutions shall be used as the depository for any of the accounts of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 2-28; Code 1995, § 2-69) 
Sec. 2-82. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section II of Ord. No. 3499, adopted July 16, 2013, repealed § 2-82 which pertained to issuance of licenses, and derived from the 1973 Code, § 2-30; and the 1995 Code, § 2-70. 
Sec. 2-83. - Bond required; conditions. 
(a)  The clerk and treasurer shall give bond, with some guaranty or surety company as surety, in the amount of $10,000.00 for the faithful performance of his duties and against any fraudulent or dishonest act upon his part, and any wrongful abstraction or wilful misapplication done or participated in by him. 
(b)  The bond of the clerk and treasurer shall be conditioned for the faithful performance of his duties and against any fraudulent or dishonest act upon his part and any wrongful abstraction or wilful misapplication done or participated in by him. Neither the clerk and treasurer nor the surety on his bond shall be liable for any act or omission specifically authorized or directed by the city council in the result of which act or omission the clerk and treasurer has no personal pecuniary interest. Neither the clerk and treasurer nor the surety on his bond shall be liable for any loss of funds by reason of the failure of any depository in which he is authorized to deposit such funds by the provisions of this Code or any other ordinance of the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 2-26; Code 1995, § 2-71) 
Sec. 2-84. - Powers vested in two separate officials. 
    Offices of city clerk and city treasurer are vested in and imposed upon two separate officials with distinct powers and duties. 
(Ord. No. 3499, § II, 7-16-2013) 
DIVISION 2A. - CITY CLERK 

Sec. 2-85. - Powers and duties, generally. 
    The city clerk shall exercise the powers conferred and discharge the duties imposed upon the clerk by the laws of the State of Alabama and ordinances of the City of Bessemer, and is the administrative head of the municipal court clerk's office of the city under the direct supervision and control of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 3499, § II, 7-16-2013) 
Sec. 2-86. - Attendance at city council meetings; keeping of minutes; seal; absence of clerk. 
    The city clerk shall attend all meetings of the city council and shall record in a minute book all acts and proceedings of the city council, including a record of all votes or abstentions therefrom, when roll is called. The city clerk shall transcribe and maintain custody of all rules, ordinances, and resolutions adopted or passed by the city council. The clerk shall also have custody of the city seal. During the absence of the clerk the council may appoint some person to perform its duties. 
(Ord. No. 3499, § II, 7-16-2013) 
State Law reference- Clerk attending meetings, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-100. 
Sec. 2-87. - Ordinances and resolutions to be filed. 
    The city clerk shall file consecutively all ordinances and resolutions filed by the city council, in addition to recording in said minute book all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the city council. The date of their passage and approval shall appear therein and they shall be numbered. 
(Ord. No. 3499, § II, 7-16-2013) 
State Law reference- Recordation of ordinances, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-8. 
Sec. 2-88. - Custody of city records, etc; removal of such records, etc. 
    The clerk shall carefully preserve in his or her office all important books, papers, records, deeds, official bonds and documents of all kinds belonging to the city, but he or she may permit their temporary removal by authorized officers or agents of the city upon obtaining a receipt in accordance with laws of the State of Alabama and applicable city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 3499, § II, 7-16-2013) 
Sec. 2-89. - Custody and distribution of copies of City Code. 
    The clerk shall be the custodian of the City Code and all printed copies and he or she shall make distribution and sale of these copies in accordance with the regulations prescribed by the city council at [a] price to be determined by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 3499, § II, 7-16-2013) 
Sec. 2-90. - Loss, destruction, etc. of official records. 
    It shall be a misdemeanor for the clerk to destroy or negligently lose or permit to be destroyed, mutilated, altered or lost any official records of the city such as official bonds, ordinances or resolutions, contracts, etc. 
(Ord. No. 3499, § II, 7-16-2013) 
Sec. 2-91. - Claims and demands; issuance of warrants. 
    The clerk shall submit all claims, requisitions and demands against the city to the council at its next regular meeting for its approval, unless already provided by ordinance or resolution, and upon its being approved by the council and the passage of ordinances carrying it into effect when necessary, said clerk shall issue warrant on the city treasurer or director of finance for the amount of such claim, requisition or demand. Before issuing any warrant upon the treasurer, the clerk shall audit the claim, certify to its correctness and keep a record thereof, which record shall also show to what department or departments it is chargeable. 
(Ord. No. 3499, § II, 7-16-2013) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-101. 
Sec. 2-92. - Clerk to pay over city funds daily. 
    It shall be the duty of the city clerk to pay over daily to the director of finance or city treasurer, except Sundays, national holidays, all money coming into his or her hands. 
(Ord. No. 3499, § II, 7-16-2013) 
Sec. 2-93. - Additional duties; bond. 
    The clerk, in addition to these enumerated duties, shall perform any and all duties that may be required of him by ordinance or resolution. He shall give bond, with sureties, to be approved by the mayor, in such sum as the council may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 3499, § II, 7-16-2013) 
Sec. 2-94. - Clerk to attest municipal contracts and affix seal; exceptions. 
    All written contracts or municipal obligations, including temporary loans and excluding purchases for ordinary current municipal needs, shall be attested by the clerk, to which he shall also affix the seal of the city. This section shall not apply to bond issues or attached interest coupons. 
(Ord. No. 3499, § II, 7-16-2013) 
Sec. 2-95. - Record of municipal obligations, contracts, etc. 
    It shall be the clerk's duty to keep a record of all municipal obligations, contracts and evidences of debt, names of all persons interested, dates of execution and of maturity, amounts involved and any other information pertaining thereto of general interest. 
(Ord. No. 3499, § II, 7-16-2013) 
Sec. 2-96. - Inventory of city property; listing evaluation of property. 
    It shall be the duty of the director of finance to prepare and keep on file for the information of city officials and the public a complete and up to date inventory of all the tangible property of the city, real and personal, including realty, houses, buildings, livestock, vehicles, tools, implements, machinery, scrapers, street cleaners, books, furniture, cells, fire equipment, hose, engines, hook and ladders, trucks, electrical apparatus, etc. In securing such inventory, the director of finance shall have the right to call upon any officer, agent or employee of the city for any desired information at the discretion of the mayor. The inventory shall also show the approximate value of each item. 
(Ord. No. 3499, § II, 7-16-2013) 
DIVISION 2B. - CITY TREASURER (DIRECTOR OF FINANCE) 

Sec. 2-97. - Designation. 
    The treasurer shall be designated as the director of finance. 
(Ord. No. 3499, § II, 7-16-2013) 
Sec. 2-98. - Powers and duties, generally. 
    The director of finance shall be the custodian of the funds of the municipality, keeping an accurate record of the funds of the several departments, and shall keep books showing accurately the financial condition of the city, and as follows: 
(1)  He shall pay out money only upon warrants drawn by the officers authorized by the applicable provisions of this title to draw warrants upon the treasurer, and when paid shall keep safely the warrants so drawn. Such warrants, approved by the mayor or such other person as the council may designate, except as otherwise provided in this section, shall be drawn by the clerk on the treasurer, the warrant showing to what department the same is to be charged. 
(2)  He shall keep a convenient set of books in which there shall be kept a separate account with each collecting officer of the city. He shall keep a separate account with each department for which a separate appropriation shall have been made, crediting the amount of the appropriation and charging warrants drawn against the same. 
(3)  He shall keep such other accounts as may be necessary to show the financial condition of the municipality and of each department thereof at all times. 
(4)  He shall not allow the amount appropriated for any item of expense to be drawn on for any other purpose. 
(5)  He shall not allow any warrant to be drawn unless sufficient funds actually be in the treasury to the credit of the fund upon which such warrant is drawn unless specifically authorized by an ordinance or by the mayor and is carefully itemized and shall have been examined, audited and approved. 
(6)  He shall keep a record of all warrants presented for payment which are unpaid for want of funds and shall pay them when funds are available in the order of their presentation. 
(7)  He shall collect and account for all monies due to the municipality or any department thereof and all monies owed shall be directly paid to the director of finance for depository into the treasury except as provided in this Code. 
(8)  He shall make report once a month or oftener if required by the council of the financial condition of the account of each department authorized to draw on the treasurer and shall make a quarterly statement, under oath, of the financial condition of the city or town to the council. 
(9)  He is the administrative head of the revenue department of the city under the direct supervision and control of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 3499, § II, 7-16-2013) 
Sec. 2-99. - Issuance of; form; and content of licenses. 
    The director of finance shall issue all licenses. Each license issued by the director of finance shall have designated therein by him the name of the person to whom it is issued, the name of the trade, business, profession or occupation to be followed, and shall authorize the licensee to engage in such business, trade, profession or occupation, and shall prescribe or designate the place which shall not be changed except by consent of the city council, which consent may be endorsed by the director of finance upon the license. 
(Ord. No. 3499, § II, 7-16-2013) 
Sec. 2-100. - Payment of city money generally. 
    All city vouchers or requisitions for the payment of city money shall be drawn by the director of finance, and on such vouchers he shall designate upon what fund it is drawn or against which department it is charged as set out in the annual budget. 
(Ord. No. 3499, § II, 7-16-2013) 
Secs. 2-101-2-109. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY ATTORNEY 

Sec. 2-110. - Duties. 
    The city attorney shall discharge the duties imposed and exercise the powers conferred upon him by state statute, the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 2-10; Code 1995, § 2-81) 
Sec. 2-111. - Legal adviser. 
    The city attorney shall be the legal adviser, on all necessary questions, of the mayor, the city council and other city officers and employees in respect to city business, their official duties and all matters pertaining to the city's welfare and its rights and powers, insofar as they may be affected by the official acts of such officers. 
(Code 1973, § 2-11; Code 1995, § 2-82) 
Sec. 2-112. - Attendance at meetings; legislation. 
(a)  The city attorney shall attend such regular, special, or called meetings as he may be requested by the mayor to attend. When so attending, he shall advise the city council, or any member thereof, upon any legal matters pertaining to the officers or the interests of the city. 
(b)  He shall prepare such ordinances and resolutions as may be required of him and, when requested, advise the city council as to the legality, reasonableness and constitutionality of legislation pending before the city council or of enactments already adopted. 
(Code 1973, § 2-12; Code 1995, § 2-83) 
Sec. 2-113. - Written opinions required. 
    The city attorney shall, when requested, furnish written opinions or advice to any city official in respect to his official duties, insofar as the city may be affected. 
(Code 1973, § 2-13; Code 1995, § 2-84) 
Sec. 2-114. - Drafts of contracts and documents. 
    When directed by the city council, the city attorney shall prepare needed contracts, conveyances, documents, etc., for use by the city or its officers. He shall pass upon the legal sufficiency of all bonds of city officers, contracts and bonds of persons having dealings with the city. 
(Code 1973, § 2-14; Code 1995, § 2-85) 
Sec. 2-115. - Prosecutions in municipal court. 
    When requested by the mayor, the city attorney shall attend the municipal court and prosecute cases pending in such court. 
(Code 1973, § 2-15; Code 1995, § 2-86) 
Sec. 2-116. - Prosecution of appeals. 
    The city attorney shall prosecute all cases appealed from the municipal court. 
(Code 1973, § 2-16; Code 1995, § 2-87) 
Sec. 2-117. - Recommendations to city council. 
    The city attorney shall make, from time to time, such suggestions or recommendations to the city council as may seem advisable and proper in reference to the enforcement, revision or modification of the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 2-18; Code 1995, § 2-88) 
Sec. 2-118. - Represents city in all suits in which city is party; compensation in addition to monthly retainer. 
    In all suits or proceedings, wherever pending, to which the city shall be a party, the city attorney, or an attorney selected by him with the consent of the city council, shall appear for and represent the city. For such representation the attorney representing the city shall be entitled to reasonable compensation as approved by the council. In such suits or proceedings, if the city attorney represents the city, the compensation paid to him shall be in addition to the monthly retainer paid to such attorney. 
(Code 1995, § 2-89; Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 6-22-1976; Ord. No. 2065, § 1, 10-2-1979) 
Sec. 2-119. - Limitation of authority-Settling suits. 
    In any suit brought against the city for personal injuries or property damage, the city attorney shall have the authority to consent to judgment therein against the city without any approval other than his own in an amount not exceeding $4,000.00. With his approval and that of the mayor and one other councilmember he may settle in an amount not exceeding $7,500.00. With the approval of the mayor and all members of the council he may settle in any amount. 
(Code 1995, § 2-90; Ord. No. 1995, § 1, 11-15-1977) 
Sec. 2-120. - Same-Making compromises. 
    With no approval other than his own, the city attorney may compromise for any amount not exceeding $4,000.00 any claim against the city for personal injury or property damage which has not yet been put to suit. With the approval of the mayor and any other councilmember, the city attorney may compromise such claims in any amount not to exceed $7,500.00. 
(Code 1995, § 2-91; Ord. No. 1995, § 2, 11-15-1977) 
Sec. 2-121. - Release required for suits or compromises. 
    The city attorney shall take a proper release of the city in either case. 
(Code 1973, § 2-17; Code 1995, § 2-92; Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 6-22-1976; Ord. No. 2065, § 1, 10-2-1979) 
Secs. 2-122-2-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY ENGINEER 

Sec. 2-141. - Creation of office. 
    There is created the position of the city engineer. The city engineer shall be designated as the head of the engineering department of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 2-19; Code 1995, § 2-106) 
Sec. 2-142. - Duties. 
    The city engineer shall: 
(1)  Administer and operate the engineering department of the city. 
(2)  Advise the city council and the heads of other departments of the city on any engineering problem or any engineering matter affecting the interest of the city. 
(3)  Recommend, consult with and advise the planning and zoning commission on the development of a master plan for the orderly development of future public improvements and facilities. 
(4)  Cause to be prepared and recommend to the city council for approval all maps, drawings, profiles, specifications and engineering data for all public improvements of the city. 
(5)  Draft engineering data and specifications for public improvement ordinances, and prepare estimates of cost, notices to contractors for bids, construction contract technical data and assessment rolls and other cost data relative to the levy of public improvement assessments. 
(6)  Supervise construction work undertaken by the street department and certify to the city council when work authorized by the city under contract has been completed in accordance with plans and specifications. 
(7)  Prepare maps relative to annexations of the city, and such other maps as may be required to show the location of sewers, boundaries of the city and other data needed in the administration of the affairs of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 2-20; Code 1995, § 2-107) 
Sec. 2-143. - Qualifications. 
    An application for the position of city engineer shall present evidence: 
(1)  Of a BS degree in engineering from an accredited engineering college or university; 
(2)  That the applicant has been licensed and registered as an engineer in this state; and 
(3)  Any additional qualifications as may be prescribed in the notice for examinations issued by the county personnel board. 
(Code 1973, § 2-21; Code 1995, § 2-108) 
Sec. 2-144. - Appointment. 
    The position of city engineer shall be appointed by the mayor. 
(Code 1973, § 2-22; Code 1995, § 2-109) 
Secs. 2-145-2-171. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES AND AUTHORITIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-172-2-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Creation, composition, and powers of municipal planning commission, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-52-2-11-52-7; zoning commission generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-79. 

Sec. 2-196. - Creation. 
    There is created a planning and zoning commission with powers and duties as set by law that is designated and referred to as "The Planning and Zoning Commission of Bessemer, Alabama." 
(Code 1973, § 2-32; Code 1995, § 2-141) 
Sec. 2-197. - Composition; qualifications; appointment; terms of office; compensation; removal of members; vacancies. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of nine members: The mayor, one of the administrative officials of the city selected by the mayor, a member of the council to be selected by it as a member ex officio and six persons who shall be appointed by the mayor. If the mayor designates a person to sit in his place on the city planning commission, such person appointed shall serve during the term of the mayor, unless his original appointment shall be limited to a term certain of not less than 12 months at the time of appointment. 
(b)  All members of the commission shall serve without compensation, and the appointed members shall hold no other municipal office, except that one of such appointed members may be a member of the zoning board of adjustment or appeals. 
(c)  The term of the ex officio member shall correspond to the councilmember's official tenure. The term of each appointed member shall be six years or until his successor takes office. 
(d)  Members other than the member selected by the council may, after a public hearing, be removed by the mayor for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office. The council may, for like cause, remove the member selected by it. The mayor or council, as the case may be, shall file a written statement of reasons for such removal. 
(e)  Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor in the case of members selected or appointed by him, by the council in the case of the councilmember or other members selected by the council. 
(Code 1973, §§ 2-33-2-36; Code 1995, § 2-142) 
Sec. 2-198. - Organization; meetings. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission shall meet and elect a chairman from amongst the appointed members and create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The term of the chairman shall be one year, with eligibility for reelection. 
(b)  The commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month. It shall adopt rules for transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations. Such record shall be a public record. 
(Code 1973, § 2-37; Code 1995, § 2-143) 
Sec. 2-199. - Master plan; contents; adoption of parts; amendments. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission shall make and adopt a master plan for the physical development of the city, including any areas outside of its boundaries which, in the planning and zoning commission's judgment, bear relation to the planning of the city. 
(b)  The master plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts and descriptive matter shall show the commission's recommendations for the development of such territory, including, among other things: 
(1)  The general location, character and extent of streets, viaducts, subways, bridges, waterways, waterfronts, boulevards, parkways, playgrounds, squares, parks, aviation fields, and other public ways, grounds and open spaces. 
(2)  The general location of public buildings and other public property. 
(3)  The general location and extent of public utilities and terminals, whether publicly or privately owned or operated, for water, light, sanitation, transportation, communication, power and other purposes. 
(4)  The removal, relocation, widening, narrowing, vacating, abandonment, change of use or extension of any of the ways, grounds, open spaces, buildings, property, utilities or terminals already described in this section. 
(5)  A zoning plan for the control of the height, area, bulk, location and use of buildings and premises. 
(c)  As the work of making the whole master plan progresses, the commission may from time to time adopt and publish a part of the plan, any such part to cover one or more major sections or divisions of the city or one or more of the other functional matters to be included in the plan. 
(d)  The commission may from time to time amend, extend or add to the plan. 
(Code 1973, § 2-39; Code 1995, § 2-144) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-8. 
Sec. 2-200. - Survey and studies for master plan; purposes. 
(a)  In the preparation of the master plan, the planning and zoning commission shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of present conditions and future growth of the city and with due regard to its relation to neighboring territory. 
(b)  The master plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the city and its environs which will, in accordance with present and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, including, among other things, adequate provision for traffic, the promotion of safety from fire and other dangers, adequate provisions for light and air, the promotion of the healthful and convenient distribution of population, the promotion of good civic design and arrangement, wise and efficient expenditure of public funds and the adequate provision of public utilities and other public requirements. 
(Code 1973, § 2-40; Code 1995, § 2-145) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-9. 
Sec. 2-201. - Powers and functions. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission shall have power to promote public interest in and understanding of the master plan and, to that end, may publish and distribute copies of the plan or of any report and may employ such other means of publicity and education as it may determine. Members of the commission, when duly authorized by the commission, may attend city planning conferences or meetings of city planning institutes or hearings upon pending city planning legislation. The commission may, by resolution spread upon its minutes, pay the reasonable traveling expenses incident to such attendance. 
(b)  The commission shall, from time to time, recommend to the appropriate public officials programs for public structures and improvements and for the financing thereof. It shall be part of its duties to consult and advise with public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional and other organizations, and with citizens with relation to the protecting or carrying out of the plan. The commission shall have the right to accept and use gifts for the exercise of its functions. All public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the commission, within a reasonable time, such available information as it may require for its work. 
(c)  The commission, its members, officers and employees, in the performance of their functions, may enter upon any land and make examinations and surveys and place and maintain necessary monuments and marks thereon. 
(d)  In general, the commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to fulfill its functions, promote city planning or carry out the purposes of this division. 
(e)  The planning and zoning commission shall have all powers granted to the zoning commission as prescribed by law. 
(Code 1973, § 2-42; Code 1995, § 2-146) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-6. 
Sec. 2-202. - Territorial jurisdiction of commission over subdivisions; approval of maps or plats. 
(a)  The territorial jurisdiction of the city planning commission over the subdivision of land shall include all land located in the city and all land lying within five miles of the corporate limits of the city and not located in any other municipality, except that in the case of any such nonmunicipal land also lying within five miles of another municipality having a planning commission, then the jurisdiction of each municipal planning commission shall terminate at a boundary line equidistant from the respective corporate limits of the municipalities. 
(b)  No map or plat of any subdivision shall be recorded, and no property shall be sold referenced to such map or plat, until and unless it has been first submitted to and approved by the planning commission. 
(Code 1973, §§ 2-43-2-46; Code 1995, § 2-147) 
State Law reference- Territorial jurisdiction generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-30. 
Sec. 2-203. - Adoption, publication and certification of subdivision regulations by commission; arrangement of streets, other ways; subdivision plat. 
(a)  The planning commission shall adopt regulations governing the subdivision of land within its jurisdiction. Such regulations may provide for the proper arrangement of streets in relation to other existing or planned streets and to the master plan, for adequate and convenient open spaces for traffic, utilities, access of firefighting apparatus, recreation, light and air and for the avoidance of congestion of population, including the minimum width and area of lots. Such regulations may include provisions as to the extent to which streets and other ways shall be graded and improved and to which water and sewer and other utility mains, piping or other facilities shall be installed as a condition precedent to the approval of the plat. The regulations or practice of the commission may provide for tentative approval of the plat previous to such installation, but any such tentative approval shall be revocable and shall not be entered on the plat. In lieu of the completion of such improvements and utilities prior to the final approval of the plat, the commission may accept a bond with surety to secure to the city the actual construction and installation of such improvements or utilities at a time and according to specifications fixed by or in accordance with the regulations of the commission. The city may enforce such bond by all appropriate legal and equitable remedies. 
(b)  All such regulations shall be published as provided by law for the publication of ordinances, and, before adoption, a public hearing shall be held thereon. A copy thereof shall be certified by the commission to the probate judge of the county in which the city and territory are located. 
(Code 1973, §§ 2-43-2-46; Code 1995, § 2-148) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-31. 
Secs. 2-204-2-229. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS 

Sec. 2-230. - Established. 
(a)  Purpose. The city hereby establishes a building code board of appeals to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of the International Residential Code as adopted by the city. 
(1)  Appointment. Members shall be appointed to the building code board of appeals by the city council based on the individual's experience and training to pass on matters pertaining building construction. 
(2)  Composition. The building code board of appeals shall be comprised of three regular members, one alternate member and the city building official as an ex officio member. 
(3)  Term. Members of the building code board of appeals shall be appointed and serve for staggered terms of four years, three years, and two years. The ex officio member shall serve for the duration of their position as the city building official. The alternate member shall be appointed and serve for a four year term. 
(b)  Rules of procedure. The building code board of appeals shall adopt rules of procedures for conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellate with a duplicate copy to the building official. 
(Res. No. 116-08, 2-19-2008) 
Secs. 2-231-2-253. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TREE COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-254. - Established. 
    There is established a tree commission and the mayor, with the concurrence of the council, shall appoint to the tree commission two members of the council, and the mayor shall serve as an ex officio member. The councilmember's term shall expire on the date that a newly elected council shall take office. In addition, the mayor shall appoint, with the concurrence of the council, six additional persons in the city. Following the initial appointments, two members shall be appointed annually to serve for a period of three years, and until their successors are appointed and qualified. Persons with special expertise may be added as needed who shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. 
(Code 1995, § 2-161; Ord. No. 2612, § I, 2-1-1994) 
Sec. 2-255. - Meetings. 
    The commission shall provide in its minutes for regular periodic meetings. Meetings may also be called by the mayor, by either of the two councilmembers, or by any two of the commission members, after giving not less than three days' notice of the date, time and place of the special meeting. 
(Code 1995, § 2-162; Ord. No. 2612, § II, 2-1-1994) 
Sec. 2-256. - Duties and responsibilities. 
    The tree commission shall: 
(1)  Make recommendations to the mayor and council on the needs of the city in connection with its tree planting program; 
(2)  Recommend the type and kind of trees to be planted upon city streets, parks and other public places within the city; 
(3)  Assist the mayor and council in providing information regarding the protection, maintenance, removal, and planting of trees on public property, and, where requested by the owner, on private property; 
(4)  Assist in making a master street plan by recommending the use and species of trees; 
(5)  Recommend to the mayor and council which trees are considered unwanted trees, and identify and recommend removal of dead, dying, diseased or insect infected trees; and 
(6)  Make studies and report back to the mayor and council with recommendations on matters concerning trees in the city. 
(Code 1995, § 2-163; Ord. No. 2612, § III, 2-1-1994) 
Secs. 2-257-2-275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - BESSEMER AIRPORT AUTHORITY BOARD OF DIRECTORS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal and regional airport authorities, Code of Ala. 1975, § 4-3-1 et seq.; "Each member elected by the governing body of one of the authorizing subdivisions shall be a resident of the authorizing subdivision by whose governing body he was elected," Code of Ala. 1975, § 4-3-5. 

Sec. 2-276. - Created. 
    There is hereby created by the city council an airport board, a public body, which shall be known as the "Bessemer Airport Authority," sometimes referred to herein as the "airport authority." 
Sec. 2-277. - Jurisdiction. 
    The airport authority shall have jurisdiction and control over the Bessemer Airport, the municipal airport of the city. 
Sec. 2-278. - Membership. 
    The airport authority shall be governed by a board of directors consisting of five members. The members of the board of directors shall be nominated by the mayor and appointed by the city council. The board members shall be so appointed and designated to serve for terms as established by the city council. Vacancies occurring otherwise than by the expiration of the term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointment. Each airport authority board member shall hold office until a successor has been appointed. 
Sec. 2-279. - Qualifications. 
    At least three members of the Bessemer Airport Authority Board of Directors shall be bona fide residents and qualified electors of the City of Bessemer, Alabama. 
(Ord. No. 3335, § 1, 6-19-2007; Ord. No. 3493, § 1, 4-16-2013) 
Sec. 2-280. - Organization; powers; duties. 
    The airport authority shall be organized according to and vested with all of the powers and duties enumerated under state law. 
Secs. 2-281-2-308. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - EDUCATIONAL BUILDING AUTHORITY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Educational building authorities generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 16-17-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-309. - Established. 
(a)  The name of the authority is and shall be the "Educational Building Authority of the City of Bessemer." 
(b)  The location of the principal office of the authority shall be at city hall. 
(c)  The authority shall have all powers conferred on corporations of like nature under state law, and any amendment thereof heretofore or hereafter made, and all other powers conferred upon corporation generally by the laws of Alabama, as heretofore or hereafter amended 
(d)  The authority shall be a nonprofit corporation and no part of the net earnings thereof shall inure to the benefit of any private person or entity of any nature whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 3306, §§ 1-6, 6-20-2006) 
Secs. 2-310-2-320. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - BESSEMER BEAUTIFICATION BOARD[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3540, §§ 1-6, adopted Sept. 15, 2015, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as div. 7, §§ 2-321-2-326 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-321. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created the Bessemer Beautification Board. This board shall act in an advisory capacity to the mayor and council in regard to matters set out in this section. The board shall not have the right to sue or be sued or to have or to hold property, and all money or property accruing to it shall be vested in and be the money or property of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3540, § 1, 9-15-2015) 
Sec. 2-322. - Purpose. 
(a)  The beautification board shall study, investigate, develop and propose plans for improving the health, sanitation, safety and cleanliness of the city by beautifying the streets, highways, alleys, parks and other city property. 
(b)  The board shall recommend those plans as it deems proper to agencies of the city for the beautification of the city and otherwise promote public interest in the general improvement of the appearance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3540, § 2, 9-15-2015) 
Sec. 2-323. - Composition. 
(a)  The beautification board shall consist of any number of members as from time to time are appointed by the mayor; provided, that the membership shall not be less than seven nor more than 25 persons. 
(b)  Each member shall be appointed for a term of four years to begin immediately, or until the tenure of the mayor expires, whichever first appears. Each member shall be over 19 years of age or older. 
(c)  Appointments to fill a vacancy can be made for the unexpired term at any time by the mayor. A vacancy may occur through death, resignation, expiration of term, or four unexcused absences to regularly scheduled meetings upon which notice was forwarded to all board members within a reasonable time. 
(d)  The mayor, or his/her designee, a representative of the city council and a representative of the parks department shall be ex-officio non-voting members of the board. 
(Ord. No. 3540, § 3, 9-15-2015) 
Sec. 2-324. - Quorum and calling of meetings and keeping of minutes. 
(a)  A quorum shall consist of half of the board members serving at any time, plus one. 
(b)  The board shall hold regular meetings at city hall or a designated city facility once each month on a date determined by the board. Special meetings may be called by the chairperson upon five days' written notice to the members, which notice shall be sufficient if mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to each member, six days prior to such special meetings. Special meetings may also be held at any time upon written waiver of notice executed by each member of the board. 
(c)  The board is required to keep minutes of its meetings. Minutes will be deposited with the city clerk with duplicate copy maintained by the secretary. Upon certification of meeting minutes by a quorum at the next regularly scheduled meeting, the chairperson and secretary shall affix their signature and certify the same to the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 3540, § 4, 9-15-2015) 
Sec. 2-325. - Election of officers. 
(a)  A chairperson, vice-chairperson, and secretary shall be elected by the members of the board at the first regular meeting at which a quorum is present at the first meeting in September each year for a term of office to begin October 1 of such year and terminate on September 30 of the following year, except for the initial officers, which shall be elected at the first meeting at which a quorum is present after the establishment of the board. 
(b)  The chairperson or vice-chairperson, if chairperson is absent, shall officiate all meetings. Should the chairperson and vice-chairperson both become vacant or be absent from a regularly scheduled meeting, a quorum can appoint a member present to officiate for that meeting only. 
(c)  No officer shall serve in the same office for more than two consecutive terms. 
(d)  Any officer may be removed by unanimous consent of all members if an issue of moral turpitude or other conduct renders said officer unable to perform said duties. 
(Ord. No. 3540, § 5, 9-15-2015) 
Sec. 2-326. - No compensation of board members. 
(a)  The members of the beautification board and the officers thereof shall receive no compensation whatever for their services thereon, nor shall they receive compensation of per diem for attending meetings. 
(b)  The board shall have no authority to act for or to oblige the city or any official or agency thereof in any matters whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 3540, § 6, 9-15-2015) 
Secs. 2-327-2-336. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Competitive bids required for certain contracts, Code of Ala. 1975, § 41-16-50. 

Sec. 2-337. - Revenue department. 
    The revenue department of the clerk and treasurer's office shall have the following responsibilities: 
(1)  Enforce the city business license ordinance. 
(2)  Collect and account for all monies due the city, the responsibility for which is not vested in another agency or entity. 
(Code 1973, § 2-31; Code 1995, § 2-186) 
Secs. 2-338-2-470. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MUNICIPAL-OWNED VEHICLES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3549, § 1, adopted July 19, 2016, repealed art. VI in its entirety, and §§ 2-8 of said ordinance enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former art. VI, §§ 2-471-2-478 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 3385, §§ 1-6, adopted July 15, 2008. 

Sec. 2-471. - Use of municipal vehicles policy statement. 
    Municipally owned vehicles are intended to promote the efficient and effective conduct of official municipal business, and therefore, are to be used exclusively to further this purpose. 
(Ord. No. 3549, § 2, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 2-472. - Personal use. 
    City-owned vehicles are for official use only. Personal use of city-owned vehicles is prohibited, except as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 3549, § 3, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 2-473. - Application. 
    The rules and regulations set forth in this article shall be applicable to the use of city-owned passenger vehicles, patrol cars, and trucks by all city officers, employees and volunteers, including elected and appointed officials and employees. For purposes of this article, "city-owned vehicles" shall include any motor vehicle owned by or under the control of the city and provided for the use of any city official, employee, agent or volunteer in the performance of official duties. 
(Ord. No. 3549, § 4, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 2-474. - Use of municipal vehicles generally. 
(a)  Municipally-owned vehicles are to be operated only by city officials and employees (a) on official business of the City of Bessemer and (b) as authorized to do so by the mayor as hereinafter provided. This paragraph does not authorize or expand the use of municipally owned vehicles in sections 2-474, 2-476 and 2-477 of this article. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, utilization of municipal vehicles generally shall be by the authorization of the mayor as hereinafter provided. 
(c)  Municipally-owned vehicles shall not be utilized to transport persons other than city employees except in the line and scope of duty and in connection with city business. Releases shall be obtained from persons who are not city employees to ride in municipal vehicles whenever possible, prior to allowing the same. 
(d)  All municipal vehicles shall be identified as official city vehicles by appropriate markings with the exception of certain law enforcement vehicles as directed by the mayor or request of the chief of police. 
(e)  Drivers shall be prohibited from carrying passengers in city vehicles who are not related to city business. The City Council or the Mayor of the City of Bessemer may grant approval, in writing, to carry specified passenger(s) or to use a city vehicle in appropriate circumstances and on a case-by-case basis without amendment to this article. 
(f)  Drivers shall observe all traffic laws at all times. 
(g)  Drivers shall operate vehicles not only in compliance with law, but in compliance with safe driving practices including but not limited to obeying speed limits and using seat belts. 
(h)  Fines and penalties imposed by a court for a violation while on city business shall be the personal responsibility of the driver. 
(i)  Parking citations issued to a city vehicle shall be the responsibility of the driver who parked the vehicle. 
(j)  Drivers shall operate city vehicles in an ordinary, reasonable manner consistent with the intended use of the vehicle. Except for vehicles engaged in law enforcement work, they shall not be used in activities which may endanger the vehicle. 
(k)  The use of any tobacco product by any driver of a city vehicle is prohibited. 
(l)  The use of alcohol by any driver of a city vehicle is prohibited. 
(m)  The use of a cell phone while driving a vehicle is prohibited, unless it is an emergency or law enforcement vehicle and during an emergency. A hands-free device may be used at any time. 
(n)  The costs of repairing damages to city vehicles resulting from gross negligence, abuse or willful misconduct by the driver having custody of the vehicle shall be recoverable from the driver. 
(Ord. No. 3549, § 5, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 2-475. - Parking and overnight retention of municipal vehicles. 
(a)  General. When not in use on city business, city vehicles shall at all times be kept at the following designated locations on city property: 
(1)  All vehicles assigned to the Bessemer Police Department shall be parked and kept at Bessemer Police Department. 
(2)  All vehicles assigned to the Bessemer Fire Department shall be kept and parked at Bessemer Fire Station nearest to the job assignment of the employee assigned to the vehicle. 
(3)  All vehicles assigned to personnel at city hall and all other vehicles not specifically mentioned herein shall be kept and parked at Bessemer Utilities. 
(b)  No person shall operate or have overnight retention of city vehicles except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(c)  The governing body of the City of Bessemer, hereby grants overnight retention of municipal vehicles, subject to the provisions of this article, as follows: 
(1)  The Mayor of the City of Bessemer, Alabama; 
(2)  The Bessemer Police Department: 
a.  The chief of police; and 
b.  Such persons employed in the Bessemer Police Department as the chief of police deems necessary for the good and efficient operation of the police department. 
(3)  The Bessemer Fire Department: 
a.  The fire chief; and 
b.  Such persons employed in the Bessemer Fire Department as the fire chief deems necessary for the good and efficient operation of the fire department. 
(d)  Parking overnight retention. Municipal vehicles on overnight retention and when not in use or on city business shall be safely and securely parked at the residence of the driver under whose charge the municipal vehicle has been let. 
(Ord. No. 3549, § 6, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 2-476. - Criteria for overnight retention; other personnel. 
(a)  The City Council or Mayor of the City of Bessemer may authorize other personnel to retain municipal vehicles overnight, under the following criteria: 
(1)  The driver must respond to emergencies which require immediate attention during off-duty hours for the protection of persons or property specifically requiring the presence of the employee in a supervisory or technical capacity. Such emergencies shall require immediate travel to the emergency scene. An average of at least three emergency calls per month requiring travel shall be documented. This subsection shall not apply to emergency responders utilizing fire apparatus; and 
(2)  The driver's duties are such that the checkout of a city vehicle from a city facility at the start or end of a normal workday would be both impractical and uneconomical due to lost time and increased city transportation costs. In such cases, it shall be determined that the employee's productive working hours would be reduced by travel time if the vehicle were not parked at the residence. 
(b)  Temporary overnight retention. Temporary overnight retention shall be permitted: 
(1)  When a driver is working on a special assignment requiring continuous availability of a city vehicle. Such authorization shall only extend over the span of the special assignment. 
(2)  When a driver requires the use of a city vehicle to attend city business and/or a training session in or out of the city, and such assignment is to the benefit of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3549, § 6, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 2-477. - [Driver's travel log; reservations; fuel card; city logo; place of parking and overnight retention.] 
(a)  Vehicles assigned to the city council. There shall be kept in each vehicle assigned to the city council a driver's travel log to be completed by each driver each time the vehicle is used. The log shall specify the following: 
(1)  The name of the driver using the vehicle; 
(2)  The date and time the use begins; 
(3)  The destination and business purpose for the use; 
(4)  The beginning odometer reading; 
(5)  The ending odometer reading; and 
(6)  The date and time the use ends and the vehicle is returned. 
(b)  Submission of travel log. The driver shall be responsible for submitting the driver's travel log to the council's secretary at the end of each use. The driver's travel logs shall be kept in the records of the city council for easy review and retrieval. A driver who fails to record his or her beginning and ending mileage may be responsible for gaps, omissions or errors in recording the mileage of the preceding driver. 
A copy of the travel log from the preceding 30 days shall be placed upon the agenda of each planning session for review by the council. 
(c)  Reservation for use of vehicle-In-town. 
(1)  Reservation. A person desiring the use of a vehicle assigned to the city council for in-town use (inside of the city limits and up to ten miles beyond of the city limits of the City of Bessemer) must reserve the use of vehicle at least 24 hours or one business day, before the intended use. 
(2)  Consecutive day use. No person may reserve the use of a vehicle assigned to the city council for consecutive days unless the same is approved, in advance, by the council president, the pro tem if the president is unavailable, or the city council. 
(3)  Use of vehicle to survey the district. No person may reserve the use of a vehicle assigned to the city council to survey any council district more than twice monthly. Surveying a council district shall mean use of such vehicle to drive through a council district to assess or evaluate the condition of or projects in a district or to otherwise canvass the condition of a district or the opinions of the residents of a district. 
(4)  Return of vehicle. A vehicle used under this section shall be returned to its place of parking and retention not later than 4:30 p.m., and the keys and log provided to the council secretary or, in his/her absence, to the office of the city clerk. In extenuating circumstances, with the prior approval of the council president or the pro tem if the president is unavailable, the vehicle may be returned by 9:00 a.m., of the following day. 
(d)  Reservation for use of vehicle-Out-of-town. 
(1)  Reservation. A person desiring the use of a vehicle assigned to the city council for out-of-town use (more than ten miles beyond the city limits of the City of Bessemer) must reserve the use of the vehicle at least seven days prior to the intended use. In extenuating circumstances, the seven-day requirement may be waived by council president, the pro tem if the president is unavailable, or the city council. 
(2)  Reservation information. The person reserving a vehicle for out-of-town use shall state: 
a.  The destination and business purpose for the use; 
b.  Number of days the vehicle is expected to be used; and 
c.  The date the vehicle is expected to be returned. 
(3)  Return of vehicle. A vehicle used under this section shall be returned to its place of parking and retention not later than 4:30 p.m., on the day the user arrives back in town and the keys and log shall be provided to the council secretary or, in his/her absence, to the office of the city clerk. In extenuating circumstances, with the prior approval of the council president or the pro tem if the president is unavailable, the vehicle may be returned by 9:00 a.m., of the following day. 
(e)  Fuel card. A person refueling a vehicle assigned to the city council with a city issued fuel card shall provide a copy of all fuel receipts from the use of said card to the director of finance with a copy attached to the travel log. All vehicles must be refueled at the end of each use prior to parking the vehicle in its designated location. 
(f)  City logo. Each vehicle assigned to the city council shall bear the city's logo on the front doors, below the side-view mirrors. 
(g)  Place of parking and overnight retention. All vehicles assigned to the Bessemer City Council shall be parked and kept in the city's parking lot adjacent to city hall. 
(Ord. No. 3549, § 7, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 2-478. - Unauthorized use. 
    Every use of a municipal vehicle in violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed unauthorized. 
(Ord. No. 3549, § 8, 7-19-2016) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Intoxicating beverages generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-1-1 et seq.; power of municipalities to adopt ordinances to promote temperance and to suppress intemperance, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-112. 

Sec. 6-1. - State statutes adopted by reference. 
(a)  All provisions, except those which by their nature are not applicable, of Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-1-1 et seq. are adopted by reference as if fully set out in this chapter. 
(b)  All definitions and rules of construction of the state statutes adopted by reference shall apply, insofar as applicable, in this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 6-1) 
Sec. 6-2. - Illegal drinking place defined; sales from; visitation of; buying from; violation. 
(a)  Illegal drinking place means any place where liquor, wine, malt or brewed beverages are sold without a license duly issued therefor by the state alcoholic beverage control board. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell liquor, wine, malt, or brewed beverages at any place not duly licensed by the state alcoholic beverage control board. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to visit or resort to an illegal drinking place for the purpose of buying any liquor, wine, malt, or brewed beverage. 
(d)  Proof that a person is present in or at an illegal drinking place at the time any liquor, wine, malt or brewed beverages are sold therein shall be prima facie evidence that such person was visiting or resorting to such place for the purpose of buying liquor, wine, malt, or brewed beverages. 
(e)  Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be guilty of an offense against the city and shall be punished as provided by law. 
(Code 1995, § 6-2; Ord. No. 2204, 5-3-1983) 
State Law reference- Abatement of unlawful drinking places generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-4-70 et seq. 
Sec. 6-3. - State license required; revocation by state. 
(a)  No license shall be issued to any applicant for the sale of any intoxicating beverages under the provisions of this chapter until the applicant has obtained a license from the state alcoholic beverage control board for the sale of such beverage. The city shall issue a license for the same type of license issued by such board. 
(b)  If the license issued by the state alcoholic beverage control board is revoked for any cause whatsoever, the city license shall also be revoked upon receipt of notice from such board. 
(Code 1973, § 3-8; Code 1995, § 6-3) 
Sec. 6-4. - Licenses required. 
(a)  For individuals. No person within the city limits shall sell, or have in his possession with the intent or purpose to sell, or offer to sell, any liquor, wine, malt or brewed beverage, unless such person has, prior thereto, made application for and received a proper license from the city for the sale of such liquor, wine, malt or brewed beverage. 
(b)  For businesses. No person operating a business within the city limits shall sell or have in his possession with the intent or purpose to sell or serve or give away or otherwise distribute at or in such place of business any liquor, wines, malt or brewed beverages, unless such person has, prior thereto, made application for and received a proper license from the city for the sale of such liquor, wines, malt or brewed beverages. 
(c)  Sales in public places. No person shall sell, serve, distribute or give away, or offer to sell, serve, distribute or give away any liquor, wines, malt or brewed beverages at any public place within the city limits unless such person has, prior thereto, obtained a proper license from the city for the sale or distribution of such liquor, wines, malt or brewed beverages at such public place. 
(Code 1973, § 3-2; Code 1995, § 6-4) 
State Law reference- Authority to license and collect fees or taxes for sale of alcoholic beverages, Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-21(15)(c). 
Sec. 6-5. - Written statement required by licensees; contents. 
(a)  Every distributor or seller of intoxicating beverages shall before engaging in business within the city limits file with the clerk and treasurer a written statement, under oath, containing full data regarding the business he intends to carry on. 
(b)  The written statement shall include: 
(1)  His place of business; 
(2)  Whether or not such wholesale distributor or seller is a natural person, a corporation, a partnership or association; 
(3)  If not a natural person, the names of the persons composing the partnership, corporation or association and their residences, or the names and residences of the persons who hold the capital stock of the corporation; and 
(4)  Such other information as the city council may require. 
(Code 1973, § 3-3; Code 1995, § 6-5) 
Sec. 6-6. - Application for license; investigation; determination. 
(a)  Every application for a license for the sale of intoxicating beverages to be sold for consumption on the licensed premises, and a license has not been issued for the preceding year, shall be submitted to the city clerk and treasurer. 
(b)  The police chief shall make an investigation of the police record and the character of the applicant. He shall make a survey of the residents within a one-block radius, if within the fire zone, or three-block radius, if outside the fire zone, as to whether there is objection to the location of the place of business at the proposed location. The chief of police shall report his findings of fact to the city council, together with his recommendation as to whether the application should be granted or denied. The city council, after consideration of the facts and the recommendation of the chief of police, shall determine whether in the interest of the peace, good order and welfare of the community the application for license shall be granted or refused. 
(c)  The fire limits of the city shall include the area designated as the corporate city limits. 
(Code 1973, §§ 3-5, 6-2; Code 1995, §§ 6-6, 50-2) 
Sec. 6-7. - Transfer of licenses; fee. 
(a)  Licenses issued pursuant to this section may not be assigned. Upon written application, and subject to the approval by the state alcoholic beverage control board, the city is authorized to transfer any license from one person to another, or from one place to another within its jurisdiction, or both. No transfer shall be made to a person who would not have been eligible to receive the license originally, nor for the transaction of business at a place for which the license could not originally have been issued lawfully. 
(b)  No license shall be transferred in any event more than one time during the term of the license. 
(c)  A fee shall be paid by the applicant upon the filing of an application to transfer any alcoholic beverage license. This fee shall not be refunded even if the application is denied. The amount of the fee shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 6-7; Ord. No. 2233, § 1(3-6), 9-21-1984; Ord. No. 2291, § 1, 12-17-1985) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-23(j). 
Sec. 6-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3468, adopted Aug. 16, 2011, repealed § 6-8 which pertained to distribution or sale within police jurisdiction, and derived from the 1973 Code, § 3-9; and the 1995 Code, § 6-8. 
Sec. 6-9. - License for specified business location only. 
(a)  Every person subject to any of the provisions of this chapter shall designate the place at which such business is to be carried on. The license issued shall designate such place, and such license shall authorize the carrying on of business only at such place. For each place at which such business is carried on, a separate license shall be required. 
(b)  Any person dealing in two or more articles or engaging in two or more businesses licensed under this chapter shall pay for and take out a license for each line of business. 
(Code 1973, § 3-12; Code 1995, § 6-9) 
Sec. 6-10. - Presence of beverages on premises; presumption of sales. 
    The possession by any person of any liquor, wines, malt or brewed beverages at or on any business or business premises within the city limits shall be prima facie evidence that such liquor, wines, malt or brewed beverages are being possessed on such premises by such person for the purpose of sale. 
(Code 1973, § 3-14; Code 1995, § 6-10) 
Sec. 6-11. - Consumption of beverages on business premises limited to licensed beverages. 
    No person operating a place of business within the city limits shall allow any person to drink any intoxicating beverage on such business premises other than the beverage for which the business has been duly licensed. 
(Code 1973, § 3-15; Code 1995, § 6-11) 
Sec. 6-12. - Refund of license fees. 
    If any license for the sale of liquor, wines, malt or brewed beverages, having been issued by the city, is revoked then, in such case, the city shall not be required to refund any portion of the moneys paid by the licensee for such license. 
(Code 1973, § 3-20; Code 1995, § 6-12) 
Sec. 6-13. - Consumption of intoxicating beverage in public; licensed premises. 
(a)  No person shall consume or drink any intoxicating beverage in any public place other than on the premises where purchased and for which a license has been procured by the proprietor thereof for the sale of that particular type of beverage. 
(b)  No proprietor, owner, manager, or person in charge of any business shall allow any person to drink any intoxicating beverage on his premises, other than the beverage for which the business has been duly licensed and which was actually purchased in such place of business. 
(Code 1973, § 3-22; Code 1995, § 6-13) 
Sec. 6-14. - Tax levied on beer; amount. 
(a)  In addition to all other taxes now imposed by law, every person who sells, stores or delivers beer or ale in the city shall pay a license tax to the city. A license tax is fixed and levied for the sale, storage or delivery of beer or ale in the city limits. 
(b)  The license tax shall be in an amount equal to $0.02 for each bottle, can or other container thereof containing 12 fluid ounces or less and a like amount for each additional 12 fluid ounces, or fractional part thereof, contained therein, so sold, stored or delivered. 
(Code 1973, § 3-28; Code 1995, § 6-14) 
Sec. 6-15. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3468, adopted Aug. 16, 2011, repealed § 6-15 which pertained to tax levied in police jurisdiction; amount, and derived from the 1973 Code, § 3-29; and the 1995 Code, § 6-15. 
Sec. 6-16. - License for sale of off-premises wine-Application. 
    Any business may apply for a license for the sale of off-premises wine by making application to the clerk and treasurer and giving such information as may be necessary. The chief of police shall make an investigation and report his findings and recommendations to the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 3-32; Code 1995, § 6-16) 
Sec. 6-17. - Same-Conditions. 
    Any person granted an off-premises wine license shall be subject to the conditions of this chapter and to the following additional conditions: 
(1)  Any conflict shall be resolved in favor of the more restrictive. 
(2)  The license must be conspicuously displayed under a transparent substance upon the licensed premises. 
(Code 1973, § 3-33; Code 1995, § 6-17) 
Sec. 6-18. - Persons receiving, storing, selling or handling alcoholic beverages preserving, auditing and inspecting records. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person, club, or association of persons receiving, storing, selling or handling alcoholic beverages enumerated in this chapter in any manner whatsoever, to keep and preserve all invoices, books, papers, cancelled checks or other memoranda touching the purchase, sale, exchange or receipt of any and all such alcoholic beverages for a period of three years. 
(b)  All such invoices, books, papers, cancelled checks or other memoranda shall be subject to audit and inspection by any duly authorized representative of the city at any and all times. 
(c)  Any person, club or association of persons who fails or refuses to keep and preserve the records as required by this section or who, upon request by a duly authorized agent of the city, fails or refuses to allow an audit or inspection of records, as provided in this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. 
(Code 1973, § 3-10; Code 1995, § 6-19) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Licensing, etc., of amusements generally by cities, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-102 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BILLIARDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Billiard rooms generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-6-1 et seq. 

Sec. 10-19. - Definitions. 
    The definitions set forth in Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-6-1 (Billiard rooms-Definitions), shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this article. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-6-1, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-6-1. 
(Code 1973, § 4-1; Code 1995, § 10-26) 
Sec. 10-20. - Issuance of license prohibited. 
    This chapter shall not be construed as authorizing the issuance of any license by the city for the operation of any public billiard room, where the operation of such billiard room is prohibited by other laws of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 4-2; Code 1995, § 10-27) 
Sec. 10-21. - Sale of alcoholic beverages; license issuance. 
(a)  No person shall sell, offer for sale, or possess or keep for the purpose of sale, any alcoholic beverage in any pool room, pool hall, billiard hall or like place of business in the city. 
(b)  The clerk and treasurer shall not issue a license for the sale of whiskey, beer or wine or other alcoholic beverages to be sold, stored or offered for sale in violation of the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 4-7; Code 1995, § 10-32) 
Sec. 10-22. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not be construed to include billiard tables or billiard rooms operated by industrial concerns for the exclusive use of its employees, Young Men's Christian Associations, religious orders, charitable institutions, state, county or city institutions, fraternal orders, or bona fide clubs using such tables for employees or members only. 
(Code 1973, § 4-11; Code 1995, § 10-36) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-6-15. 
Secs. 10-23-10-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BINGO[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to license and regulate bingo games, Amd. No. 386, Ala. Const.; prohibition of gaming and gambling houses generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-111. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3463, §§ 1-16, adopted May 3, 2011, repealed the former art. III, §§ 10-48-10-54, 10-82-10-87, and enacted a new art. III as set out herein. The former art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2108, §§ 2-15, adopted Oct. 7, 1980; and the 1995 Code, §§ 10-56-10-62, 10-76-10-81. 

Sec. 10-48. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the City of Bessemer Bingo Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 3463, § 1, 5-3-2011) 
Sec. 10-49. - Definitions. 
    As used herein the following words shall have the following meanings as described here, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Any and all games of bingo shall mean any game of chance known as bingo, including any game permitted by federal law or which the National Indian Gaming Commission has classified, in a letter opinion, as a Class II bingo game (whether or not electronic, computer, or other technological aids are used in connection therewith), which incorporate the following elements: (i) the game must be played on a grid of five horizontal rows intersecting by five continuous squares contained within the grid; (ii) each square in a grid must be designated by a number or other symbol contained in a collection of numbers or symbols used for playing the game; (iii) numbers or symbols are selected by a procedure or mechanism entirely or predominantly governed by chance, and as such number or symbols, if they present on one or more of the squares on any grid in play, are covered or otherwise marked on such grid; (iv) the winner or winners of a particular game are the players of those grids for which a previously designated pattern or arrangement is first covered or marked; (v) two or more players must compete against one another for prizes; (vi) monetary wagers may be collected for the players of bingo for the opportunity to participate in the game, and such wagers may vary in amount to reflect the value of the prize of winning a particular game, whether the wager is for participation in the whole game or a particular phase thereof, and other factors reflecting the interplay of the amount wagered, the size of the prize and the probability of winning; and (vii) the prizes for winning the game of bingo must be in accordance with state law. To the extent that the foregoing elements are present in the game of bingo, it can be played with different kinds of equipment varying from one end of the spectrum, where traditional cards displaying the playing grids are used with tokens to cover the designated square on the grids, to the technologically advanced end of the spectrum where electronic devices perform the operation of the game using computers or micro processors and interact with the human players by means of an electronic console. When the game of bingo is played on electronic devices which determine and signal the winner, such devices, shall be electronically linked to ensure that multiple players are competing against each other. The prizes or evidence thereof for winning bingo games may be disbursed by the electronic devices or consoles used in playing such games at the time each game is won or on different schedules that reflect a record of wins and losses involving multiple games. The entertaining capabilities of electronic devices and consoles used in playing bingo may be enhanced by spinning reels or other video or mechanical displays, but such displays and the apparatus used to perform them may not affect the play or outcome of the game. In the event that any controversy concerning whether or not a certain activity, or type of activity, constitutes the game of "bingo" as herein defined, and for which a license may be issued, the decision of the chief of police shall control and be final. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, the definition of "bingo" or "bingo games" must include the following description as follows: 
(1)  Each player uses one or more cards with spaces arranged in five columns and five rows, with an alphanumeric or similar designation assigned to each space. 
(2)  Alphanumeric or similar designations are randomly drawn and announced one by one. 
(3)  In order to play, each player must pay attention to the values announced; if one of the values matches a value on the player's card, the player must physically act by marking his or her card accordingly. 
(4)  A player can fail to pay proper attention or to properly mark his or her card, and thereby miss an opportunity to be declared a winner. 
(5)  A player must recognize that his or her card has a "bingo," i.e., a predetermined pattern of matching values, and in turn announce to the other players and the announcer that this is the case before any other player does so. 
(6)  The game of bingo contemplates a group activity in which multiple players compete against each other to be the first to properly mark a card with the predetermined winning pattern and announce the fact. 
    Additionally, "bingo" and "bingo games" shall be defined as said definition may be subsequently amended by the Alabama Supreme Court and/or pursuant to an Amendment to the Constitution of the State of Alabama. 
    Bingo expenses shall mean all expenses incurred in connection with the holding, operating and conducting of bingo games in accordance with the Constitution of Alabama 1901, including but not limited to, the following expenses; rental of bingo machines, payment for the maintenance and repair of bingo machines, payment of prizes, rental for the location, utilities, janitorial services, security services, banking services, permit fees, taxes and license fees, insurance premiums, professional services, maintenance and any payments required by this article. Any expenses authorized by the Alabama Constitution shall be permitted under this article. 
    Bingo facility shall mean a facility in which bingo games are operated by a nonprofit organization as provided in this article. As long as a nonprofit organization is operating the bingo games, the bingo facility may be owned by an individual, partnership, profit corporation or for profit organization. 
    Bingo machine shall mean any electronic or mechanical equipment, machine or device, or computer or other technological hardware or device, (i) which is installed, or is to be installed, at a Class B qualified location and (ii) which is used, or can be used, to play bingo as herein defined. Bingo machines include any machine, device or hardware that assists a player or the playing of bingo games, broadens the participation levels in a common game, and includes all of the ancillary bingo supplies. Examples of bingo machines include but are not limited to, dispensers, readers, electronic player stations, player terminals, central computer servers containing random number generators and other processing capabilities for remote player terminals, electronic consoles capable of providing game results in different display modes, telephones and telephone circuits, televisions, cables, and other telecommunication circuits, and satellites and related transmitting and receiving equipment. Bingo machines shall not be deemed to be for any other purpose a "gambling device" or "slot machine" within the meaning of the Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 13A-12-20(5) and (10) or other provision of law, whether now in effect or hereafter enacted. Traditional bingo played utilizing paper cards and any devices to assist in the playing of traditional bingo utilizing paper cards shall be exempt under this definition. 
    Bingo machine vendor shall mean any person that leases or otherwise provides "bingo machines" to a Class B bingo licensee. 
    Bingo sessions shall mean a consecutive period of time up to 24 consecutive hours during which bingo is played Monday through Saturday. A holder of a Class A or a Class B bingo license shall not be limited in the number of bingo sessions it operates during any 24-hour period. No bingo facility shall operate between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 2:59 p.m. on any Sunday. 
    Chief of police shall mean the Chief of Police for the City of Bessemer, Alabama, or in his absence, the next most senior captain, who is charged with certain duties concerning investigation, regulation, and enforcement of the requirements of this article as set forth therein. 
    Class A bingo license shall mean a license issued to an applicant who desires to operate only paper card bingo games at a Class A qualified location as defined herein. 
    Class B bingo license shall mean a license issued to an applicant who desires to operate any and all games of bingo at a Class B qualified location. 
    Class A qualified location for the holder of a Class A bingo license shall mean a location (i) which has been previously licensed under the provisions of Ordinance No. 2108 as amended, or (ii) any other location which (a) is located within the following zoning classifications of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Bessemer, Alabama, to-wit: O-1, C-1, SC-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, C-6, PRD or any other zoning classification of the zoning ordinance which specifically provides for the playing of bingo as a permitted use or a use permitted upon review, (b) which has been inspected by the fire department, the police department and the department of buildings and inspections for compliance with applicable federal, state and local laws and (c) approved by the city council for the conduct of paper card bingo. 
    Class B qualified location for the holder of the Class B bingo license shall mean a location which: 
(1)  Is located within one of the following geographic areas within the city limits of Bessemer: 
a.  Any real property with a boundary situated within 600 feet of the centerline of 9th Avenue; or 
b.  Any real property situated between Alabama Adventure Parkway on the North, 9th Avenue SW on the East, Academy Drive on the South, and Powder Plant Road on the West; 
(2)  Has one of the following zoning classifications set forth in the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Bessemer, Alabama, to-wit: O-1, C-1, SC-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, C-6, PRD or any other zoning classification of the zoning ordinance as hereafter amended which specifically provides for the playing of bingo as a permitted use or a use permitted upon review; 
(3)  Has been inspected by the fire department, the police department and the department of buildings and inspections for compliance with applicable federal, state and local laws; 
(4)  Has submitted to the revenue department a certificate of insurance which provides for liability insurance in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00; 
(5)  Has demonstrated to the department of buildings and inspections that the location has adequate square footage of floor space within that portion of the building that is open to the general public for the placement of at least 300 bingo machines; 
(6)  Has demonstrated to the fire department, the police department and the department of buildings and inspections that the location has adequate parking for patrons and employees; 
(7)  Has demonstrated to the police department an ability to provide onsite security as reasonably prescribed by the chief of police, including but not limited to at least one APOST certified officer on the premises during all hours of operation; 
(8)  Has demonstrated to the fire department an ability to provide onsite first aid as reasonably prescribed by the fire chief; 
(9)  Has demonstrated to the revenue department such accounting procedures, controls and security monitoring as are reasonably necessary to preserve and promote the integrity of the operation of bingo games and the protection of the nonprofit organization and the patrons of the bingo games; 
(10)  Has demonstrated to the department of buildings and inspections satisfactory evidence that the location is fully compliant with the Americans with Disabilities Act; 
(11)  Has a minimum of 300 bingo machines on site and available for play at all times; and 
(12)  Has been approved by the city council for the conduct of Class B bingo games. 
    License holder shall mean any holder of a Class A bingo license or Class B bingo license. 
    Location shall mean a building, hall, room, premises, grounds and/or outdoor area that comply with all federal, state and local laws and applicable building and fire codes. 
    Net proceeds from bingo shall mean gross receipts from holding, operating and conducting of bingo games in accordance with the Constitution of Alabama 1901 less winnings and/or prizes awarded less bingo expenses. 
    Nonprofit organization shall mean any bona fide charitable, education, religious, fraternal, civic or service organization or other entity which has been classified by the Internal Revenue Service as a tax-exempt organization and which operates without profit to its members (if any). 
    Paper card bingo shall mean any game of chance known as bingo to the extent that it is played with traditional bingo cards displaying playing grids that are used with tokens to cover the designated squares on the cards and which incorporate the following elements: (i) the game must be played on a grid of five horizontal rows intersecting by five continuous squares contained within the grid; (ii) each square in a grid must be designated by a number or other symbol contained in a collection of numbers or symbols used for playing the game; (iii) numbers or symbols are selected by a procedure or mechanism entirely or predominantly governed by chance, and as such number or symbols, if they present on one or more of the squares on any grid in play, are covered or otherwise marked on such grid; (iv) the winner or winners of a particular game are the players of those grids for which a previously designated pattern or arrangement is first covered or marked; (v) two or more players must compete against one another for prizes; (vi) monetary wagers may be collected for the players of bingo for the opportunity to participate in the game, and such wagers may vary in amount to reflect the value of the prize of winning a particular game, whether the wager is for participation in the whole game or a particular phase thereof, and other factors reflecting the interplay of the amount wagered, the size of the prize and the probability of winning; and (vii) the prizes for winning the game of bingo must be in accordance with state law. Paper card bingo must be played without the incorporation of any electronic device. 
    Person shall mean any human being, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, business organization, association or legal entity of any kind whatsoever. 
    Revenue director shall mean the person appointed by the mayor to be the department head of the revenue department, who is charged with certain duties concerning the issuance of licenses and revocation of licenses prescribed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 3463, § 2, 5-3-2011) 
Sec. 10-50. - Authorization for the operation of bingo games. 
    The city hereby authorizes the licensing and operation of bingo games within the City of Bessemer subject to the authority, rules, and regulations set forth in the Constitution of Alabama (1901), Amendment No. 386 to the Constitution of Alabama (1901), Amendment No. 600 to the Constitution of Alabama (1901), and the provisions of this article, as amended from time to time. 
    If any provision in this article is deemed less restrictive than the Constitution of Alabama (1901), Amendment [No.] 386, and amended by Amendment [No.] 600, by a court of competent jurisdiction, then the provisions of the article shall be read to comply with the Constitution of Alabama, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 3463, § 3, 5-3-2011) 
Sec. 10-51. - Bingo license required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bingo game within the city limits unless the City of Bessemer first issues a license authorizing the playing of bingo. The licenses described herein shall be in a form designated by the Mayor of the City of Bessemer which is consistent with the terms of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to lease or otherwise provide bingo machines to any Class B bingo licensee unless the City of Bessemer first issues a license to said person. 
(c)  The following types of business licenses are hereby created for the operation of bingo games in the city: 
(1)  Class A bingo license; 
(2)  Class B bingo license; and 
(3)  Bingo machine vendor license. 
(d)  A holder of a Class A or Class B bingo license may hold only one license, and that license shall be valid for only one location in the City of Bessemer, Alabama. A license is not assignable or transferable without the express written consent of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 3463, § 4, 5-3-2011) 
Sec. 10-52. - Application for license; submission; form content; application fees and bingo machine fees. 
(a)  Any nonprofit organization desiring to obtain a license to operate bingo games hereunder shall make application to the revenue director and pay such application fee as is required by this article. Each such application shall be updated within 30 days of the close of each calendar year on a form prescribed by the city. 
(b)  For each calendar year, an annual base fee of $250.00 shall be required for a Class A bingo license and $15,000.00 shall be required for a Class B bingo license. Payment shall be due at the time of original application and at the time for renewal each year following as provided by this article. The holder of any bingo license pursuant to this article shall not be entitled to a half-year license; payment of the entire calendar year fee must be made in full prior to the issuance of a bingo license. 
(c)  In addition to all other fees set forth in this section, each holder of a Class B bingo license shall pay the following fees: 
(1)  Through December 31, 2011, $100.00 per bingo machine per month paid monthly in advance. 
(2)  On and after January 1, 2012, $150.00 per bingo machine per month paid monthly in advance. 
(3)  All bingo machine fees for the first month of holding a bingo license must be paid at the time of the original application, and payment must be made for a month in full, regardless of when during the month the bingo license is issued. The bingo machine fees for all subsequent months of holding a bingo license must be paid within the first ten days of each month. 
(4)  If additional bingo machines are utilized at any time after the license holder has paid its original or renewal fees in a given tax year, the license holder must make a supplemental payment for each additional bingo machine prior to the time that any new machine is placed in service. 
(5)  Each license holder of a Class B bingo license must pay for a minimum of 500 bingo machines per month paid in advance, regardless of whether said bingo machines are actually in operation. 
(d)  Any bingo machine vendor desiring to lease or otherwise provide bingo machines to a Class B bingo licensee shall make application to the revenue director and pay such application fee as required by this article. Each such application shall be updated within 30 days of the close of each calendar year on a form prescribed by the city. 
(e)  For each calendar year an annual base fee of $20,000.00 for the first location to which bingo machines are provided to a Class B bingo location shall be required for a bingo machine vendor license and $1,000.00 for each additional Class B bingo location to which bingo machines are provided. Payment shall be due at the time of original application and at the time for renewal each year following as provided by this article. The holder of any bingo license pursuant to this article shall not be entitled to a half-year license; payment of the entire calendar year fee must be made in full prior to the issuance of a bingo license. 
(f)  No license shall be issued under this section to any applicant qualified hereunder unless and until the applicant fully provides the information required hereunder, such being provided in a form and in sufficient detail to satisfy the City of Bessemer of its validity and sufficiency. The City of Bessemer may require any reasonable confirming documentation as to any information required hereunder and shall have reasonable time to check and confirm by any available method the accuracy or validity of any information provided hereunder. 
(1)  Any annual anniversary update under this section shall fully provide the information required hereunder, such being provided in a form and in sufficient detail to satisfy the City of Bessemer of its validity and sufficiency. The City of Bessemer may require any reasonable confirming documentation as to any information required hereunder and shall have reasonable time to check and confirm by any available method the accuracy or validity of any information provided hereunder. 
(2)  The city reserves the right to revoke any license issued under this section should there be a material change in the information provided on any update required under this section which would have caused the city to reject the initial application. 
(g)  No Class A or Class B bingo license shall be issued until such time as the location listed in the application meets the definition of a Class A or Class B qualified bingo location as defined in section 10-49 of this article. 
(h)  No license shall be issued for any individual electronic player station or device if the City of Bessemer finds that said individual electronic player station or device is a "gambling device" as defined by the statutes and Courts of the State of Alabama. Should said application be incomplete or contain material inaccuracies, same shall be grounds for denial of the license. In addition, the chief of police shall investigate as to the possible criminal record of the applicant. Should it be determined that any of said parties have, within two years prior to the date of application, been convicted of any felony and/or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, the application may be denied. 
(i)  Each application for a Class A or Class B bingo license or renewal thereof shall be on such form as is prescribed or approved by the mayor and shall, at a minimum, contain the following information and exhibits: 
(1)  The date of incorporation or other evidence of inception showing existence by the nonprofit organization for at least 24 months immediately prior to the issuance of the license. 
(2)  A certified copy of the charter, certificate of incorporation, by-laws, or other evidence of legal existence of the nonprofit organization or operator. 
(3)  Where applicable, a copy of the letter ruling or tax-exempt determination letter from the Internal Revenue Service, or other proof deemed acceptable by the City of Bessemer verifying the tax-exempt status of the nonprofit organization named in the application of the parent organization of which the same is a qualified branch, chapter, lodge or post. 
(4)  The names and residence addresses of each of the members, officers, directors, or the other authorized representatives of the nonprofit organization who are responsible for the operation of bingo games by the nonprofit organization. 
(5)  The exact physical location at which the applicant will conduct the bingo games and proof that such location is either owned or leased by the nonprofit organization which is conducting bingo games. If such location is not owned by such nonprofit organization, the application shall include the names and addresses of the owners or owners of the leasehold interest thereof and a copy of all agreements with the said owners and/or owners of the leasehold interest thereof regarding the rental or use of the premises for the operation of bingo games. 
(6)  The application shall also be accompanied by a drawing showing the floor plan of the proposed business and all exits. Applications for licenses shall also show the proposed location of each individual electronic player station or device, and its floor space requirement as required under the Building Code of the City of Bessemer. 
(7)  A statement listing all convictions, if any, for criminal offenses, other than traffic offenses, of each of the persons identified pursuant to subsections (i)(4) and (5) above. 
(8)  A statement that the persons identified pursuant to subsections (i)(4) and (5) above are persons of good moral character. 
(9)  Such additional information as is reasonably required by the City of Bessemer to ensure compliance with this article and other applicable city, county, state and federal ordinances, laws and regulations. 
(j)  Each applicant for a Class B license or renewal thereof shall be on such form as is prescribed or approved by the mayor, and shall, at a minimum, contain the following information and exhibits: 
(1)  The number and type of individual electronic player stations or devices intended to be operated; 
(2)  The owner, description, model and serial number of each individual electronic player stations or device; and 
(3)  The full name, address and date of birth of each and every owner of such business. 
(k)  Each application or renewal for a bingo machine vendor license or renewal thereof shall be on such form as is prescribed or approved by the mayor, and shall, at a minimum, contain the following information and exhibits: 
(1)  The date of the incorporation, organization or other evidence of inception. 
(2)  A certified copy of the following if a corporation: the charter, certificate of incorporation, by-laws, a certificate of good standing issued by the state in which the corporation is incorporated and if the corporation is a foreign corporation, a certificate of authority issued by the Secretary of State of Alabama that the foreign corporation is qualified to do business in Alabama. 
(3)  A certified copy of the following if a limited liability company: the articles of organization, the operating agreement, a certificate of good standing issued by the state in which the corporation is incorporated and if the company is a foreign company, a certificate of authority issued by the Secretary of State of Alabama that the foreign company is qualified to do business in Alabama. 
(4)  The Federal Taxpayer Identification number of the person. 
(5)  The names and residence addresses of each of the managing members, officers, directors, or the other authorized representatives of the entity who will be the designated agents of the entity for the leasing or otherwise providing of bingo machine to the Class B bingo licensee. 
(6)  The exact physical location at which the applicant will lease or otherwise provide bingo machine and proof that such location is either owned or leased by a holder of a current Class B bingo licensee which is conducting bingo games. 
(7)  A statement listing all convictions, if any, for criminal offenses, other than traffic offenses, of each of the persons identified pursuant to subsection (k)(5) above. 
(8)  A statement that the persons identified pursuant to subsection (k)(5) above are persons of good moral character. 
(9)  Such additional information as is reasonably required by the City of Bessemer to ensure compliance with this article and other applicable city, county, state and federal ordinances, laws and regulations. 
(10)  The number and type of individual electronic player stations or devices intended to be operated; and 
(11)  The owner, description, model and serial number of each individual electronic player station or device and the exact location physical location of each device within the City of Bessemer. 
(Ord. No. 3463, § 5, 5-3-2011) 
Sec. 10-53. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a fully completed and documented application for a Class A or Class B bingo license meeting all the requirements set out herein, the chief of police shall make such investigation as he may deem necessary and proper of the qualifications of each applicant as required herein and the truth and veracity of the information contained or attached to the application. After making such investigation and after being satisfied that all qualifications and requirements as set out herein have been fulfilled and that the location meets the requirements of either a Class A qualified location or a Class B qualified location, the chief of police shall make recommendations to the city council as to whether the requested license should be issued. As part of said investigation, any person named in section 10-52 herein may be required to consent to a background and criminal history investigation. 
(b)  Upon approval of the city council by a majority vote of its members, the revenue director shall issue such license to said applicant upon the terms and conditions herein set forth. 
(c)  A Class A bingo license shall be issued to an applicant who desires to operate paper card bingo only at a Class A qualified location. 
(d)  A Class B bingo license shall be issued to an applicant who desires to operate any and all games of bingo at a Class B qualified location. 
(e)  The revenue director shall issue a sticker or decal for each individual electronic player station or device located at the location of a bingo licensee annually at the time of the issuance of the bingo license. A fee of $100.00 shall be charged for each sticker/decal annually. Any sticker or decal may be transferred by the City of Bessemer to another electronic player station or device which replaces an electronic player station or device for which the sticker or decal was previously issued; a $35.00 administrative fee shall be paid for each such transfer. Any license holder found in violation of this requirement shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Bessemer. Each bingo machine without a sticker/decal shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 3463, § 6, 5-3-2011) 
Sec. 10-54. - Amendments. 
(a)  An applicant may amend an application filed hereunder to correct or complete the information contained therein or to change said information to comply with a change in circumstances at any time prior to the denial thereof by the City of Bessemer or the issuance of a license thereon, provided that said amendment is made in or on a form satisfactory to the City of Bessemer and the applicant pays a substitution or amendment fee of $200.00 per amendment. 
(b)  A license, once issued, may be amended only upon submission of a new, completed application satisfactory to the City of Bessemer and payment of a new application fee by the license holder. If such amendment is approved, a new license evidencing the amendment will be issued in place of the license being amended. 
(Ord. No. 3463, § 7, 5-3-2011) 
Sec. 10-55. - Contents and display of licenses. 
(a)  Each bingo license shall contain the name and address of the license holder, the location at which the license holder is permitted to conduct bingo games, the days of the week on which the license holder is permitted to conduct bingo games, and the date on which the license was issued and upon which it expires. 
(b)  Each bingo machine vendor license shall contain the name and address of the license holder, the location at which the license holder is permitted to lease or otherwise provide bingo machine, and the date on which the license was issued and upon which it expires. 
(c)  All license holders, including bingo machine vendors, shall display any required license conspicuously at the location where bingo is being conducted at all times during the conduct of a bingo game. 
(Ord. No. 3463, § 8, 5-3-2011) 
Sec. 10-56. - Fee procedures. 
(a)  All monies collected by the City of Bessemer hereunder shall be paid to the City of Bessemer and shall be deposited into the general fund. To the extent allowed by law, in the public interest, the said account shall be subject to audit by the State of Alabama Examiners of Public Accounts. 
(b)  The City of Bessemer as authorized by this article shall have the power to make regulations respecting the reporting, collection, and enforcement of the fees levied pursuant to this article. The levy, collection and enforcement of the fee shall be administered by the city, or other legal entity as established by ordinance of the City of Bessemer. 
(c)  Failure to remit any fee required under this article by the due date shall result in a penalty of 25 percent of the total levies due under this article which is due and payable on the second business day thereafter. 
(d)  At any time after the fifth business day wherein a license holder fails or refuses to remit fees and/or penalties, the City of Bessemer shall order said business closed until all fees and penalties are paid in full. 
(e)  At any time after the issuance of a license, each license holder shall be subject to periodic inspection of the location by a designated representative from the City of Bessemer to determine and maintain an exact accounting of the number of electronic bingo machines. 
(Ord. No. 3463, § 9, 5-3-2011) 
Sec. 10-57. - Effect of license. 
    The license holder, by accepting a license under the authority of this article, understands and acknowledges that the various courts of this state have issued different and varying opinions as to the legality of certain bingo operations. The fact that a license has been issued under the authority of this article shall not be evidence at any judicial proceeding that the city has taken the position that the operation of licensed activities is permitted under the laws of the State of Alabama. In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction determines that a particular bingo game is not permitted, the license holder agrees by acceptance of the bingo license that neither the license holder nor any other person or entity shall be entitled to a refund of any license fees or taxes collected by the City of Bessemer under this article. 
(Ord. No. 3463, § 10, 5-3-2011) 
Sec. 10-58. - Sales taxation. 
    Any operator of a bingo location shall be subject to all city tax as the current tax law requires. Further, each bingo machine vendor is subject to Bessemer City Tax. 
(Ord. No. 3463, § 11, 5-3-2011) 
Sec. 10-59. - General regulations and prizes. 
(a)  No person under the age of 19 shall be permitted to play any game or games of bingo, nor shall any person under the age of 19 be permitted to conduct or assist in the conduct of any game of bingo. 
(b)  No bingo licenses shall be issued to any nonprofit organization, unless such organization shall have been in existence in Jefferson County, Alabama, for at least 24 months immediately prior to the issuance of the license. 
(c)  Bingo games shall be operated only on the premises owned or leased by the nonprofit organization operating the bingo game. If the premises are leased, the rate of rental shall not be based on a percentage of receipts or profits resulting for the operation of bingo games. 
(d)  No nonprofit organization shall enter into any contract with any individual, firm, association or corporation to have said individual or entity operate bingo games or concessions on behalf of the nonprofit organization, nor shall said nonprofit organization pay consulting fees to any individual or entity for any services performed in relation to the operation or conduct of a bingo game, but this provision shall be interpreted to allow any items and matters allowed by Alabama Constitution of the State of Alabama. 
(e)  A nonprofit organization shall not lend its name to allow its identity to be used by any other person or entity in the operation or advertising of a bingo game in which said nonprofit organization is not directly and solely operating said bingo game. 
(f)  Prizes given by any nonprofit organization for the playing of bingo games in the City of Bessemer, Alabama, shall be unlimited but, in no event, shall any prize exceed the amount displayed on any machine prior to the playing of any game and no prize shall be paid for a game in which there is a machine malfunction. 
(g)  No person or organization, by whatever name or composition thereof, shall take any salary, expense money, or fees as remuneration for services rendered in the operation of any bingo game. (Amendment 386; Proposed by Act 80-431, submitted at the Sept. 2, 1980, election, and proclaimed ratified Sept. 17, 1980, Proclamation Register No. 3, p. 180; as amended by Amendment 600; Proposed by Act 96-420, submitted at the November 5, 1996 election, and proclaimed ratified Dec. 5, 1996, Proclamation Register No. 8, p. 220), but this provision shall be interpreted to allow any items and matters allowed by Alabama Constitutional Amendment 386, amended by Alabama Constitutional Amendment 600. 
(Ord. No. 3463, § 12, 5-3-2011) 
Sec. 10-60. - Records and accounting. 
    Each holder of a bingo license shall keep and maintain the following records and accounts pertaining to each bingo session conducted by it for at least six years from the date of such session: 
(1)  An itemized list of all gross receipts for each bingo session, which shall include all receipts derived from the sale of bingo cards, entrance fees, donations, or for any other source whatsoever pertaining to the operation of such session. 
(2)  An itemized list of all bingo expenses, costs and disbursements, other than prizes paid or given as a result of the operation of any bingo session, together with the name and address of each person to whom said bingo expenses, disbursements or consideration was paid or given, a receipt invoice for all items purchased and for all services rendered; and such other records as will adequately reflect the amount and nature of such expenses, costs and disbursements. 
(3)  All records, receipts, accounts and or lists required to be kept and maintained hereunder shall be open to inspection by the City of Bessemer during reasonable business hours. All locations at which bingo games are being held by a license holder, or at which a license holder intends to conduct bingo games, shall be open to the City of Bessemer during all times at which bingo games are being conducted and during all other reasonable business hours. 
(4)  On or before April 15 in each year, each license holder shall file with the city a financial statement of receipts and expenses relating to the operation of bingo games in the previous calendar year. Said report shall be in addition to any and all other reports required by law. 
(Ord. No. 3463, § 13, 5-3-2011) 
Sec. 10-61. - Suspension or revocation of license; appeal. 
    The chief of police or revenue director may suspend or revoke any license issued pursuant to this article if the license holder or any officer, director, agent, member or employee of the license holder violates this article or rule promulgated hereunder. Appeal to the city council from an adverse ruling shall be available to the license holder if filed with the city clerk within 14 days of the suspension or revocation. Alternatively, the city council may, sua sponte , suspend or revoke any permit issued pursuant to this article if the license holder or any officer, director, agent, member or employee of the license holder violates this article or rule promulgated hereunder. Appeal of any adverse decision rendered by the city council may be made to the Circuit Court of Jefferson County, Alabama, Bessemer Division, within 14 days of the adverse decision. 
(Ord. No. 3463, § 14, 5-3-2011) 
Sec. 10-62. - Effect of revocation. 
    A license holder whose license is revoked as herein set out shall return such license to the City of Bessemer on or before the effective date of such revocation and whether returned or not such license shall be inactive on the effective date and shall become void 15 days after the effective date of revocation. A license holder who loses the right to use a license in consequence of a violation of any rule or regulation promulgated herein shall be ineligible to apply for or have issued to it another license hereunder for a period of 24 months after the effective date of such revocation. Nor shall any license be issued to any person which is directed or controlled by persons listed in the application for license filed pursuant to section 10-52, in regard to the revoked license or to any organization which the membership is substantially the same as any organization whose license has been revoked hereunder, for a period of 24 months after the effective date of such revocation. 
(Ord. No. 3463, § 15, 5-3-2011) 
Sec. 10-63. - Violation, offense. 
    Any person, association, corporation, or organization who or which shall violate any of the provisions of this article relating to the conduct of bingo in the City of Bessemer or any terms of any license issued under this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Bessemer. In addition, said person, association, corporation or organization shall forfeit any license issued under this article and shall be ineligible to serve as an officer of a licensee or to participate in conducting bingo for a period of two years. 
(Ord. No. 3463, § 16, 5-3-2011) 
Secs. 10-64-10-117. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND CENTERS 

Sec. 10-118. - Scope. 
    This article shall be applicable to the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3116, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 10-119. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Amusement center, game room and arcade, hereinafter referred to by the term "amusement center," means: 
(1)  Any place of business where the gross receipts from mechanical amusement devices, as hereinafter defined, constitutes 25 percent or more of the gross receipts of the business; 
(2)  Any place of business which advertises as an amusement center, game room, arcade, or similar type business where mechanical amusement devices are available to the public for use; or 
(3)  Any place of business which has less than 10,000 square feet of floorspace available to the general public for use and has more than six mechanical amusement devices available to the public for use or operation. 
    Mechanical amusement device , hereinafter referred to by the abbreviation "MAD," means an instrument, machine, or contrivance which may be operated or set in motion upon the insertion of a coin, bill, slug, token, plat, disc, money, or any other insertion device, which may be operated by the public for use as a game, entertainment, or amusement, of any kind or description whatever. Specifically excluded from the purview of this article are devices which only furnish music and which are commonly referred to as "jukeboxes," scales for the express purpose of giving weights, medical devices, such as, those providing blood pressure information, pool and billiard tables and bowling lanes. 
    Revenue director refers to the Director of Licenses, Department of Revenue, Bessemer, Alabama. 
(Ord. No. 3116, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 10-120. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to: 
(1)  Any person having set up in his private residence one or more MAD's when employed for his own private use or for the use of his family; 
(2)  Clubs where MAD's are used exclusively by club members and for which no charge for playing is made and prizes or awards are forbidden. 
(Ord. No. 3116, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 10-121. - License required. 
(a)  No amusement center shall be established, maintained or conducted in the city by any owner or operator without first obtaining a license to operate such place in the city. 
(b)  The revenue director shall issue a sticker or decal for each MAD located at an amusement center annually at the time of the issuance of the license for the amusement center. 
(c)  Each MAD located at any amusement center must have the sticker or decal obtained from the revenue director affixed to the MAD in a clearly visible location. 
(d)  Failure to display the current license for the amusement center or to have a current decal or sticker affixed to each MAD may result in closure of the amusement center and/or confiscation of the MAD and/or a 50 percent penalty of the cost of the license, sticker or decal. 
(Ord. No. 3116, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 10-122. - Restrictions on location of amusement centers and arcades. 
(a)  No amusement center license, as hereinafter set forth, shall be issued by the revenue director to any such proposed operation which shall be located less than 1,000 feet from the property line of any property on which there is located an elementary, junior high school, high school, or vocational school; or which shall be located less than 300 feet from the property line of any property on which there is located a church. 
(b)  The revenue director shall not issue an amusement center license until the city zoning board of adjustment has made a determination in compliance with the requirements of the city zoning ordinance that the use is compatible with the permitted district use and is consistent with the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 3116, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 3240, § 1, 5-4-2004) 
Sec. 10-123. - Application for license, fee, term. 
(a)  Applications for an amusement center license and MAD sticker or decal shall be made to the city revenue department on a form provided by the revenue department, and shall be in accordance with the provisions of this section. The application for license, sticker or decal shall be verified and state, among other things: 
(1)  The number and type of machines or devices intended to be operated; 
(2)  The proposed locations for such machines or devices; 
(3)  The proposed business address, the full name of the business; 
(4)  The owner, description, model and serial number of each MAD; and 
(5)  The full name, present address and date of birth of each and every owner of such business. 
(b)  The application for an amusement center license shall be accompanied by an annual license fee which shall be established, from time to time, by the city council, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(c)  The amount of the license fee for each MAD shall be based upon the following factors, whether: 
(1)  The MAD dispenses no rewards except free play, or if it dispenses or the player is awarded coupons, certificates, or tickets valued in the amount of one cent (1/100 one dollar) or less per play; or 
(2)  The MAD dispenses or the player is awarded coupons, certificates, or tickets valued in an amount greater than one cent (1/100 one dollar) per play. 
The amount of each MAD license fee shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(d)  The application for an amusement center shall also be accompanied by a drawing showing the floor plan of the proposed business, all exits, the proposed location of each MAD, and its floorspace requirement as required under the building code of the city. 
(e)  An application for a MAD license shall be accompanied by a drawing showing the proposed location of each MAD. 
(f)  No license shall be issued until such time as the fire department has determined that the proposed location of each MAD will not interfere with egress from the building in case of fire, and that all fire regulations and life safety codes have been satisfied. 
(g)  No such licenses shall be issued until such time as the building department has determined that all electrical, pneumatic and hydraulic connections to each MAD comply with the this Code, and that all building and zoning regulations have been satisfied. 
(h)  No license shall be issued until such time as the police department has verified the accuracy of the information set forth in the application. No license shall be issued for any MAD if the police department finds that said MAD is a gambling device as defined by the statutes and courts of the state. Should said application be incomplete or contain material inaccuracies, same shall be grounds for denial of the license. In addition, the police department shall investigate as to the possible criminal record of the applicant or the officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation. Should it be determined that any of said parties have, within two years prior to the date of the application, been convicted of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or involving the operation of an amusement center, or of any felony, said conviction shall be grounds for denial of a license. 
(i)  If, after the issuance of any license, the licensee desires to operate additional MAD's or to relocate those MAD's already in place, the applicant shall submit an amended application, in a form similar to the original application, showing, the additions, changes or modifications desired. Any drawings, or other information filed with the original license application and not affected by the additions, changes or modifications requested may be incorporated by reference in the amended application. 
(Ord. No. 3116, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 3240, § 2, 5-4-2004; Ord. No. 3272, § 1, 11-2-2004) 
Sec. 10-124. - Basis for denial. 
    The revenue director shall deny an application for the following reasons: 
(1)  Misstatements or misleading statements of material facts in the application shall be a basis for denial. 
(2)  The proposed operation would not comply with one or more applicable city ordinances or state statutes. 
(3)  Failure to receive location approval of the city board of zoning adjustment or failure to receive approval of the fire department, building department or police department as required by the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Failure to pay the required application fee. 
If the director does not issue a license, the reasons for his not doing so shall be given in writing and shall accompany the notice of nonissuance. 
(Ord. No. 3116, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 10-125. - Term. 
    The term of any license granted shall begin January of the license year and shall terminate at midnight on December 31 of that year. In the event that a license is obtained after January 1, the cost of the license shall not be prorated and shall terminate on December 31, regardless of the date of issuance of the license. 
(Ord. No. 3116, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 10-126. - Notice. 
    Each applicant shall be notified by registered mail or by hand delivery of the issuance or nonissuance of an original license by the director at any address listed in the application for license. 
(Ord. No. 3116, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 10-127. - Appeal. 
    An applicant who's application has been denied for any reason, other than failure to receive location approval by the board of zoning adjustment, shall have the right to appeal the decision of the revenue director to the city council for a hearing. Any such notice of appeal shall be filed with the clerk of the city within 14 days of the date of the decision of the revenue director and the city council shall hear said appeal within 30 days of the date of the appeal. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. 3116, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 10-128. - Display of license. 
    The license issued herein by the revenue director shall be prominently displayed within the premises of the amusement center. 
(Ord. No. 3116, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 10-129. - Renewal procedure. 
(a)  Within 30 days of the expiration of the license, a licensee may apply to the director for renewal thereof, on such applications as shall be provided by the director. 
(b)  Renewal applications shall contain the name, address and license number of the licensee's operation, and further, licensee shall indicate any changes from the information furnished to the director at the time of the original application. 
(c)  An application for renewal of an amusement center license shall be accompanied by a renewal application fee, no part of which shall be refundable. The amount of the renewal application fee shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(d)  An application for renewal of a MAD license shall be accompanied by a renewal application fee, no part of which shall be refundable. The amount of the renewal application fee shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(Ord. No. 3116, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 3240, § 3, 5-4-2004) 
Sec. 10-130. - Suspension or revocation procedure. 
(a)  When the revenue director finds one or more of the following have occurred: 
(1)  Making of a misstatement or misleading statement of material fact in the application, not discovered until after the issuance of such license; 
(2)  A violation of any statutes or ordinances pertaining to consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages by a minor, or any statutes or ordinances pertaining to a possession of controlled substances or narcotics, has occurred on the premises of an amusement center; or 
(3)  The operation of the amusement center or any MAD located in the amusement center does not comply with one or more applicable city ordinances or state statutes. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the revenue director to notify the licensee of his determination and advise the licensee at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing that at a fixed time and place specified in the notice, he will apply to the city council for a suspension or revocation of the license. At the time and place so specified in the notice, the licensee may appear before the city council in person and by counsel, one or both, and show cause, if any there be, why said license should not be suspended or revoked. Any determination made by the city council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. 3116, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 10-131. - Miscellaneous regulations; conduct prohibited. 
(a)  No person under the age of 13 years shall be permitted on the premises of any amusement center without parental supervision. 
(b)  No consumption of alcoholic beverages or nonintoxicating beer shall be permitted on the premises of an amusement center. 
(c)  No alcoholic beverages or nonintoxicating beer shall be permitted on the premises of an amusement center. 
(d)  No firearms shall be permitted on the premises of an amusement center. 
(e)  No narcotics or controlled substances under the laws of the United States or the state shall be permitted on the premises of an amusement center or arcade. 
(f)  At least one supervisor of at least 19 years of age, employed by the operator, shall be on duty at all times and be present on the premises of an amusement center. 
(g)  An amusement center may not operate between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(h)  No person can reward a player of a coin-operated amusement machine with non-cash merchandise, prizes, toys, gifts, certificates or novelties that have a wholesale value of more than $5.00. 
(i)  No person or player can redeem non-cash merchandise, prizes, gifts, toys, gift certificates or novelties for cash. 
(j)  No issuer of a gift certificate that has been awarded to a player at an amusement center or arcade can give cash or part cash and merchandise for the gift certificate. Only merchandise can be given for the gift certificate. 
(k)  A licensee who elects to give a gift certificate as an award must stamp on the gift certificate the name of the amusement center signed by the licensee. 
(l)  A person cannot give but one award per game to a player of a MAD and the wholesale prize cannot exceed $5.00. 
(Ord. No. 3116, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 10-132. - Penalties. 
    Any person who shall be convicted of a violation of any provision of this article may be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 3116, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 10-133. - Cavaet. 
(a)  The fact that a license for an amusement center or for a MAD has been issued by the revenue director of the city shall not be evidence at any judicial proceeding that the city has taken the position that the operation of the amusement center is permitted under the laws of the state or that any MAD is a legal machine or device. Further, by accepting the license, the licensee understands and agrees that the city shall not be stopped from arguing in a court of law that the licensed amusement center is an illegal gambling operation or that a particular licensed MAD is a gambling device as defined by the statutes of the state. The licensee, by accepting any license issued pursuant to this article, understands and acknowledges that the various courts of this state have issued different and varying opinions as to the legality of certain MAD's and the issuance of gift certificates in relation thereto. In the event that a court of this state determines that a licensed amusement center is an illegal gambling operation or that a particular licensed MAD is a gambling device, the licensee agrees by acceptance of the license that neither the licensee of the amusement center or the owner or licensee of the MAD shall be entitled to a refund of the license issued by the revenue director. 
(b)  The city is opposed to illegal gambling operations within its corporate limits and will prosecute to the fullest extent of the law any violation of the gambling laws of the state or the municipal ordinances of this city. 
(Ord. No. 3116, 8-15-2000) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 3304, adopted on May 16, 2006, placed a moratorium on the issuance of any licenses or permits for any mechanical amusement devices (MAD) to include those individual arcade games and sweepstakes readers as authorized in decisions by Judge Dan C. King, III and Judge Scott Vowell until such time as the City of Bessemer has had an opportunity to modify its zoning ordinance so as to regulate and create zoning areas for these type devices. Nothing in the ordinance prohibited the issuance of a license or permit to existing amusement centers or mechanical amusement devices previously licensed by the City of Bessemer. The ordinance also directed that the director of the department of revenue shall not issue a license or permit for any new mechanical amusement devices until such time that the city council has made a decision relative to zoning or otherwise authorized issuance thereof. 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Animals generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 3-1-1 et seq.; general authority relative to animals, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 3-5-14, 11-47-110. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal means any and all types of animals, both domesticated and wild, male and female, except man. 
    At large means off the premises of the owner and not under control of a human being either by leash, cord, chain or otherwise. 
    Collar means any band, chain, harness or suitable device worn around the neck of a dog to which a license may be affixed. 
    Dog means any member of the canine species, male or female, which has attained the age of three months or more. 
    Fowl means any and all fowl, domesticated and wild, male and female. 
    Keep means possessing, controlling, exercising or allowing to run at large. 
(b)  The definitions set forth in Code of Ala. 1975, § 3-7A-1 (Rabies-Definitions), shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this chapter. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in Code of Ala. 1975, § 3-7A-1, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in Code of Ala. 1975, § 3-7A-1. 
(Code 1973, § 5-1; Code 1995, § 14-1) 
Sec. 14-2. - Citation for violation of chapter provisions. 
    Any officer noting a violation of this chapter may issue a citation designating the date, time, location and offense and the name of the officer who issues the citation. The citation shall contain the location, the violation charged and the description of the animal causing such violation. 
(Code 1995, § 14-2; Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 5-6-1975) 
Sec. 14-3. - Payment of penalty; warrant upon failure. 
    The owner of the animal in question may, within five days after the issuance of the citation, pay the penalty prescribed in section 14-4 for the offense as noted on the citation. If the citation has not been paid within five days from the date of the citation, a warrant for the arrest of the owner shall be issued and the persons arrested shall be brought before the municipal court for trial as in other cases. 
(Code 1995, § 14-3; Ord. No. 1895, § 2, 5-6-1975) 
Sec. 14-4. - Penalty amounts. 
    The minimum penalty or fine for violations of this chapter shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and will be available for public examination in a fine schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 14-4; Ord. No. 1895, § 3, 5-6-1975) 
Sec. 14-5. - Enforcement of chapter. 
    The rabies control officer and the officers of the police department shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 5-2; Code 1995, § 14-5) 
Sec. 14-6. - Applicability of state laws to custody of animals. 
    No person owning or having in his custody any animal shall violate any laws, rules or regulations of the state applicable thereto. Such laws, rules and regulations are adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set out. Where the provisions of rules and regulations are less restrictive than the provisions of this chapter, the latter shall govern. 
(Code 1973, § 5-3; Code 1995, § 14-6) 
Sec. 14-7. - Keeping animals. 
(a)  No person shall keep or maintain any animal in the city in such manner so as to become a public nuisance or disturb the peace, comfort or health of any person residing within the city. 
(b)  The keeping of all animals within the city shall be subject to all pertinent regulations of the state health department and the county health department. 
(Code 1973, § 5-33; Code 1995, § 14-7) 
Sec. 14-8. - Unnecessary noises by animals. 
    No person shall keep any animal which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity. Such action is declared to be a public nuisance and detrimental to public health and welfare. 
(Code 1973, § 5-54; Code 1995, § 14-8) 
Sec. 14-9. - Keeping of-Swine. 
    No person shall keep or maintain any swine upon any premises within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 5-35; Code 1995, § 14-9) 
Sec. 14-10. - Same-Vicious animals. 
    No person shall keep any vicious animal, whether owned by him or not, on his premises within the city. 
(Code 1973, § 5-36; Code 1995, § 14-10) 
Sec. 14-11. - Same-Reptiles and wild animals. 
    No person shall keep or maintain any poisonous reptile or wild animal without first having registered such animal or reptile with the chief of police and the county department of health. The chief of police may prescribe regulations to ensure the safe penning or caging of such animals. 
(Code 1973, § 5-37; Code 1995, § 14-11) 
Sec. 14-12. - Issuance of permit. 
    The rabies control officer shall issue permits to keep the animals described in section 14-11 when, in his judgment, they are not detrimental to public health or likely to create a nuisance. 
(Code 1973, § 5-38; Code 1995, § 14-12) 
Sec. 14-13. - Complaint of unsanitary conditions; hearing. 
    Whenever a complaint is made to the city council that the animals mentioned in section 14-15 are creating an unsanitary or obnoxious condition, the city council shall give notice of a hearing to be held at which the party complained against and the complainants shall be present. If, upon hearing the matter, the city council deems the condition unsanitary, it shall revoke the license of the party complained against. 
(Code 1973, § 5-43; Code 1995, § 14-13) 
Sec. 14-14. - Keeping of fowl or animals. 
    No person shall keep within the city any fowl, chickens or rabbits within 30 feet of a dwelling house or 12 feet of a lot line without a permit from the county health department. 
(Code 1973, § 5-34; Code 1995, § 14-14) 
Sec. 14-15. - Animals or poultry-License to raise. 
(a)  Any person engaged in raising or breeding poultry, pigeons, rabbits, hares or guinea pigs for commercial purposes or otherwise shall obtain a license. 
(b)  Each application shall state the number and kind of poultry or animals to be raised and the location of the premises to be used for that purpose. 
(Code 1973, § 5-39; Code 1995, § 14-15) 
Sec. 14-16. - Same-Sanitary conditions for raising. 
    All persons raising poultry or animals within the city, whether for commercial purposes or otherwise, shall be required to keep the poultry or animals at all times in a clean and sanitary condition and free from obnoxious odors. 
(Code 1973, § 5-41; Code 1995, § 14-16) 
Sec. 14-17. - Turning cattle from enclosed premises. 
    No person shall turn from his enclosed premises any cattle, horses, goats or hogs unless such animals are turned over to the care of some person at the time such cattle, horses, goats or hogs are turned out of the premises of the owner. 
(Code 1973, § 5-42; Code 1995, § 14-17) 
Sec. 14-18. - Exhibition of animals breeding in public. 
    No person shall exhibit a stallion, jackass, bull or other animal kept for breeding purposes in any public place, while breeding. 
(Code 1973, § 5-44; Code 1995, § 14-18) 
Sec. 14-19. - Dead animals-Covering of carcasses for human consumption during transport. 
    The body or part of any animal to be used for human food shall not be transported through any streets, unless it is covered so as to protect it from insects, animals, dust and dirt. 
(Code 1973, § 5-45; Code 1995, § 14-19) 
Sec. 14-20. - Same-Removal; costs. 
(a)  No person shall permit any dead horse, cow, sheep or other animal carcass to remain within the city longer than a reasonable time for removing or burying the same, which shall be done in accordance with any of the county health department rules and regulations. 
(b)  The charge for removal by the city of any dead horse or cow shall be as established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 5-46; Code 1995, § 14-20) 
Sec. 14-21. - Same-Burial. 
    When a dead animal is found in the city, the owner shall promptly and properly bury the animal when notified to do so by the county health department. Where the owner is unknown or neglects or refuses, the health officer shall bury the animal. Refusal or neglect by the owner is punishable as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1973, § 5-47; Code 1995, § 14-21) 
Sec. 14-22. - Same-Mutilation. 
    No person shall skin, cut, or in any manner, mutilate the body of any deceased animal within the city when the animal is to be taken away or disposed of by the city. 
(Code 1973, § 5-48; Code 1995, § 14-22) 
Sec. 14-23. - Minimum area limitation for keeping animals. 
(a)  No animal shall be kept on any lot or parcel of land within the city consisting of less than 10,000 square feet in area. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the keeping of: 
(1)  Small household pets to include, but not limited to, dogs and cats; or 
(2)  Animals for commercial purposes where such use is established as a lawful use under the zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1973, § 5-56; Code 1995, § 14-23) 
Sec. 14-24. - Cruelty to animals; exception. 
(a)  No person shall override, overdrive, overload, drive when overloaded, torture, torment, deprive of necessary sustenance, cruelly beat, mutilate or cruelly kill, or cause or procure to be overridden, overdriven, driven when overloaded, tortured, tormented, deprived of necessary sustenance, cruelly beaten, mutilated or cruelly killed, any animal. No person having the charge or custody of such animal, either as owner or otherwise, shall inflict unnecessary cruelty upon the animal, or fail to provide the animal with proper food, drink or protection from the weather, or cruelly drive the animal when unfit for labor. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed as prohibiting the dehorning of cattle. 
(Code 1973, § 5-49; Code 1995, § 14-24) 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-11-14. 
Sec. 14-25. - Fastening animals to trees; impoundment. 
(a)  No person shall at any time fasten any horse or other animal to any hydrant, shade tree, or to any box or case around such tree, or to any public ornamental tree on any street or public ground. 
(b)  Any police officers or other authorized persons may impound the animal so fastened until any penalty as may be provided and any expenses reasonably incurred in keeping and caring for the animal are paid. If the fine and charges are not paid within seven days, the animal shall be deemed a stray and treated as provided for in article III of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 5-52; Code 1995, § 14-25) 
Sec. 14-26. - Injuring or poisoning animals. 
(a)  No person who accidentally or otherwise strikes an animal with an auto and injures it shall leave the scene without rendering aid and assistance in the care of such animal. 
(b)  No person shall willfully or negligently poison any animal. 
(Code 1973, § 5-50; Code 1995, § 14-26) 
Sec. 14-27. - Diseased animals. 
    Every person owning or having any animal under his charge within the city which he knows or suspects has been affected by any communicable disease, in particular by glanders or anthrax, shall isolate the animal from other animals and shall report the existence or suspected existence of such disease to the county health department. 
(Code 1973, § 5-51; Code 1995, § 14-27) 
Sec. 14-28. - Animals running at large. 
    No owner or custodian shall permit any cattle, horse, mule, sheep, goat, geese, ducks, chickens or any other animal to run at large within the city. Tying such animal for grazing in any street or other public place shall be deemed running at large within the meaning of this section. To permit running at large is declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to public health and safety. 
(Code 1973, § 5-57; Code 1995, § 14-28) 
Sec. 14-29. - Dangerous animals running at large; exception. 
(a)  No person shall permit any bear, or other noxious or dangerous animal to run at large, or lead such animal, muzzled or unmuzzled, with chain or rope, or other appliance on any street, public place, or public way of the city. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to a lawfully conducted circus or carnival parade or theatrical performance. 
(Code 1973, § 5-58; Code 1995, § 14-29) 
Sec. 14-30. - Animal running at large by accident. 
    No animal running at large by accident with a person in immediate pursuit of it shall be deemed a stray within the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 5-59; Code 1995, § 14-30) 
Sec. 14-31. - Pets in eight-story residential buildings. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any pet owner to house pets in any residential structure, located within the municipal limits of the city, consisting of eight stories or more. 
(b)  Any person who violates any section of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person who violates any section of this article shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. 
(c)  Animals that are used to assist handicapped persons (e.g., guide dogs for persons with vision impairments, hearing dogs for persons with hearing impairments and emotional support animals for persons with chronic mental illness) are exempt. 
(Ord. No. 3156, 6-9-2001) 
Secs. 14-32-14-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 

Sec. 14-51. - License tag-Required. 
    No person shall possess, keep or harbor within the corporate limits of the city after the month of February in any year any dog that does not have attached to it a dog license tag for such year issued by the clerk and treasurer. 
(Code 1973, § 5-4; Code 1995, § 14-51) 
Sec. 14-52. - Same-Preparation; contents; issuance. 
(a)  The clerk and treasurer shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, an adequate number of dog license tags for issuance for each calendar year. 
(b)  A dog license tag shall consist of a metal disk having inscribed thereon the number of the calendar year for which issued and also the words, "City of Bessemer Dog License." The dog license tags shall be numbered serially. 
(c)  One tag shall be issued by the clerk and treasurer for the appropriate calendar year for each dog for which application for such tag is made, when the requirements of section 14-53 are complied with. 
(Code 1973, § 5-5; Code 1995, § 14-52) 
Sec. 14-53. - Same-Fee; vaccination certificate. 
(a)  Before any dog license tag shall be issued for any dog, the applicant therefor shall pay the clerk and treasurer a tag issuance fee. He shall deliver to the clerk and treasurer the certificate of some person authorized in section 14-114 to vaccinate dogs showing the name, color, breed, sex, weight and age of the dog for which a dog license tag is sought, and that the dog described in the certificate has been vaccinated by such authorized person in accordance with sections 14-113 and 14-114 and showing, also, the date of vaccination, the name of the manufacturer of the vaccine administered, the manufacturer's lot number of the vaccine administered, the number of cubic centimeters of vaccine administered and the method of administration of the vaccine. 
(b)  Where five or more dogs all belonging to the same person are in the same kennel, humane society or pet shop a maximum annual fee for the issuance of dog license tags for such dogs shall be charged. 
(c)  The clerk and treasurer shall not issue any license tag for any dog for any calendar year other than the calendar year in which such certificate shows the dog was vaccinated. 
(d)  The amounts of the fees listed in this section shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 5-6; Code 1995, § 14-53) 
Sec. 14-54. - Same-Delinquent license fee. 
    All licenses required by section 14-51 which have not been paid within the month of February of each year shall be delinquent. A delinquent fee shall be added to the amount of such license. The amount of the fees shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 5-7; Code 1995, § 14-54) 
Sec. 14-55. - Same-Nontransferable. 
    No person shall permit or allow any dog in his charge or control within the corporate limits of the city to wear a dog license tag issued for a different dog. 
(Code 1973, § 5-8; Code 1995, § 14-54) 
Sec. 14-56. - Noisy dogs. 
    No person shall confine, harbor or keep at any place or any premises, within the corporate limits of the city, any dog which habitually, continuously or intermittently makes or emits sounds or noises of such volume as to be a public nuisance by reason of being obnoxious or annoying to the ordinary persons in that neighborhood. 
(Code 1973, § 5-9; Code 1995, § 14-56) 
Sec. 14-57. - Vicious dogs; confinement. 
    No owner or any other person in charge of any vicious dog shall harbor or keep at any place or on any premises within the corporate limits of the city a vicious dog unless the dog is securely confined or bound in such a manner as to prevent it from biting or attacking any person or other animal. 
(Code 1973, § 5-10; Code 1995, § 14-57) 
Sec. 14-58. - Running at large-Prohibited. 
    No owner or custodian of any dog shall knowingly allow such dog to run at large within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 5-11; Code 1995, § 14-58) 
Sec. 14-59. - Same-Exception. 
(a)  No owner or person in charge of a dog shall cause or permit such dog to run or be at large on or about any lot or premises, within the corporate limits of the city, unless the dog is securely and effectively confined to such lot or premises by a wall, fence or other enclosure. 
(b)  Whenever a dog is permitted to run at large within a wall, fence or other enclosure, as provided under this section, it shall be the duty of the owner or person in charge of such dog to give public notice or warning. The warning shall be conspicuously posted at every unlocked entrance to such enclosure, that such dog is at large within the enclosure. 
(Code 1973, § 5-12; Code 1995, § 14-59) 
Sec. 14-60. - Leash required. 
    No owner or person in charge of a dog shall cause or permit such dog to run or be upon a street, sidewalk, thoroughfare or public place, within the corporate limits of the city, unless the dog is attached to a leash in the hands of the owner or person in charge. 
(Code 1973, § 5-13; Code 1995, § 14-60) 
Secs. 14-61-14-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - IMPOUNDMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to impound animals running at large, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-110. 

Sec. 14-81. - Animals at large. 
    Any animal let or permitted to run at large in violation of provisions of this article shall be impounded at the owner's expense until the penalty for the violation is paid. 
(Code 1973, § 5-60; Code 1995, § 14-81) 
Sec. 14-82. - Interference with officer impounding. 
    No person shall willfully prevent or obstruct the impounding of any animal in violation of any of the provisions of this article or shall take any animal out of any pound without the consent of the rabies control officer, or shall knowingly impound or attempt to impound any animal not legally liable to impoundment. 
(Code 1973, § 5-24; Code 1995, § 14-82) 
Sec. 14-83. - Power to impound dogs. 
    Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under this article is authorized to go upon any premises and seize for impounding any dog which he may lawfully seize when such officer is in immediate pursuit of such dog, except upon the premises of the owner of the dog if the owner is present and forbids the entry of the officer or agent. A warrant shall then issue according to law at the request of such officer or agent. 
(Code 1973, § 5-15; Code 1995, § 14-83) 
Sec. 14-84. - Impounding dogs. 
    The rabies control officer may seize and take into custody and impound or cause to be taken into custody and impounded and thereafter destroyed or disposed of as provided in this article: 
(1)  Any dog off the premises of the owner which official or his agent have reason to believe is a stray dog; 
(2)  Any dog off the premises of the owner without a current registration tag on his collar; 
(3)  Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner; and 
(4)  Any dog which is permitted to run at large within the city contrary to section 14-58. 
(Code 1973, § 5-17; Code 1995, § 14-84) 
Sec. 14-85. - Officer may impound animal at large. 
    Any police officer or other officer designated by the city is authorized to capture and impound any animal found at large in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1973, § 5-61; Code 1995, § 14-85) 
Sec. 14-86. - Property owner may impound animal. 
    Any person who finds an animal or fowl on his property to his injury or annoyance may: 
(1)  Remove such animal or fowl to an animal shelter, public or private; or 
(2)  Retain possession of such animal or fowl and, as soon as possible, notify the humane society or other appropriate existing agency of this custody, giving a description of the animal and the owner's name, if known. 
(Code 1973, § 5-53; Code 1995, § 14-86) 
Sec. 14-87. - Impounding by residents. 
    Any resident of the city may take up any animal found running at large and deliver it to a police officer or other authorized person for impounding, or he may impound the animal in the city pound. 
(Code 1973, § 5-16; Code 1995, § 14-87) 
Sec. 14-88. - Qualifications for redeemer. 
    The owner of an impounded dog or animal may redeem it as provided for in section 14-92. However, at the expiration of the impoundment period, any other person may claim the dog or animal, provided such person pays the fees set out in section 14-92. 
(Code 1973, § 5-19; Code 1995, § 14-90) 
Sec. 14-89. - Disposition of unredeemed animals; sale. 
(a)  When a dog or animal has been impounded in accordance with this article and has not been redeemed by his owner, the poundkeeper or agent of the humane society or any person authorized under this article to do so may cause the dog or animal to be sold or destroyed in a humane manner. 
(b)  Any dog or animal which has remained in the pound over 14 days and which has not been redeemed by the owner, may be sold by the city to the highest bidder for cash, provided that: 
(1)  No dog or cat may be sold for less than $3.00, plus the cost of maintenance and rabies inoculation; or 
(2)  No animal may be sold for less than $10.00, plus the cost of maintenance. 
(Code 1973, § 5-20; Code 1995, § 14-91) 
Sec. 14-90. - Collection of fine where sale proceeds are insufficient. 
    When the proceeds of the sale are insufficient to satisfy the costs, fees and penalties incurred, the balance of the debt owing may be collected by the city through due process of law. 
(Code 1973, § 5-22; Code 1995, § 14-93) 
Sec. 14-91. - Record of impounded animals. 
(a)  Any officer or agent authorized to impound an animal under the provisions of this article, who impounds an animal, shall make a record of the breed, color and sex of the animal and whether or not it is licensed. 
(b)  If the animal is licensed, the officer shall enter the name and address of the owner and number of the license tag. The officer shall also enter in the record the disposition made of such animal. 
(Code 1973, § 5-23; Code 1995, § 14-94) 
Sec. 14-92. - Redemption prior to sale; fees. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the poundkeeper or any agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under this article, to take up and impound any animal running at large, found loose, or grazing or feeding in violation of this section. Such animal picked up by animal control will be kept for a period of two weeks. If after such time the animal is not claimed, animal control retains the right to sell said animal for a price of not more than $250.00 or release animal into the care of a charitable organization so designated by the city. 
(b)  If, before the day of sale, any animal so taken up and impounded is applied for by the owner or person entitled to its custody, it shall be released to the owner by the poundkeeper or any agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under this article, on the payment of the actual cost of impounding, feeding and maintaining such animal. 
(c)  The proceeds of all sales of any such animal taken up and impounded as aforesaid shall be paid into the revenue department, but if any surplus of proceeds of sale remain after paying the charges and expenses thereof and all expenses for impounding, feeding and maintaining such animal, such surplus shall be paid to the owner of the animal from the sale of which the proceeds were derived, upon satisfactory proof of the ownership being made. 
(d)  An impoundment fee for all animals placed in the animal shelter operated by the city shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(e)  Additional fees. The owner of any animal impounded by the city will also be liable for the cost of maintenance, care, feed, or any other costs incurred in housing such animal. Such cost will be ascertained and determined by the poundkeeper or any agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under this article. 
(Code 1973, § 5-21; Code 1995, § 14-92; Ord. No. 3219, 5-27-2003) 
Secs. 14-93-14-112. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RABIES CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Rabies generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 3-7A-1 et seq. 

Sec. 14-113. - Vaccination of dogs required. 
    No person shall possess, keep or harbor within the corporate limits of the city after the month of February of any year any dog which has not been vaccinated within such year as provided in section 14-53. 
(Code 1973, § 5-26; Code 1995, § 14-116) 
Sec. 14-114. - Inoculation; sufficiency. 
    In order to be sufficient under this article, the vaccination of a dog shall be accomplished by a physician, surgeon or veterinarian duly licensed as such by the state board of veterinary medical examiners, or by a rabies inspector or deputy rabies inspector appointed pursuant to the state law, by means of injection beneath the skin of such dog of at least five cubic centimeters of canine anti-rabies vaccine, manufactured by a person licensed for such manufacture by the United States Public Health Service for each 20 pounds, or fraction of 20 pounds, of the weight of the dog up to 80 pounds of such weight. 
(Code 1973, § 5-27; Code 1995, § 14-117) 
Sec. 14-115. - Knowledge or suspicion of rabies; confinement. 
    No person shall keep, harbor or maintain on or about any place or premises within the corporate limits of the city a dog, cat or other animal that is known to have or reasonably suspected of having rabies, unless the animal is securely confined in such a manner as to effectually prevent contact with or injury to other animals or persons. Any such animal not so confined shall either be destroyed or removed to the city pound or other appropriate place by a person designated for that purpose by the city and there securely confined. 
(Code 1973, § 5-28; Code 1995, § 14-118) 
Sec. 14-116. - Period of confinement of animal after person bitten. 
    No person shall keep, harbor or maintain on or about any place or premises within the corporate limits of the city a dog, cat or other animal which has bitten or otherwise injured a human being in such a manner as to permit or favor the transmission or suspected transmission of the virus of rabies to such human being, unless such dog, cat or other animal is securely confined in such a manner as to prevent its disappearance or escape for not less than 14 days or such minimum period of time following such bite or injury as may be reasonably necessary for the purpose of determining whether such dog, cat or other animal is afflicted with rabies, either by physical examination or observation done by or on behalf of the county board of health. 
(Code 1973, § 5-29; Code 1995, § 14-119) 
Sec. 14-117. - Period of confinement of animal after animal bitten. 
    No person shall keep, harbor or maintain on or about any place or premises within the corporate limits of the city a dog, cat or other animal whatsoever which has been or is reasonably suspected of having been bitten, or otherwise injured by or having been in contact with another animal afflicted with or suspected of being afflicted with rabies in such a manner as to permit or favor transmission of such disease unless such dog, cat or other animal so bitten, injured or in contact shall be securely confined for not less than six months thereafter. 
(Code 1973, § 5-30; Code 1995, § 14-120) 
Sec. 14-118. - Impounding rabid animals; inoculation. 
    When a dog, cat or other animal is found in or about any street, public thoroughfare, public place, lot or premises or portions of premises within the corporate limits of the city, except in accordance with the provisions of this article, it shall be the duty of any police officer or other person employed for that purpose to take such animal into custody and remove or cause the animal to be removed to the city pound and placed in charge of the rabies control officer to be held and properly disposed of before any such dog, cat or other animal is released, it shall be appropriately inoculated at the expense of the owner for the purpose of immunizing it against rabies. 
(Code 1973, § 5-31; Code 1995, § 14-121) 
Sec. 14-119. - Removal of animal to pound; destruction. 
(a)  The health officer shall have the right at any time to move, or cause to be moved, to the city pound, or other place designated by him, for observation or examination, any dog, cat or other animal which is reasonably suspected to be afflicted with rabies, or which has bitten or otherwise injured a human being in such a manner as would permit or favor the transmission of the virus of rabies in the event such animal should be afflicted with rabies, or which has been, or is reasonably suspected to have been bitten or injured, or in contact with another having or suspected of having rabies. 
(b)  No person shall hinder, obstruct or interfere with the health officer, or his authorized agent or deputy, in the exercise of the authority conferred upon him in this chapter. It shall be the duty of the health officer to destroy, or cause to be destroyed, any animal found to be afflicted with rabies. 
(Code 1973, § 5-32; Code 1995, § 14-122) 
Sec. 14-120. - Disposition of impounded dogs suffering from rabies or other infectious disease; rabies tests. 
(a)  Any impounded dog which appears to be suffering from rabies or affected with hydrophobia, mange or other infectious or dangerous disease or which has attacked any person shall be kept at the pound until such time and under such conditions as required by the rabies control officer. The rabies control officer shall notify the county health department when he has good reason to believe that such dog is in his possession. 
(b)  Whenever in the judgment of the rabies control officer or the city health department it becomes necessary to test a dog or the remains of a dog suspected of being rabid, the dog shall be sent to a veterinarian and/or state laboratory for rabies-hydrophobia testing and disposition. The fees, costs and expenses of such tests shall be paid by the owner of the dog except as otherwise provided by law. 
(Code 1973, § 5-25; Code 1995, § 14-123) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt building laws and inspect buildings, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-59; authority to adopt technical codes by reference, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-8; state building construction standards, Code of Ala. 1975, § 41-9-160 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Liability of city officials. 
    No officer, agent, or employee of the city shall render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this chapter. He shall be defended by the city attorney until the final determination of the proceedings therein. 
(Code 1973, § 6-56; Code 1995, § 18-1) 
Sec. 18-2. - Technical codes; on file. 
    At least three copies of the technical codes adopted by reference shall be on file in the office of the clerk and treasurer for public inspection and use. 
(Code 1973, § 6-1(b); Code 1995, § 18-2) 
Sec. 18-3. - Payment of permit and inspection fees. 
    All fees for permits and inspections required under this chapter shall be paid at the office of revenue department. 
(Code 1995, § 18-3; Ord. No. 2551, § VI, 9-17-1991) 
Sec. 18-4. - Unused permits; refunds. 
(a)  The city clerk and treasurer is authorized to make refunds of amounts paid for permits issued under this chapter at any time within 90 days after the issuance of the permits, provided the building inspection officer certifies in writing to the city clerk and treasurer as follows: The permit for which the refund is requested has not been utilized to begin any work, and no such work is planned. Any refund made under the provisions of this section shall be subject to an administrative charge, which amount shall be deducted from the refund applied for. 
(b)  The amount of the administrative charge shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 18-4; Ord. No. 2551, § VII, 9-17-1991) 
Sec. 18-5. - Fees for additional work. 
    If during the performance of the work or installation or alteration permitted by a permit granted under this chapter, additional installations or alterations are required, it shall be unlawful for the person who secured the original permit to fail to immediately remit to the city clerk and treasurer an amount that is equal to the additional fees for permits and inspections incurred by the additional installations or alterations. Any fees not immediately remitted for installation or alteration of work not permitted on the original permit shall be subject to a fee double the specific fees provided by law to be paid for a timely permit. 
(Code 1995, § 18-5; Ord. No. 2551, § VIII, 9-17-1991) 
Sec. 18-6. - Permit-Double permit fees. 
(a)  When work for which a permit is required by this chapter is commenced prior to the obtaining of a permit, the permit applicant shall be required to pay a penalty, as provided by section 18-9, plus a double permit fee. The payment of the required fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with all of the requirements of all applicable regulations and codes of this chapter, nor shall it relieve them from being subject to any of the penalties therein. The double fee requirement shall be applicable to all divisions of the building and zoning department, as noted in this section. 
(b)  The amounts of the permit fee and penalty shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 10-13; Code 1995, § 18-6; Ord. No. 2551, § IX, 9-17-1991) 
Sec. 18-7. - Same-Issuance; separate permits. 
(a)  If the building inspection officer is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and that the drawings and specifications which may be filed therewith conform to the requirements of this chapter, then a permit shall be issued to the applicant. 
(b)  No building permit shall be issued by the city for any structure within the corporate limits of the city or its police or fire jurisdiction until such time as said permits have been reviewed by the fire chief or his agent for the fire department of the city, single-family dwellings excepted. 
(c)  A separate permit must be obtained for the work on each structure or for each separate piece of work of any description including alterations, additions and general repairs, except for minor repairs. 
(Code 1995, § 18-7; Ord. No. 2551, § X, 9-17-1991; Ord. No. 3024, 6-2-1998) 
Sec. 18-8. - Same-Commencement of work; time extensions. 
    The building inspection officer shall act upon an application for a permit with drawings and/or specifications, as filed, or as amended, without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. A permit issued shall be construed to proceed with the work and shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel, alter or set aside any of the provisions of this chapter, nor shall such issuance of a permit prevent the building inspection officer from thereafter requiring correction of errors in construction or of violations of this chapter. Any permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within 90 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended, cancelled, or abandoned for a period of 90 days after the time the work is commenced, provided that, for cause, one or more extensions of time for periods not exceeding 90 days each, may be allowed in writing by the building inspection officer. 
(Code 1995, § 18-8; Ord. No. 2551, § XI, 9-17-1991) 
Sec. 18-9. - Citations for violations of chapter. 
(a)  The building inspection officer or any city police officer shall serve upon the owner of property or each person engaged in the activities regulated under this chapter, which activities are being conducted in violation of this chapter, a citation to appear in the municipal court at a time and date specified thereon to answer the charge of such violation of this chapter; provided, however, that prior to 12:00 noon on the date this matter is to be set before the municipal court, such person charged in such citation, if he has not previously settled or been convicted of three or more such violations within 12 months of the date of such citation, may dispose of the citation by settlement involving payment to the clerk of the municipal court a fine for the offenses charged, plus any and all charges otherwise payable to the city pursuant to the terms and conditions of this chapter. If the offense charged is the third such offense by the owner or person charged within 12 months from the date of such citations, settlement cannot be voluntarily made to the clerk of the municipal court as referred to in this section. If the settlement of the charges set out in the citation is not made prior to 12:00 noon of the date the case is set for trial in the municipal court, and if the party charged fails to appear and answer such charge in the municipal court at the time and place set out in such citation, or if the citation is not otherwise disposed of by such court, a warrant shall be issued charging such party with the violation set out in the citation, which warrant shall be obtained, served and tried as provided by law for the arrest and trial of the offenses involving violations of the ordinances of the city. If a person receiving a citation as provided in this section has, within the prescribed 12 months from the date such citation settled or been convicted of three or more such violations, he shall not be permitted to settle the instant alleged offense, but shall be required to stand trial in the municipal court. 
(b)  Once the warrant has been issued and tried before the municipal court, a person found guilty of such violations shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided according to the provisions of section 1-8, which shall include the payment of any fines levied by the municipal court, plus any court costs as provided and issued by the municipal court. 
(c)  The violation of a provision of this chapter as such provision is presently existing or as hereinafter modified or amended, shall be punished by the provisions of this chapter in the case of voluntary settlement, as provided in any general ordinance of the city. Each day such offense continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  All citations shall be signed by the building inspection officer finding such violations and shall be sent by certified mail to the contractor responsible for the permit or to the owner of the property on which the violation is found, as such owner's name and address appears in the records of the county tax assessor's office. 
(e)  The amount of any fine prescribed in this section shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fine schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 18-9; Ord. No. 2551, § XII, 9-17-1991) 
Sec. 18-10. - Permit issuance fee. 
    There shall be a fee charged for the issuance of all building, plumbing, electrical, gas, house moving, and demolition permits. Such fee shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 18-10; Ord. No. 2014, § 1, 3-21-1978) 
Sec. 18-11. - Department of building inspection services. 
(a)  Created; chief to head department. There is created a department of building inspection services. The chief of inspection services shall be designated as the head of the department of inspection services of the city. 
(b)  Duties of chief. The duties of chief of inspection services shall be as follows: 
(1)  Organize and direct building inspections and building code enforcement services; direct housing code enforcement; act as zoning administrator and do related work as required. 
(2)  Consult with the city council on all laws and ordinances pertaining to building regulations and codes. 
(3)  Consult with and advise engineers, attorneys, contractors, property owners, and mechanics on building construction. 
(c)  Qualifications for chief. Applicants for chief of inspection services shall meet all the requirements as set out by the county personnel board and shall be appointed from the eligible list submitted by the county personnel board. 
(Code 1973, §§ 2-30.1-2-30.3; Code 1995, § 18-11) 
Sec. 18-12. - Building inspection officer; establishment. 
    There shall be a building inspection officer whose duties, powers, qualifications and compensation shall be as established by law or determined from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 6-3; Code 1995, § 18-12) 
Sec. 18-13. - References to officials and departments in adopted technical codes. 
    Where reference is made to the duties of certain officials or departments named within the technical codes which are adopted by reference in this chapter, then that designated official of the city or of the county, who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said technical code, shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of that technical code are concerned. 
Sec. 18-14. - Permit fees. 
    Unless otherwise specified, the fees and/or charges for permits, certificates, inspections, or re-inspections as required under this chapter shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and will appear in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
Secs. 18-15-18-31. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING AND RESIDENTIAL CODE 

Sec. 18-32. - Adoption of building code. 
    The 2015 edition of the International Building Code, published by the ICC is hereby adopted by reference pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-8 and is incorporated as is set out and fully herein with the following modifications, amendments and additions to the below sections: 
(1)  105.2. Delete section 105.2 of the 2015 International Building Code and any other sections dealing with work exempt from permits. 
(2)  107.1. Delete section 107.1 in its entirety and replace with the following: 
Section 107.1 Submittal Documents. Submittal Documents consisting of construction documents, statement of special inspections, geotechnical report and other data shall be submitted in two or more sets with each permit application and in such form and detail as required by the building code official for all structures classified as Group A, E, and I, as defined by the International Codes, and all structures that contain 5000 square feet or more in area. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data. Where special conditions exist, the building official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional. 
(3)  111.1 Delete section 111.1 in its entirety and replace with the following: 
Section 111.1 Use and Occupancy. No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the building official and the fire official has issued a certificate of occupancy thereof and provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the City of Bessemer. 
(Code 1995, § 18-36; Ord. No. 2549, § 1, 9-17-1991; Ord. No. 3025, § 1, 6-2-1998; Ord. No. 3283, § 3, 5-17-2005; Ord. No. 3431, § 2, 3-23-2010; Ord. No. 3531, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 18-33. - Adoption of residential code. 
    The 2015 edition of the International Residential Code, published by the ICC is hereby adopted by reference pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-8 and is incorporated as is set out and fully herein with the following modifications, amendments and additions to the below sections: 
(1)  R105.2. Delete section R105.2 of the 2015 International Residential Code and any other sections dealing with work exempt from permits. 
(2)  R313. Delete section R313 of the 2015 International Residential Code. Automatic fire sprinkler systems for single-family homes shall not be required. 
(3)  R403. Amend that section 403.1(1) reads as follows: 
Section R403 Footings. That all footings shall have a minimum of two #4 bars placed in the middle third of the footing depth. 
(Ord. No. 3283, § 6, 5-17-2005; Ord. No. 3431, § 5, 3-23-2010; Ord. No. 3436, § 1.A, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 3531, § 2, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 18-34. - Building permit fees. 
    Each person engaged in excavation work, building or constructing any individual building, remodeling, adding to air conditioning, roofing, reroofing, storage tanks, fire sprinkler systems or repairing any existing building shall submit plans of each building, construction, addition, remodeling, air conditioning, roofing, reroofing, or repair to the city. For the purpose of determining the fee for the issuance of a building permit, the evaluations of the requested work shall be determined by bona fide signed contracts or other evidence of cost as submitted by the persons requesting a building permit. However, in no event shall the evaluation of the requested work be less than the average cost of construction as set out in the Building Valuation Data (BVD) chart, as revised every six months, in the most current edition of the Building Safety Journal, which is published by the International Code Council. The following charges shall be made for the issuance of building permits based on the contract or estimated cost as referred to in this section: 
(1)  The minimum building permit fee as established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code, regardless of any additional amount indicated in this section. 
(2)  In the contracts or estimated costs, as determined by the Building Valuation Data (BVD) chart in the most current edition of the Building Safety Journal as published by the International Code Council and referred to in this section, whichever is greater, if such work is $100.00 and less than $2,500.00 in value, the building permit fee shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(3)  Where the contracts or estimated costs, as determined by the Building Valuation Data (BVD) chart in the most current edition of the Building Safety Journal as published by the International Code Council and referred to in this section, is over $2,500.00, the building permit fee shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. There shall be a reinspection fee established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code, when necessitated by faulty materials, equipment or workmanship. 
(4)  The fee for occupancy on any building without a certificate of occupancy in violation of this article shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(5)  Trailers approved for construction field offices shall pay a fee when placed on a construction site before utilities can be connected. This shall be for a period of one year and another fee must be paid again at the end of one year if construction is not completed. The fees shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. The trailer office must be moved before the final inspection of the building. 
(Code 1995, § 18-37; Ord. No. 2551, § I, 9-17-1991) 
Secs. 18-35-18-58. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL CODE 

Sec. 18-59. - Adoption. 
    The 2011 edition of the National Electric Code compiled by the NFPA is hereby adopted by reference pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-8 and is incorporated as is set out and fully herein. 
(Code 1995, § 18-61; Ord. No. 2589, § 1, 4-6-1993; Ord. No. 3025, § 1, 6-2-1998; Ord. No. 3283, § 2, 5-17-2005; Ord. No. 3531, § 4, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 18-60. - Electricians-Certification requirements. 
(a)  No person other than a holder of a certificate of competency or a holder of a certificate of registration as an apprentice electrician shall do any electrical installation or construction work in the city. 
(b)  No holder of a certificate of competency shall employ as an assistant in any work as described in subsection (a) of this section any person other than a holder of a certificate of competency or the holder of a certificate of registration as an apprentice electrician. 
(c)  No holder of a certificate of competency shall require a registered apprentice electrician to do any such electrical work other than under his direct supervision. 
(d)  No registered apprentice electrician shall do any such electrical work other than while under the direct supervision of the holder of a certificate of competency. 
(e)  No holder of a maintenance electrician's certificate shall make any alterations or additions to the wiring systems of the person by whom he is employed. 
(Code 1973, § 10-41; Code 1995, § 18-62) 
Sec. 18-61. - Same-Employees of contractor. 
    No electrical contractor shall employ any person on any job in the capacity of a journeyman electrician, unless such person shall have in his possession a valid journeyman's certificate of competency, issued to him as provided in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 10-40; Code 1995, § 18-63) 
Sec. 18-62. - Same-Bond; license required. 
    Before any person shall engage in the electrical business within the city limits he shall qualify as set forth in this article and post bond in the amount of $5,000.00 ensuring that all work is done in accordance with the rules and regulations of the city, which shall be filed with the city clerk and treasurer, and obtain a license. 
(Code 1995, § 18-63; Ord. No. 2163, 2-23-1982) 
Sec. 18-63. - Unauthorized connections to installations. 
    No person shall make connections from a source of electrical energy to any electric wiring, devices or equipment for the installation of which a permit is required, until a certificate of approval has been issued by the city electrician authorizing such connection and the use of such wiring, devices or equipment. 
(Code 1973, § 10-19; Code 1995, § 18-65) 
Sec. 18-64. - Sale of electrical equipment; markings; defacing markings. 
(a)  No person shall sell, offer or expose for sale at retail and/or wholesale or dispose by gift, premium or similar manner, any electrical material, apparatus, fitting, appliance, device or appurtenance, unless such electrical material, apparatus, fitting, appliance, device or appurtenance, shall conform in all respects to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  All electrical materials, apparatus, fittings, appliances, devices or appurtenances, sold, offered or exposed for sale, at retail or wholesale, or which are disposed of by gifts, premium or similar manner by any person shall bear the manufacturer's name, trademark or other identification symbol, along with markings giving operating voltage, type of current, wattage and other pertinent information as may be necessary to determine the character of the material, apparatus, fitting, appliance, device or appurtenance and the use for which it is intended. 
(c)  No person shall remove, alter, change, mar and/or deface any manufacturer's name, trademark, symbol or markings required by this section. 
(Code 1973, § 10-22; Code 1995, § 18-66) 
Sec. 18-65. - Electrical equipment; approval by underwriters. 
    No electrical material, apparatus, fitting, appliance, device or appurtenance shall be sold, offered or exposed for sale, at retail and/or wholesale or disposed of by gift, premium or other similar manner by any person, until such material, apparatus, fitting, appliance, device or appurtenance shall have been submitted to the laboratories of the National Board of Fire Underwriters and approval obtained. Only electrical materials, apparatus, fittings, appliances, devices or appurtenances appearing in the Listing of Approved Materials and Fittings of the Underwriter's Laboratories, shall be considered as having complied with this section. 
(Code 1973, § 10-23; Code 1995, § 18-67) 
Sec. 18-66. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business of electrical construction, installation or repair unless duly licensed by the city; provided, however, that any person who holds a valid statewide license shall be deemed qualified and, upon satisfactory proof of said license, shall be allowed to perform forthwith electrical work in any county or municipality under the terms and conditions set forth. 
(b)  No person shall permit the installation of any electrical wiring, apparatus or other appurtenances upon his premises, work, ways, machinery or plant except in strict accordance with all provisions of this article. 
(c)  No person shall maintain, operate or attempt to operate any electrical wiring, apparatus, equipment or other appurtenances, in or upon his premises, works, ways, machinery or plant, which has not been installed in strict accordance with this article. 
(Code 1973, § 10-43; Code 1995, § 18-68) 
Sec. 18-67. - Contractor's sign; requirements. 
    Each electrical contractor operating under a certificate granted in accordance with this article shall have displayed, in a conspicuous place in front of each and every place where work of an electrical nature or character is being done by him, a sign giving the name and address of the electrical contractor doing the work and the words "certified electrical contractor" in letters not less than two inches high. No such sign need be displayed in front of the place of minor repairs such as repairing or replacing flush and snap switches, fuses, lamp sockets, taping joints and repairing drop cords. 
(Code 1973, §§ 10-9(a)(1), 10-44; Code 1995, § 18-69) 
Sec. 18-68. - Meter loop or switch installation; permit and plan required. 
    Any application for a permit to install any meter loop or switch over 100 amperes capacity must be accompanied by a plan indicating the proposed size, rating, and location of the meter loop or switch, which plan must be approved by the city electrician. Such plan must show the branch circuits, the carrying capacity of each and each branch circuit shall have a carrying capacity of not less than the rating of the branch circuit and not less than the maximum load to be served. The minimum size wire shall not be smaller than no. 8 for ranges of 83/4 kw or greater rating nor smaller than no. 14 copper for other loads. 
(Code 1973, § 10-45; Code 1995, § 18-70; Ord. No. 2006, § 1, 1-10-1978) 
Sec. 18-69. - Requirements for overhead service wires. 
(a)  Service entrance assembly. The developer will, in wiring the individual buildings, cause the service entrance assembly to be so installed as to facilitate the installation by the city electric service, called "the company" in this section of overhead service wires. 
(b)  Service point. The company will designate the service point on each building. If the developer proceeds without consultation, he will be liable for relocating the service point if the company deems the location to be unsatisfactory. 
(c)  Meter base. The developer will install the proper meter base furnished by and to the specification of the company. Basically, this calls for the meter base to be securely fastened to the building at an elevation not to exceed 61/2 feet above the finished grade. 
(d)  Point of attachment. The developer must provide, at the service point designated by the company, a point of attachment of sufficient mechanical strength to support the service wires to be installed by the company. The point of attachment must provide a direct, unobstructed path to the nearest utility pole and provide for vertical clearance of the lowest conductor in the service of 18 feet over public streets, alleys or roads; 16 feet over driveways to residence garages; eight feet over accessible roofs and must be at least five feet measured horizontally from the nearest window opening. Upon application and a showing of undue hardship, this subsection's provisions may be waived if safety is maintained. 
(e)  Pipe masts. The use of a pipe mast extending above the roof is recommended when feasible. The pipe must be rigid steel conduit two inches or larger, fitted with a suitable weatherhead and anchored sufficiently to withstand the strain of the service wires. 
(f)  Inspection. The company will not proceed to install service equipment until after it has received approval of the wiring installation from the city inspection department. 
(Code 1995, § 18-71; Ord. No. 2006, § 2, 1-10-1978) 
Sec. 18-70. - Homeowner's permit examination; procedure. 
(a)  The building department official shall examine and pass upon the qualifications of every person who may apply for a homeowner's permit, to install electrical wiring in or on the premises he owns and occupies as a home. 
(b)  The examination shall cover only such subjects as pertain to the proper installation of wiring to lighting outlets, circuits, fixtures, switches, ranges and/or heaters. 
(c)  The applicant shall be required to make application for such permits on forms furnished by the city. There shall be no charge for a homeowner's examination. 
(Code 1973, § 10-30; Code 1995, § 18-72) 
Sec. 18-71. - Fraudulent use of licensee's credentials. 
    No person engaged in the business of electrical contracting in the city shall allow his name to be used by any other person, directly or indirectly, to obtain a permit for the construction of any work under his name, certificate, license or bond or make any misrepresentation or omission in his returns. 
(Code 1973, § 10-11; Code 1995, § 18-73) 
Sec. 18-72. - Enumeration of fees. 
    The electrical permit and construction fees shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and will be available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 10-12; Code 1995, § 18-86; Ord. No. 2035, § I, 12-19-1978; Ord. No. 2551, § III, 9-17-1991) 
Secs. 18-73-18-102. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MECHANICAL CODE 

Sec. 18-103. - Adoption. 
    The 2015 edition of the International Mechanical Code, published by the ICC is hereby adopted by reference pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-8 and is incorporated as is set out and fully herein. 
(Code 1995, § 18-106; Ord. No. 2549, § 1, 9-17-1991; Ord. No. 3025, § 1, 6-2-1998; Ord. No. 3283, § 1, 5-17-2005; Ord. No. 3431, § 1, 3-23-2010; Ord. No. 3531, § 5, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 18-104. - Mechanical permit fees. 
(a)  The minimum mechanical permit fee shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code, regardless of amount hereafter indicated. 
(b)  The mechanical permits shall have the same fee as building permits. For work of $100.00 up to $2,500.00 or less in value, and for work over $2,500.00, the permit fee shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 18-107; Ord. No. 2551, § II, 9-17-1991) 
Secs. 18-105-18-121. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PLUMBING CODE 

Sec. 18-122. - Adoption. 
    The 2015 edition of the International Plumbing Code, published by the ICC is hereby adopted by reference pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-8 and is incorporated as is set out and fully herein with the following modifications, amendments and additions to the below sections: 
(1)  605.3. Amend section 605.3(1) as follows: 
Section 605.3 Water service pipe. That no pressure rated piping as listed in Tables 605.3 and 605.4,except for Ductile Iron Pipe, shall be used in new underground piping for fire service mains within the fire jurisdiction in the City of Bessemer, both private and public, and shall be listed for fire protection service and comply with AWWA standards and NFPA 24. 
(Code 1973, § 17-1; Code 1995, § 18-131; Ord. No. 2549, § 1, 9-17-1991; Ord. No. 3025, § 1, 6-2-1998; Ord. No. 3283, § 5, 5-17-2005; Ord. No. 3431, § 4, 3-23-2010; Ord. No. 3531, § 6, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 18-123. - Plumbing permit fees. 
    The plumbing permit and construction fees shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 18-132; Ord. No. 2551, § IV, 9-17-1991) 
Secs. 18-124-18-144. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - GAS CODE 

Sec. 18-145. - Adoption. 
    The 2015 edition of the International Fuel Gas Code, published by the ICC is hereby adopted by reference pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-8 and is incorporated as is set out and fully herein. 
(Code 1995, § 18-156; Ord. No. 2549, § 1, 9-17-1991; Ord. No. 3025, § 1, 6-2-1998; Ord. No. 3283, § 1, 5-17-2005; Ord. No. 3431, § 1, 3-23-2010; Ord. No. 3531, § 7, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 18-146. - Gas permit fees. 
    The gas permit and construction fees shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 18-157; Ord. No. 2551, § V, 9-17-1991) 
Secs. 18-147-18-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - HOUSING CODE 

Sec. 18-176. - Adoption. 
    The 2015 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, published by the ICC is hereby adopted by reference pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-8 and is incorporated as is set out and fully herein. 
(Code 1995, § 18-181; Ord. No. 2549, § 1, 9-17-1991; Ord. No. 3283, § 1, 5-17-2005; Ord. No. 3431, § 1, 3-23-2010; Ord. No. 3531, § 8, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 18-177. - Schedule of minimum penalties and fines for violations of housing code; citations. 
    The fines and penalties for violations of the city housing code shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fines schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 18-182; Ord. No. 2125, §§ 1, 2, 2-24-1981) 
Secs. 18-178-18-207. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MOVING BUILDINGS 

Sec. 18-208. - Permit-Required. 
    No building or part of any building shall be moved through or across any sidewalk, street, alley or highway within the city limits without first obtaining a permit from the building inspection officer. 
(Code 1973, § 6-71; Code 1995, § 18-206) 
Sec. 18-209. - Same-Application; contents. 
    Any person desiring to move a building shall first file with the building inspection officer and the chief of police a written application setting forth the following information: 
(1)  Type and kind of building to be moved; 
(2)  The original cost of such building; 
(3)  The extreme dimensions of the length, height and width of the building; 
(4)  Its present location and proposed new location by lot, block, subdivision and street numbers; and 
(5)  The approximate time such building will be upon the streets and the contemplated route that will be taken from present to new location. 
(Code 1973, § 6-72; Code 1995, § 18-207) 
Sec. 18-210. - Same-Restricted. 
    If in the opinion of the building inspection officer and chief of police, the moving of any building will cause serious injury to persons or property or serious injury to the streets or other public improvements, or the building to be moved has deteriorated more than 50 percent of its original value by fire or other element, or the moving of the building will violate any of the requirements of this Code or of the zoning regulations, the permit shall not be issued, and the building shall not be moved over the streets of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 6-73; Code 1995, § 18-208) 
Sec. 18-211. - Bond required; amount; conditions. 
(a)  The building inspection officer and chief of police, as a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit, under the provisions of this article, shall require a bond to be executed by the person desiring such removal permit, with corporate surety to the satisfaction of building inspection officer. 
(b)  The bond shall be made payable to the city and for such amount as the city shall prescribe. It shall indemnify the city against any damage caused by the moving of such buildings to streets, curbs, sidewalks, shade trees, highways and other property which may be affected by the moving of a building. The surety bond shall also be conditioned upon and liable for strict compliance with the terms of the permit, as to the route to be taken and the limit of time in which to effect such removal, and to repair or compensate for the repair and to pay the city as liquidated damages an amount to be prescribed by the building inspection officer and chief of police for each and every day's delay in completing such removal, in repairing any damage to property or public improvement or in clearing all public streets, alleys or highways of all debris occasioned thereby. 
(Code 1973, § 6-74; Code 1995, § 18-209) 
Sec. 18-212. - Notice required; contents. 
    Upon the issuance of a moving permit, under the provisions of this article, the building inspection officer and the chief of police shall cause notice to be given to the superintendent of fire alarm, chief of the fire department, telephone or light companies, or others whose property may be affected by such removal. The building inspection officer and the chief of police shall set forth in all notices the route that will be taken, time started and approximate time of completion. 
(Code 1973, § 6-75; Code 1995, § 18-210) 
Sec. 18-213. - Building remaining on streets. 
    Any building being moved for which a permit was granted under the provisions of this article shall not be allowed to remain in or on the streets of the city for more than 48 hours. 
(Code 1973, § 6-76; Code 1995, § 18-211) 
Sec. 18-214. - Public safety requirements. 
(a)  Every building which occupies any portion of public property after sundown shall have sufficient lights continuously burning between sunset and sunrise for the protection of the public. 
(b)  There shall be a minimum of five red lights placed on each street side of the building. Such red lights shall be attached to the building in such a fashion as to indicate extreme width, height and size. 
(c)  There shall be placed, in addition to the red lights on the building, flares at regular intervals for a distance of 200 feet up the street on each side of the building. 
(d)  When more than 50 percent of the street, measured between curbs, is occupied at night by the building, or when, in the opinion of the building inspection officer and chief of police, flagmen are necessary to divert or caution traffic, the owner or person moving such building shall employ, at their expense, two flagmen, one at each street intersection beyond the building. Such flagmen shall remain at these intersections, diverting or cautioning traffic from sunset to sunrise. Red lights shall be employed in flagging traffic at night. Such flagmen so employed shall be furnished by the city at the expense of the applicant. The minimum fee charged for each flagman shall be $5.00 per hour. 
(Code 1973, § 6-77; Code 1995, § 18-211) 
Secs. 18-215-18-236. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of municipality to commence an action in the name of the city to abate or enjoin any public nuisance injurious to the health, morals, comfort, or welfare of the community of nuisances generally, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 6-5-122, 11-47-117, 11-47-118; minimum housing standards and regulation of unsafe buildings, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-53-1 et seq.; municipal authority to repair or demolish unsafe structures, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-53B-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-237. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dangerous building means any building or structure which has any or all of the following defects: 
(1)  Interior walls or other vertical structural members which list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumbline passing through the center of gravity falls outside the middle third of its base. 
(2)  One which, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33 percent or more, of damage or deterioration of the supporting members, or 50 percent of damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering. 
(3)  One which has improperly distributed leads upon the floors or roofs or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. 
(4)  One which has been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals, or the general welfare and health of the occupants or the people. 
(5)  One which has become or is so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary or which so utterly fails to provide the amenities essential to decent living that it is unfit for human habitation, or is likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of those living therein. 
(6)  One having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of human beings who live or may live therein. 
(7)  One having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or one having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes, or other means of communication. 
(8)  One which has parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or property. 
(9)  One which because of its condition is unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people. 
(Code 1973, § 6-48; Code 1995, § 18-236) 
Sec. 18-238. - Declared nuisances. 
    All dangerous buildings are declared to be public nuisances, and shall be repaired, vacated, or demolished as provided in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 6-50; Code 1995, § 18-267) 
Sec. 18-239. - Building repair; vacation or demolition; standards. 
    The following standards shall be followed in substance by the building inspection officer in ordering repairs, vacation or demolition: 
(1)  If the dangerous building can reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this article it shall be ordered repaired. 
(2)  If the dangerous building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated. 
(3)  In any case where a dangerous building is 50 percent damaged or decayed, or deteriorated from its original value or structure, it shall be demolished, and in all cases where a building cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this article it shall be demolished. In all cases where a dangerous building is a fire hazard, existing or erected in violation of the terms of this article, it shall be demolished. 
(Code 1973, § 6-49; Code 1995, § 18-238) 
Sec. 18-240. - Building inspection officer; duties. 
    The building inspection officer shall: 
(1)  Inspect or cause to be inspected semiannually all public buildings, schools, halls, churches, theaters, hotels, tenements, commercial, manufacturing or left buildings for the purpose of determining whether any conditions exist which render such places a dangerous building within the terms of this article. 
(2)  Inspect any building, wall or structure about which complaints are filed by any person to the effect that a building, wall or structure is or may be existing in violation of this article. 
(3)  Inspect any building, wall or structure reported by the fire or police department of this city as probably existing in violation of the terms of this article. 
(4)  Notify in writing the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent and all other persons having an interest in the building as shown in the office of the judge of probate of this county, of any building found by him to be a dangerous building within the standards set forth in this article. One of the following responses to the notice is required: 
a.  The owner must vacate, or repair, or demolish the building in accordance with the notice and this article; 
b.  The occupant or lessee must vacate the building or may have it repaired in accordance with the notice and remain in possession; or 
c.  The mortgagee, agent, or other person having an interest in the building may at his own risk repair, vacate or demolish the building or have such work or act done, provided that any person notified under this subsection to repair, vacate or demolish any building shall be given such reasonable time, not exceeding 60 days, as may be necessary, to do or have done the work or act required by the notice. 
(5)  Set forth in the notice provided for in subsection (4) of this section a description of the building or structure deemed unsafe, a statement of the particulars which make the building or structure a dangerous building and an order requiring the building or structure to be put in such condition to comply with the terms of this article within such length of time, not exceeding 60 days, as is reasonable. 
(6)  Report to the city council any noncompliance with the notice provided for in subsections (4) and (5) of this section. 
(7)  Place a notice on all dangerous buildings reading as follows: "This building has been found to be a dangerous building by the building inspection officer. This notice is to remain on this building until it is repaired, vacated, or demolished in accordance with the notice which has been given to owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or agent of this building, and all other persons having an interest in the building as shown in the office of the judge of probate of this county. It is unlawful to remove this notice until such notice is complied with." 
(Code 1973, § 6-51; Code 1995, § 18-239) 
Sec. 18-241. - Procedure taken by city council. 
    The city council shall: 
(1)  Upon receipt of a report of the building inspection officer, as provided in section 18-240, give written notice to the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent and all other persons having an interest in the building as shown by the land records in the office of the judge of probate of the county, to appear before it on the date specified in the notice to show cause why the building or structure reported to be a dangerous building should not be repaired, vacated, or demolished in accordance with the statement of particulars set forth in the building inspection officer's notice, as provided in section 18-240(7). 
(2)  Hold a hearing and hear such testimony as the building inspection officer or the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, or any other person having an interest in the building shall offer relative to the dangerous building. 
(3)  Determine from the testimony offered pursuant to subsection (2) of this section as to whether or not the building in question is a dangerous building within the terms of this article. 
(4)  Issue an order based upon the determination made pursuant to subsection (3) of this section commanding the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent and all other persons having an interest in the building to repair, vacate, or demolish any building found to be a dangerous building and provided that any person so notified, except the owners, shall have the privilege of either vacating or repairing the dangerous building; or any person not the owner of the dangerous building but having an interest in the building, may demolish the dangerous building at his own risk to prevent the acquiring of a lien against the land upon which the dangerous building stands by the city as provided in subsection (5) of this section. 
(5)  If the owner, occupant, mortgagee, or lessee fails to comply with the order provided for in subsection (4) of this section, within 30 days, the city council shall cause such building or structure to be repaired, vacated, or demolished as the facts may warrant, under the standards provided for in section 18-239, and, with the assistance of the city attorney, shall cause the costs of such repair, vacation or demolition to be charged against the land on which the building existed as a city lien or cause such costs to be recovered in a suit at law against the owner, provided that in cases where such procedure is desirable and any delay thereby caused will not be dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people of this city, the city council shall notify the city attorney to take legal action to force the owner to make all necessary repairs or demolish the building. 
(6)  Report to the city attorney the names of all persons not complying with the order provided for in subsection (5) of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 6-52; Code 1995, § 18-240) 
Secs. 18-242-18-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND BUSINESS BUILDINGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-261. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Generally. Whenever any words are used in this article, they shall be construed, unless expressly stated to the contrary, as if they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
    Accessory structure means a structure, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building and which is attached thereto or located on the same premises. 
    Building means a combination of materials to form a construction adapted to permanent or continuous occupancy for use in public, institutional, residence, business or storage purposes. 
    Deterioration means the condition or appearance of a building or part thereof, characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting or other evidence of physical decay or neglect, excessive use or lack of maintenance. 
    Exposed to public view means any premises, or any part thereof, or any building, or any part thereof, which may be lawfully viewed by the public, or any member thereof, from a sidewalk, street, alleyway, licensed open air parking lot or from any adjoining or neighboring premises. 
    Exterior premises means those portions of a building which are exposed to public view and the open space of any premises outside of any building erected thereon. 
    Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rodents and vermin by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible material that may serve as their food by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other approved means of pest elimination. 
    Fire hazard means any thing or any act which increases or may cause an increase of the hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree than that customarily recognized as normal by persons in the public service of preventing, suppressing, or extinguishing fire; or which may obstruct, delay or hinder or may become the cause of an obstruction, a delay, a hazard or a hindrance to the prevention, suppression or extinguishment of fire. (See Nuisance ) 
    Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. (See Refuse, Rubbish ) 
    Infestation means the presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests on the premises which constitute a health hazard. 
    Mixed occupancy means any building containing one or more dwelling units or rooming units and also having a portion thereof devoted to non-dwelling uses. 
    Nuisance means: 
(1)  Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence, or as provided by the statutes of this state, or the ordinances of the city. 
(2)  Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health or safety of children whether in a building, on the premises of a building, or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes, but is not limited to: abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators, motor vehicles, any structurally unsound fences or structures, lumber, trash, fences, debris, or vegetation such as poison ivy, oak or sumac, which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors. 
(3)  Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to health or persons on or near the premises where the condition exists. 
(4)  Insanitary conditions or anything offensive to the senses or dangerous to health, in violation of this article. 
(5)  Whatever renders air, food, or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings. 
(6)  Fire hazards. 
    Operator means any person who has charge, care or control of premises, or a part thereof, whether with or without the knowledge and consent of the owner. 
    Owner means any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or shall have charge, care or control of premises, as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee, receiver, or guardian of the estate, or as a mortgagee in possession either by virtue of a court order or by voluntary surrender by the person holding the legal title. Any person who is a lessee subletting or reassigning any part or all of any premises shall be deemed to be a co-owner with the lessor and shall have joint responsibility over the portion of the premises sublet or assigned by the lessee. 
    Plumbing means all of the following supplies, facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clotheswashing machines, catchbasins, vents, and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines, and water pipes and lines utilized in conjunction with air conditioning equipment. 
    Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings or structures thereon. 
    Public officer means the building inspection officer of the city, or such other person as the city council may specifically designate and such other officials as the public officer may designate to act in his behalf. 
    Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body wastes, including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes. (See Garbage, Rubbish ) 
    Registered mail means registered mail or certified mail. 
    Room means space in an enclosed building, or space set apart by a partition or partitions. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar materials. (See Garbage, Refuse ) 
    Sanitary sewer means any sanitary sewer owned, operated and maintained by the city or by the county, and available for public use for the disposal of sewage. 
    Sewage means waste from a flush toilet, bathtub, sink, lavatory, dishwashing or laundry machine, or the water-carried waste from any other fixture or equipment or machine. 
    Story means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished ceiling level directly above a basement or cellar is more than six feet above grade, such basement or cellar shall be considered a story. 
    Structure means any combination of any materials, whether fixed or portable, forming a construction, including buildings. 
    Washroom means an enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs, showers, or both, and which shall also include toilets, lavatories, or fixtures serving similar purposes. 
    Water closet compartment means an enclosed space containing one or more toilets which may also contain one or more lavatories, urinals and other plumbing fixtures. 
    Weathering means deterioration, decay or damage caused by exposure to the elements. 
(Code 1973, § 6-5; Code 1995, § 18-261) 
Sec. 18-262. - Applicability of article; scope. 
(a)  Every commercial, business or industrial establishment and the premises on which it is situated in the city used or intended to be used for commercial, business or industrial occupancy shall comply with the provisions of this article, whether or not such building has been constructed, altered or repaired before or after the enactment of this article, and irrespective of any permits or licenses which have been issued for the use or occupancy of the building or premises for the construction or repair of the building, or for the installation or repair of equipment or facilities prior to May 23, 1967. 
(b)  This article establishes minimum standards for the initial and continued occupancy and use of all such buildings, and does not replace or modify standards otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration or use of the building, equipment or facilities contained therein, except as provided in section 18-263. Where there is mixed occupancy, any commercial, business or industrial use therein shall be nevertheless regulated by and subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 6-6; Code 1995, § 18-262) 
Sec. 18-263. - Conflict of article and other ordinances and laws. 
    In any case where the provisions of this article impose a higher standard than set forth in any other ordinances of the city, then the standard as set forth in this article shall prevail. If the provisions of this article impose a lower standard than any other ordinance of the city, then the higher standard contained in any such other ordinance or law shall prevail. 
(Code 1973, § 6-7; Code 1995, § 18-263) 
Sec. 18-264. - Enforcement of article. 
    No license or permit or other certification or compliance with this article shall constitute a defense against any violation of any other ordinance of the city applicable to any structure or premises. No provision of this article shall relieve any owner or operator from complying with any other provision or any official of the city from enforcing any other provision. 
(Code 1973, § 6-8; Code 1995, § 18-264) 
Sec. 18-265. - Issuance of licenses and permits. 
    All licenses and permits shall be issued upon compliance with this article's provisions, as well as compliance with the provisions of the ordinance under which such licenses and permits are granted. 
(Code 1973, § 6-8; Code 1995, § 18-265) 
Secs. 18-266-18-293. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 18-294. - Supervision by public officer. 
    Responsibility for enforcement of this article is vested in the building department and all inspections, regulations, enforcement, and hearings on violations of the provisions of this article, unless expressly stated to the contrary, shall be under its direction and supervision. 
(Code 1973, § 6-10; Code 1995, § 18-276) 
Sec. 18-295. - Inspections and right of entry. 
(a)  All buildings and premises subject to this article's provisions are subject to inspection from time to time by the public officer or his designees. All rooms and areas in the building shall be available and accessible for such inspection which shall be made during the usual business hours if the premises are used for nonresidential purposes; provided, however, that inspections may be made at other times if: 
(1)  The premises are not available for inspection during the business hours; 
(2)  There is reason to believe that violations are occurring on the premises which can only be apprehended and proved by inspection during other than the prescribed hours; or 
(3)  There is reason to believe a violation exists of a character which is an immediate threat to health or safety requiring inspection and abatement without delay. 
(b)  Emergency inspections may be authorized without warrant if the public officer has reason to believe that a condition exists which poses an immediate threat to life, health, or safety. Such procedure shall take place only where the time required to apply for and secure the issuance of a warrant would render ineffective the immediate action necessary to abate the condition. 
(Code 1973, § 6-11; Code 1995, § 18-277) 
Sec. 18-296. - Search warrant or access warrant. 
(a)  The public officer or his designee may, upon affidavit, apply to a judge of competent jurisdiction for a search warrant setting forth factually the actual conditions and circumstances that provide a reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance or violation of this article may exist on the premises. 
(b)  If a judge of competent jurisdiction is satisfied as to the matters set forth in the affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance of a search warrant permitting access to and inspection of that part of the premises on which the nuisance or violation may exist. 
(Code 1973, § 6-12; Code 1995, § 18-278) 
Sec. 18-297. - Violation abatement-Notice. 
    Where a violation of this article or a regulation pursuant to the provisions of this article is found to exist, a written notice from the public officer shall be served on the person responsible for the correction thereof. The notice shall specify the violation committed, what must be done to correct the violation, and a reasonable period of time not to exceed 30 days to correct or abate the violation. 
(Code 1973, § 6-13; Code 1995, § 18-279) 
Sec. 18-298. - Same-Service of notice. 
    Notice may be served personally or by certified mail with postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the person to be served. If the last known address cannot be ascertained, the notice may be posted on the outside front entrance of the building. 
(Code 1973, § 6-14; Code 1995, § 18-280) 
Sec. 18-299. - Same-Final order; hearing; determination by the housing board of adjustments and appeals. 
(a)  Within ten days of the date of service of a notice, the notice shall constitute a final order unless any person affected by the notice requests a hearing thereon, serves a written request within the ten-day period in person or by mail to the public officer. Such request for a hearing shall set forth briefly the grounds or reasons on which the request for a hearing is based and the factual matters contained in the notice of violation which are to be disputed at the hearing. The public officer, upon receipt of the request shall, within 30 days therefrom and upon five days' notice to the party aggrieved, set the matter down for hearing. 
(b)  The hearing provided in this section shall be held by the housing board of adjustments and appeals, which board and its procedures have been set up in section 111, of the 2003 International Property Maintenance Code, previously adopted by the city. The appointment, terms of office, quorum and procedure of the board shall be as set out in the 2003 International Property Maintenance Code. This board shall have the power to hear appeals and to determine whether or not the true intent and meaning of this article or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or wrongfully interpreted or whether or not such order does manifest injustice under the circumstances. If the board does find that any of the conditions described in this subsection exist, it shall have the right to alter or amend any of the findings or decisions of the public official making such order and to make such order as in its opinion will properly and justly serve the interest of this article. 
(c)  A decision of the housing board of adjustments and appeals to vary the application of any provision of this article or to modify an order of the building inspection officer or public official shall specify in what manner such variation or modification is made and the conditions upon which it is made and the reasons therefor. 
(Code 1973, § 6-15; Code 1995, § 18-281) 
Sec. 18-300. - Same-Extensions of time. 
    The public officer may extend the time for correction or abatement of the violations for an additional period of time not to exceed 30 days, except where major capital improvements or renovations are involved, in which instance the time for completion may be extended for a period not to exceed 90 days beyond the expiration date of the original notice. 
(Code 1973, § 6-16; Code 1995, § 18-282) 
Sec. 18-301. - Same-Summary abatement in emergency. 
    Where the violation or condition existing on the premises are of such a nature as to constitute an immediate threat to life and limb unless abated without delay, the public officer may either abate the violation or condition immediately or order the owner, operator or occupant to correct the violation within a period of time not to exceed three days, and upon failure to do so, the public officer shall abate the condition immediately thereafter and the costs thereof charged to the owner or operator charged with the responsibility of abating such condition. 
(Code 1973, § 6-17; Code 1995, § 18-283) 
Secs. 18-302-18-320. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OWNER'S OR OPERATOR'S RESPONSIBILITIES 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 18-321. - Maintenance of premises. 
    All parts of the premises under the control of the operator shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and the occupant shall refrain from performing any acts which would render other parts of the premises unclean or unsanitary or which would obstruct the owner or operator from performing any duty required by this article or maintaining the premises in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1973, § 6-45; Code 1995, § 18-296) 
Secs. 18-322-18-345. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Hazards and Unsanitary Conditions 

Sec. 18-346. - Exterior premises and structures. 
    The exterior of the premises and of all structures thereon shall be kept free of all nuisances, and any hazards to the safety of occupants, pedestrians and other persons utilizing the premises, and free of insanitary conditions. Any of the conditions described in this section shall be promptly removed and abated by the owner or operator. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator to keep the premises free of hazards which include but are not limited to the hazards described in this subdivision. 
(Code 1973, § 6-18; Code 1995, § 18-306) 
Sec. 18-347. - Refuse. 
    Brush, weeds, broken glass, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths and accumulations of filth, garbage, trash, refuse and debris shall constitute hazards and are prohibited. 
(Code 1973, § 6-19; Code 1995, § 18-307) 
Sec. 18-348. - Natural growths. 
    Dead and dying trees and limbs or other natural growth which, by reason of rotting or deteriorating condition or storm damage, shall constitute a hazard to persons in the vicinity thereof. Trees shall be kept pruned and trimmed to prevent such conditions. 
(Code 1973, § 6-20; Code 1995, § 18-308) 
Sec. 18-349. - Overhangings. 
    Loose and overhanging objects which by reason of location above ground level shall constitute a danger of falling on persons in the vicinity thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 6-21; Code 1995, § 18-309) 
Sec. 18-350. - Ground surface. 
    Holes, excavations, breaks, projections, obstructions, icy conditions, and excretions of pets and other animals on paths, walks, driveways, parking lots and parking areas, and other parts of the premises which are accessible to and used by persons on the premises shall constitute a danger to persons in the vicinity. All such holes and excavations shall be filled and repaired, walks and steps replaced and other conditions removed where necessary to eliminate hazards or unsanitary conditions with reasonable dispatch upon their discovery. 
(Code 1973, § 6-22; Code 1995, § 18-310) 
Sec. 18-351. - Recurring accumulations of stormwater. 
    Adequate runoff drains shall be provided and maintained in accordance with this Code to eliminate any such recurrent or excessive accumulation of stormwater. 
(Code 1973, § 6-23; Code 1995, § 18-311) 
Sec. 18-352. - Sources of infestation. 
    Any source of infestation by insects, pests or rodents shall constitute a danger to persons in the vicinity. 
(Code 1973, § 6-24; Code 1995, § 18-312) 
Sec. 18-353. - Foundation of walls. 
    Foundation walls shall be kept structurally sound, free from defects and damage, and capable of bearing imposed loads safely. 
(Code 1973, § 6-25; Code 1995, § 18-313) 
Sec. 18-354. - Chimneys and flue and vent attachments. 
    Chimneys and all flue and vent attachments thereto shall be maintained structurally sound, free from defects, and so maintained as to capably perform at all times the functions for which they were designed. Chimneys, flues, gas vents or other draft-producing equipment shall provide sufficient draft to develop the rated output of the connected equipment; and shall be structurally safe, durable, smoketight, and capable of withstanding the action of the flue gasses. 
(Code 1973, § 6-26; Code 1995, § 18-314) 
Sec. 18-355. - Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes. 
    Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes shall be provided with banisters or railings properly designed and maintained to minimize the hazard of fallings, and the same shall be kept structurally sound, in good repair, and free from defects. 
(Code 1973, § 6-27; Code 1995, § 18-315) 
Secs. 18-356-18-383. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Exterior Appearance of Premises and Structures 

Sec. 18-384. - Exterior premises and structures. 
    The exterior of the premises and the condition of accessory structures shall be maintained so that the appearance of the premises and all buildings thereon shall reflect a level of maintenance in keeping with the standards of the neighborhood or such higher standards as may be adopted as part of a plan of urban renewal by the city and such that the appearance of the premises and structures shall not constitute a blighting factor for adjoining property owners nor an element leading to the progressive deterioration and downgrading of the neighborhood with the accompanying diminution of property values including the standards contained in this subdivision. 
(Code 1973, § 6-28; Code 1995, § 18-326) 
Sec. 18-385. - Landscaping. 
    Premises shall be kept landscaped and lawns, hedges and bushes shall be kept trimmed and from becoming overgrown and unsightly where exposed to public view and where the same constitute a blighting factor depreciating adjoining property. 
(Code 1973, § 6-29; Code 1995, § 18-327) 
Sec. 18-386. - Signs and billboards. 
    All permanent signs and billboards exposed to public view shall be maintained in good repair. Any signs which have excessively weathered or faded or those upon which the paint has excessively peeled or cracked shall, with their supporting members, be removed forthwith, or put into a good state of repair. All nonoperative or broken electrical signs shall be repaired or shall, with their supporting members, be removed forthwith. 
(Code 1973, § 6-30; Code 1995, § 18-328) 
Sec. 18-387. - Windows. 
    All windows exposed to public view shall be kept clean and free of marks or foreign substances except when necessary in the course of changing displays. No storage of materials, stock or inventory shall be permitted in window display areas or other areas ordinarily exposed to public view unless the areas are first screened from the public view by drapes, venetian blinds or other permanent rendering of the windows opaque to the public view. All screenings of interiors shall be maintained in a clean and attractive manner and in a good state of repair. 
(Code 1973, § 6-31; Code 1995, § 18-329) 
Sec. 18-388. - Storefronts. 
    All storefronts shall be kept in good repair and shall not constitute a safety hazard or nuisance. If repairs to a storefront become necessary, such repairs shall be made with the same or similar materials used in the construction of the storefront in such a manner as to permanently repair the damaged area. Any cornice visible above a storefront shall be kept in good repair. 
(Code 1973, § 6-32; Code 1995, § 18-330) 
Sec. 18-389. - Awnings and marquees. 
    Any awning or marquee and its accompanying structural members which extend over any street, sidewalk or any other portion of the premises shall be maintained in good repair and shall not constitute a nuisance or a safety hazard. If such awnings or marquees are not properly maintained in accordance with the provisions of this section, they shall, together with their supporting members, be removed immediately. If the awnings or marquees are made of cloth, plastic or of a similar material, the cloth or plastic, where exposed to public view, shall be maintained in good condition and shall not show evidence of excessive weathering, discoloration, ripping, tearing or other holes. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize any encroachment on streets, sidewalks, or other parts of the public domain. 
(Code 1973, § 6-33; Code 1995, § 18-331) 
Secs. 18-390-18-406. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - General Maintenance 

Sec. 18-407. - Exteriors. 
    The exterior of every structure or accessory structure (including fences, signs and storefronts) shall be maintained in good repair. All surfaces shall be maintained free of broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling stone or brick, excessive peeling paint or other condition reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance to the end that the property itself may be preserved, safety and fire hazards eliminated. 
(Code 1973, § 6-34; Code 1995, § 18-341) 
Sec. 18-408. - Floors-Requirements. 
    Floors shall be considered to be structurally sound when capable of safely bearing imposed loads and shall be maintained at all times in a condition so as to be smooth, clean, free from cracks, breaks and other hazards. 
(Code 1973, § 6-36; Code 1995, § 18-342) 
Sec. 18-409. - Same-Washroom and water closet compartment. 
    Washroom and water closet compartment floors shall be surfaced with water resistant material and shall be kept in a dry, clean and sanitary condition at all times. 
(Code 1973, § 6-37; Code 1995, § 18-343) 
Sec. 18-410. - Supporting structural members. 
    Supporting structural members are to be kept structurally sound, free of deterioration and capable of bearing imposed loads safely. 
(Code 1973, § 6-38; Code 1995, § 18-344) 
Sec. 18-411. - Interior walls; ceilings. 
(a)  Interior walls and ceilings of every structure shall be structurally sound and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(b)  Walls and ceilings shall be considered to be in good repair when free from cracks, breaks, loose plaster and similar conditions. Walls shall be provided with paint, paper sealing material or other protective covering so that the walls and ceilings shall be kept free of visible foreign matter, and well-maintained at all times. 
(Code 1973, §§ 6-35, 6-39; Code 1995, § 18-345) 
Sec. 18-412. - Lighting of washrooms. 
    Every washroom and water closet compartment shall be provided with permanently installed artificial lighting fixtures with a switch and wall plate so located and maintained that there is no danger of short circuiting from water from other bathroom facilities or from splashing of water. 
(Code 1973, § 6-40; Code 1995, § 18-346) 
Sec. 18-413. - Electrical service-Requirements. 
    All premises shall be properly connected to and be provided with electric power through safely insulated conductors conforming to the electrical code. 
(Code 1973, § 6-41; Code 1995, § 18-347) 
Sec. 18-414. - Same-Loose or exposed wiring. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, all wiring or cables shall be properly affixed or attached to the structure. Insulation shall be provided for all wiring and cables and kept in good repair. 
(Code 1973, § 6-42; Code 1995, § 18-348) 
Sec. 18-415. - Same-Fuses and protective devices. 
    Maximum fuse sizes consistent with safety shall be posted conspicuously on the inside cover of all fuse boxes. No fuse shall be installed therein in excess of the stated maximum except that owners shall not be responsible for violation in fuse installations without their knowledge where the correct maximum is stated and the fuse box is located within any part of the premises which is in the exclusive possession of occupants other than the owner. 
(Code 1973, § 6-43; Code 1995, § 18-349) 
Sec. 18-416. - Same-Overloading of circuits. 
    Overloading of circuits is prohibited. Where the public officer finds after notice and hearing that by reason of the appliances and fixtures there is continuing overloading of an electrical line creating a hazard, the owner shall be required to install a line of sufficient capacity to absorb the load to which the line is subjected or otherwise eliminate the conditions causing the overload. For purposes of this section, the public officer may consider the peak seasonal load to which the line is subjected in accordance with the electrical code. 
(Code 1973, § 6-44; Code 1995, § 18-350) 
Sec. 18-417. - Elimination of infestation. 
    Every operator shall be responsible for the elimination of infestation in and on the premises, subject to his control. 
(Code 1973, § 6-46; Code 1995, § 18-351) 
Sec. 18-418. - Maintenance of plumbing. 
    Every operator shall maintain all plumbing fixtures used by him in a clean and sanitary condition. He shall not deposit any material in any fixture or sewer system which would result in stoppage of or damage to the fixture or sewer system. 
(Code 1973, § 6-47; Code 1995, § 18-352) 
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Licensing of the conduct of trades, businesses, etc., by cities generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-90 et seq.; in the police jurisdiction the maximum tax is at one-half the city rate, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-91; deceptive trade practices generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 8-19-1 et seq.; licenses generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-12-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Levy of tax. 
(a)  Pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, tit. 11, ch. 51, as amended, the following is hereby declared to be and is adopted as the business license code and schedule of licenses for the city for the calendar year beginning January 1, 2008, and for each calendar year thereafter. 
(b)  There is hereby levied and assessed a business license fee for the privilege of doing any kind of business, trade, profession or other activity in the city, or the police jurisdiction, by whatever name called. 
(Ord. No. 3358, § 1, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 22-2. - Definitions. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business means any commercial or industrial activity or any enterprise, trade, profession, occupation, or livelihood, including the lease or rental of residential or nonresidential real estate, whether or not carried on for gain or profit, and whether or not engaged in as a principal or as an independent contractor, which is engaged in, or caused to be engaged in, within a city. 
    Business license means an annual license issued by the city for the privilege of doing any kind of business, trade, profession, or any other activity in the city, by whatever name called, which document is required to be conspicuously posted or displayed except to the extent the taxpayer's business license tax or other financial information is listed thereon. 
    Business license remittance form means any business license return, renewal reminder notice, or other writing on which the taxpayer calculates the business license tax liability for all or part of the license year and remits the amount so calculated with the form. 
    Department or department of revenue means the Alabama Department of Revenue, as created under Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-2-1 et seq. 
    Designee means an agent or employee of the city authorized to administer or collect, or both the city's business license taxes, which may include another taxing jurisdiction, the department of revenue, or a "private auditing or collecting firm" as defined in Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-2A-3. 
    Gross receipts means the measure of any and all receipts of a business from whatever source derived, to the maximum extent permitted by applicable laws and constitutional provisions, to be used in calculating the amount due for a business license; provided, however, that: 
(1)  Gross receipts shall not include any of the following taxes collected by the business on behalf of any taxing jurisdiction or the federal government: All taxes which are imposed on the ultimate consumer, collected by the taxpayer and remitted by or on behalf of the taxpayer to the taxing authority, whether state, local or federal, including utility gross receipts levied pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, tit. 40, ch. 21, art. 3; license taxes levied pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, tit. 40, ch. 21, art. 2; or reimbursements to professional employer organizations of federal, state or local payroll taxes or unemployment insurance contributions; but no other deductions or exclusions from gross receipts shall be allowed, except as provided in this chapter. 
(2)  A different basis for calculating the business license may be used by the city with respect to certain categories of taxpayers as prescribed in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-90B. 
(3)  For a utility or other entity described in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-129, gross receipts shall be limited to the gross receipts derived from the retail furnishing of utility services within the city during the preceding year that are taxed under Code of Ala. 1975, tit. 40, ch. 21, art. 3 except that nothing herein shall affect any existing contract or agreement between a municipality and a utility or other entity. The gross receipts derived from the furnishing of utility services shall not be subject to further business license taxation by the municipality. 
(4)  Gross receipts shall not include dividends or other distributions received by a corporation, or proceeds from borrowing, the sale of a capital asset, and the repayment of the principal portion of a loan, the issuance of stock or other equity investments, or capital contributions, or the undistributed earnings of subsidiary entities. 
    License form means any business license application form, renewal reminder notice, business license remittance form, or business license return by whatever name called. 
    License officer or municipal license officer means the municipal employee charged by the city with the primary responsibility of administering the city's business license tax ordinance and related matters thereto. 
    License year means the calendar year. 
    Municipality means any town or city in this state that levies a business license tax from time to time. The term shall also include the town's or city's police jurisdiction, where the business license tax is levied in the police jurisdiction. 
    Person means any individual, association, estate, trust, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other entity of any kind, except for any nonprofit corporation formed under the laws of Alabama which is operated to enable municipalities that become members of such nonprofit corporation to finance or refinance capital projects and related undertakings, on a cooperative basis, and whose board of directors or other governing body consists primarily of elected officials of the city. 
    Taxing jurisdiction means any municipality that levies a business license tax, whether or not a business license tax is levied within its police jurisdiction, or the department of revenue acting as agent on behalf of a municipality pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-180, as the context requires. 
    Taxpayer means any person subject to or liable under this chapter for any business license tax; any person required to file a return with respect to, or pay or remit the business license tax levied under this chapter or to report any information or value to the taxing jurisdiction; or any person required to obtain, or who holds any interest in, any business license issued by the taxing jurisdiction; or any person that may be affected by any act or refusal to act by the taxing jurisdiction under this chapter, or to keep any required by this chapter. 
    USC means the applicable title and section of the United States Code, as amended from time to time. 
(b)  Other terms. Other capitalized or specialized terms used in this chapter, and not defined in this section, shall have the same meanings ascribed to them in Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-2a-3, unless the context therein otherwise specifies. 
(Ord. No. 3358, § 2, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 22-3. - License term; minimums. 
    The license term and the minimum amount for a business license are as follows: 
(1)  Full year. Every person who commences business before July 1 shall be subject to and shall pay the annual license for such business in full. Unless otherwise specified in the enclosed schedules, the minimum annual license shall be $100.00. 
(2)  Half year. Every person who commences business on or after July 1, shall be subject to and shall pay one-half the annual license for such business for that calendar year. 
(3)  Issue fee. For each license issued there shall be an issue fee collected of $12.00 and said issue fee shall be collected in the same manner as the license tax. 
(4)  Annual renewal. Except as provided in subsection a. or b of this section, the business license shall be renewed annually on or before January 31 of each year. 
a.  If the due date for payment of any business license falls on a weekend or a holiday recognized by the city from time to time, the due date shall automatically be extended until the next business day. 
b.  Insurance company annual license renewals shall be renewed in accordance with Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-122 which states that each year, each insurance company shall furnish the city a statement in writing duly certified showing the full and true amount of gross premiums received during the preceding year and shall accompany such statement with the amount of license tax due according to the licensing schedule. Failure to furnish such statement or to pay such sum shall subject the company and its agents to those penalties as prescribed for doing business without a license as provided for in the municipal code. 
c.  On or before December 31 of each year, a renewal reminder shall be mailed to each licensee that purchased a business license during the current year. Said renewal notice shall be mailed via regular U.S. mail to the licensee's last known address of record with the city. Licensees are required to furnish the city any address changes for their business prior to December 1 in order for them to receive notice. 
d.  Business license renewal payments received by the city shall be applied to the current renewal only when any and other debts the licensee owes to the city are first paid in full. No business license shall be issued if the current renewal payment does not meet said prior obligations and the current renewal. Failure to pay such sums shall subject the licensee and its agents to those penalties as prescribed for doing business without a license provided for in the municipal code. 
(Ord. No. 3358, § 3, 12-18-2007; Ord. No. 3488, § 1, 12-4-2012) 
Sec. 22-4. - License shall be location specific. 
(a)  For each place at which any business is carried on, a separate license shall be paid, and any person desiring to engage in any business for which a license is required shall designate the place at which business is carried on, and the license to be issued shall designate such place, and such license shall authorize the carrying on of such business only at the place designated. 
(b)  Every person dealing in two or more of the articles, or engaging in two or more of the businesses, vocations, occupations, or professions scheduled herein, shall take out and pay for a license for each line of business except amounts covered by gross receipts. All receipts not accounted for in gross receipts are taxed at the rate charged for each line of business. No portion is untaxed. 
(c)  A taxpayer subject to the license authorized by this chapter that is engaged in business in other municipalities may account for its gross receipts so that the part of its gross receipts attributable to its branch offices will not be subject to the business license imposed by this chapter. To establish a bona fide branch office, the taxpayer must demonstrate proof of all following criteria: 
(1)  The taxpayer must demonstrate the continuing existence of an actual facility located outside the police jurisdiction in which its principal business office is located, such as a retail store, outlet, business office, showroom, or warehouse, to which employees and/or independent contractors are assigned or located during regular normal working hours. 
(2)  The taxpayer must maintain books and records, which reasonably indicate a segregation or allocation of the taxpayer's gross receipts to the particular facility of facilities. 
(3)  The taxpayer must provide proof that separate telephone listings, signs, and other indications of its separate activity are in existence. 
(4)  Billing and/or collection activities relating to the business conducted at the branch office are performed by an employee or other representative, of the taxpayer who has such responsibility for the branch office. 
(5)  All businesses claimed by a branch office must be conducted by and through said office. 
(6)  The taxpayer must supply proof that all applicable business licenses with respect to the branch office have been issued. 
(d)  Nothing herein shall be construed as exempting businesses from payment of a license on the basis of a lack of physical location. 
(Ord. No. 3358, § 4, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 22-5. - Restriction on transfer of license. 
(a)  No license shall be transferred except with the consent of the council or other governing body of the city or of the director of finance or other chief revenue officer or his designee, and no license shall be transferred to reflect a physical change of address of the taxpayer within the city more than once during a license year and never from one taxpayer to another. Provided that a mere change in the name or ownership of a taxpayer that is a corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other form of legal entity now or hereafter recognized by the laws of the state shall not constitute a transfer for purposes of this chapter, unless: 
(1)  The change requires the taxpayer to obtain a new federal employer identification number or department of revenue taxpayer identification number; or 
(2)  In the discretion of the city, the subject license is one for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit a city from requiring a new business license application and approval for an alcoholic beverage license. 
(Ord. No. 3358, § 5, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 22-6. - Unlawful to do business without a license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, taxpayer, or agent of a person or taxpayer to engage in businesses or vocations in the city for which a license is required without first having procured a license. A violation of this chapter hereunder fixing a license shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.00 for each offense, and if a willful violation, by imprisonment, not to exceed six months, or both, at the discretion of the court trying the same. Each day shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 3358, § 6, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 22-7. - License must be posted. 
    Every license shall be posted in a conspicuous place, where said business, trade, or occupation is carried on, and the holder of the license shall immediately show same to the designee of the city upon being requested so to do. 
(Ord. No. 3358, § 7, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 22-8. - Duty to file report. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person subject to such license tax to render to the city on such forms, as may be required, a sworn statement showing the total business done, amount of sales, gross receipts and gross sales, stock, value of furniture and other equipment, capital invested, number of helpers or employees, amount of space occupied, or other factor described in the schedule, one or several, as the case may require, for the ascertainment of the classification of such person for license taxation purposes and the correct amount of license tax to which he is subject. 
(b)  If the city determines that the amount of business license tax reported on or remitted with any business license remittance form is incorrect, if no business license remittance form is filed within the time prescribed, or if the information provided on the form is insufficient to allow the taxing jurisdiction to determine the proper amount of business license tax due, the city shall calculate the correct amount of the tax based on the most accurate and complete information reasonably obtainable and enter a preliminary assessment for the correct amount of business license tax, including any applicable penalty and interest. 
(c)  The city shall promptly mail a copy of any preliminary assessment to the taxpayer's last known address by either first class U.S. mail or certified U.S. mail with return receipt requested, or, in the sole discretion of the city, deliver the preliminary assessment to the taxpayer by personal delivery. 
(d)  If the amount of business license tax remitted by the taxpayer is undisputed by the city, or if the taxpayer consents to the amount of any deficiency or preliminary assessment in writing, the city shall enter a final assessment for the amount of the tax due, plus any applicable penalty and interest. 
(e)  If a taxpayer disagrees with a preliminary assessment as entered by the taxing jurisdiction, the taxpayer shall file a petition for review with the municipal license officer within 30 days from the date of entry of the preliminary assessment setting out the specific objections to the preliminary assessment. If a petition for review is timely filed, the license officer of the city shall schedule a conference with the taxpayer for the purpose of allowing the taxpayer or its representatives and the representatives of the city to present their respective positions, discuss any omissions or errors, and to attempt to agree upon any changes or modifications to their respective positions. 
(1)  If a petition for review is not timely filed, or is timely filed, and upon further review the license officer determines that the preliminary assessment is due to be upheld in whole or in part, the city may make the assessment final in the amount of business license tax due as computed by the license officer, with applicable interest and penalty computed to the date of entry of the final assessment. The license officer shall, whenever practicable, complete his review of the taxpayer's petition for review and applicable law within 90 days following the later of the date of filing of the petition or the conference, if any. 
(2)  A copy of the final assessment shall promptly be mailed to the taxpayer's last known address: 
a.  By either first class U.S. mail or certified U.S. mail with return receipt requested in the case of assessments of business license tax of $500.00 or less; or 
b.  By certified U.S. mail with return receipt requested in the case of assessments of business license tax of more than $500.00. 
In either case, at the option of the taxing jurisdiction a copy of the final assessment may be delivered to the taxpayer by personal delivery. The final assessment shall include a statement informing the taxpayer of his right to appeal the final assessment to circuit court within 30 days from the date of the entry of the final assessment. 
(Ord. No. 3358, § 8, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 22-9. - Duty to permit inspection and produce records. 
    Upon demand by the designee of the city, it shall be the duty of all licensees to: 
(1)  Permit the designee of the city to enter the business and to inspect all portions of his place of business for the purposes of enabling said municipal designee to gain such information as may be necessary or convenient for determining the proper license classification, and determining the correct amount of license tax; 
(2)  Furnish information during reasonable business hours, at the licensee's place of business, in the city or the police jurisdiction, all books of account, invoices, papers, reports and memoranda containing entries showing amount of purchases, sales receipts, inventory and other information from which the correct license tax classification of such person may be ascertained and the correct amount of license tax to which he is subject may be determined, including exhibition of bank deposit books, bank statements, copies of sales tax returns to the state, copies of the state income tax returns and federal income tax returns. 
(Ord. No. 3358, § 9, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 22-10. - Unlawful to obstruct. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, or for any agent, servant or employee of such person, to fail or refuse to perform any duty imposed by this chapter; nor shall any person, agent, servant or employee of such person obstruct or interfere with the designee of the city in carrying out the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3358, § 10, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 22-11. - Privacy. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person connected with the administration of this chapter to divulge any information obtained by him in the course of inspection and examination of the books, papers, reports and memoranda of the taxpayer made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, except to the mayor, the municipal attorney or others authorized by law to receive such information described herein. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to print, publish, or divulge, without the written permission or approval of the taxpayer, the license form of any taxpayer or any part of the license form, or any information secured in arriving at the amount of tax or value reported, for any purpose other than the proper administration of any matter administered by the taxing jurisdiction, or upon order of any court, or as otherwise allowed in this chapter. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall prohibit the disclosure of the fact that a taxpayer has or has not purchased a business license. Statistical information pertaining to taxes may be disclosed to the municipal council upon their written request through the mayor's office. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 3358, § 11, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 22-12. - Failure to file assessment. 
(a)  In any case where a person subject to paying a license tax as provided herein fails to do so, the municipal designee shall be authorized to assess and determine the amount of license taxes due using the best information available either by return filed or by other means. 
(b)  The taxpayer shall be notified by registered or certified mail, or by personal service, of the amount of any such assessment, and of his right to appear before the municipal governing body on a day named not less than 20 days from the date of notice and to show cause why such assessment shall not be made final. Such appearance may be made by agent or attorney. 
(c)  If no showing is made on or before the date fixed in such notice, or if such showing is not sufficient in the judgment of the city, such assessment shall be made final in the amount originally fixed, or in such other amount as is determined by the city to be correct. If upon such hearing the municipal designee finds a different amount due than that originally assessed, he shall make the assessment final in the correct amount, and in all cases shall notify the taxpayer of the assessment as finally fixed. 
(d)  A notice by the United States mail, addressed to the taxpayer's last known place of business, shall be sufficient. Any assessment made by the designee of the city shall be prima facie correct upon any appeal. 
(Ord. No. 3358, § 12, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 22-13. - Lien for nonpayment of license tax. 
    On all property, both real and personal, used in the business, the city shall have a lien for such license, which lien shall attach as of the date when the license is due, as allowed by Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-44. 
(Ord. No. 3358, § 13, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 22-14. - Criminal penalties. 
    Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined in an amount not less than $50.00 and not more than $500.00, and may also be sentenced to imprisonment for a period of not exceeding six months, in the discretion of the court trying the case, and violations on separate days shall each constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 3358, § 14, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 22-15. - Civil penalties. 
    In addition to the remedies provided by Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-150 et seq., the continued or recurrent performance of any act within the corporate limits or within its police jurisdiction for which a license may be revoked or suspended under this chapter is hereby declared to be detrimental to the health, safety, comfort and convenience of the public and is a nuisance. The city, as an additional or alternative remedy, may institute injunctive proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to abate the same. 
(Ord. No. 3358, § 15, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 22-16. - Penalties and interest. 
(a)  All licenses not paid within 30 days from the date they fall due shall be increased by 15 percent for the first 30 days they shall be delinquent, or fraction thereof, and shall be measured by an additional 15 percent for a delinquency of 60 days or more, but this provision shall not be deemed to authorize the delay of 30 days in the payment of the license due, which may be enforced at once. 
(b)  In the case of persons who began business on or after the first day of the calendar year, the license for such new business shall be increased by 15 percent for the first 15 days they shall be delinquent, and shall be measured by an additional 15 percent for a delinquency of 45 days or more. 
(c)  All delinquent accounts, both license taxes and penalties, shall also be charged simple interest at the rate of one percent per month. 
(d)  Any person or employee who shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay a license fee as required by this chapter, or any employer who shall fail to withhold the license fees, or to pay over to city such license fees, penalties or interest imposed by this chapter, or any person required to file a return under the provisions of this chapter or state law, who shall fail, neglect or refuse to file such return, or any person or employer who shall refuse to permit the city clerk and treasurer or any agent or employee designated by him, in writing, to examine his books, records and papers for any purpose authorized by this chapter, or who shall knowingly make any incomplete, false or fraudulent return, or who shall attempt to do anything whatever to avoid the full disclosure of the amount of gross receipts or compensation in order to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of a license fee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-11. 
(Code § 22-10; Ord. No. 2560, § 10, 1-7-1992; Ord. No. 3358, § 16, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 22-17. - Prosecutions unaffected. 
    The adoption of this chapter shall not in any manner affect any prosecution of any act illegally done contrary to the provisions of any ordinance now or heretofore in existence, and every such prosecution, whether begun before or after the enactment of this chapter shall be governed by the law under which the offense was committed; nor shall a prosecution, or the right to prosecute, for the recovery of any penalty or the enforcement of any forfeiture be in any manner affected by the adoption of this chapter; nor shall any civil action or cause of action existing prior to or at the time of the adoption of this chapter be affected in any manner by its adoption. 
(Ord. No. 3358, § 17, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 22-18. - Procedure for denial of new applications. 
(a)  The city designee shall have the authority to investigate all applications and may refer any application to the city council for a determination of whether such license should or should not be issued. 
(b)  If the municipal governing body denies the issuance of any license referred to it, the municipal clerk shall promptly notify the applicant of the city council's decision. 
(c)  If said applicant desires to appear before the municipal governing body to show cause why said license should be issued, he shall file a written notice with the municipal clerk, said notice to be filed within two weeks from the date of mailing by the city clerk of the notice of the denial of such license by the municipal governing body. 
(d)  Upon receipt of said notice, the municipal clerk shall promptly schedule a hearing, to be held within 15 days from the date of receipt of such notice, before the city council and shall give the notice of the date, time, and place of said hearing to the applicant. 
(e)  The applicant shall be given the opportunity to appear personally, or through his counsel, or both, and the city council shall proceed to hear any evidence, which may be presented both for and against the issuance of said license. 
(f)  If the city council determines from the evidence presented that in order to either provide for the safety, preserve the health, promote the prosperity, or improve the morals, order, comfort and convenience of the inhabitants of the city said license should not be granted, it shall enter an order to that effect; otherwise, said license shall be ordered issued upon payment of any required license fees. 
(Ord. No. 3358, § 18, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 22-19. - Procedure for revocation or suspension of license. 
(a)  Any lawful license issued to any person to conduct any business shall be subject to revocation by the city council for the violation by the licensee, his agent, servant, or employee of any provision of this chapter or of any ordinance of the city, or any statute of the state relating to the business for which such license is issued; and shall also be subject to revocation by the city council if the licensee, his agent, servant, or employee under color of such license violates or aids or abets in violating or knowingly permits or suffers to be violated any penal ordinance of the city or any criminal law of the state; and shall also be subject to revocation by the city council if, in connection with the issuance or renewal of any license, the licensee or his agent filed or caused to be filed any application, affidavit, statement, certificate, book, or any other data containing any false, deceptive or other misleading information or omission of material fact. 
(b)  The conditions hereinabove set forth as grounds for the revocation of a license shall also constitute grounds for refusing to renew a license. 
(c)  The city council shall set a time for hearing on the matter of revoking or refusing to renew a license; and a notice of such hearing shall be given to the licensee, or the applicant for renewal, as the case may be, at least ten days before the day set for said hearing. At the hearing the city council shall hear all evidence offered by any party and all evidence that may be presented bearing upon the question of revocation or the refusal of renewal, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 3358, § 19, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 22-20. - Refunds on overpayments. 
(a)  Any taxpayer may file a petition for refund with the city for any overpayment of business license tax erroneously paid to the city. If a final assessment for the tax has been entered by the city, a petition for refund of all or a portion of the tax may be filed only if the final assessment has been paid in full prior to or simultaneously with the filing of the petition for refund. 
(b)  A petition for refund shall be filed with the city within two years from the date of payment of the business license tax, which is the subject of the petition. 
(c)  The city shall either grant or deny a petition for refund within six months from the date the petition is filed, unless the period is extended by written agreement of the taxpayer and the city. The taxpayer shall be notified of the city's decision concerning the petition for refund by first class U.S. mail or by certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested, sent to the taxpayer's last known address. If the city fails to grant a full refund within the time provided herein, the refund petition shall be deemed to be denied. 
(d)  If the petition is granted or the city or a court otherwise determines that a refund is due, the overpayment shall be promptly refunded to the taxpayer by the city, together with interest to the extent provided for in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-92. If the city determines that a refund is due, the amount of overpayment plus any interest due thereon may first be credited by the city against any outstanding tax liabilities due and owing by the taxpayer to the city, and the balance of any overpayment shall be promptly refunded to the taxpayer. If any refund or part thereof is credited to any other tax by the city, the taxpayer shall be provided with a written detailed statement showing the amount of overpayment, the amount credited for payment to other taxes, and the resulting amount of the refund. 
(e)  A taxpayer may appeal from the denial in whole or in part of a petition for refund by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the circuit court of the county in which the city denying the petition for refund is located. Said notice of appeal must be filed within two years from the date the petition was denied. The circuit court shall hear the appeal according to its own rules and procedures and shall determine the correct amount of refund due, if any. If an appeal is not filed with the appropriate circuit court within two years of the date the petition was denied, then the appeal shall be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 3358, § 20, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 22-21. - Delivery license. 
(a)  In lieu of any other type of license, a taxpayer may at its option purchase for $100.00 plus the issuance fee, a delivery license for the privilege of delivering its merchandise in the city if the taxpayer meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  Other than deliveries, the taxpayer has no other physical presence within the city or its police jurisdiction; 
(2)  The taxpayer conducts no other business in the city other than delivering merchandise and performing the requisite setup and installation of said merchandise; 
(3)  Such delivery and setup and installation is performed by the taxpayer's employees or agents, concerns the taxpayer's own merchandise in that city, and is done by means of delivery vehicles owned, leased, or contracted by the taxpayer; 
(4)  The gross receipts derived from the sale and any requisite setup or installation of all merchandise so delivered shall not exceed $75,000.00 during the license year; 
(5)  Any setup or installation shall relate only to: 
a.  That required by the contract between the taxpayer and the customer or as may be required by state or local law; and 
b.  The merchandise so delivered; 
(6)  If at any time during the current license year the taxpayer fails to meet any of the above stated criteria, then within ten days after any of said criteria have been violated or exceeded, the taxpayer shall purchase all appropriate business licenses from the city for the entire license year and without regard to this section. 
(b)  Mere delivery of the taxpayer's merchandise by common carrier shall not allow the city to assess a business license tax against the taxpayer, but the gross receipts derived from any sale and delivery accomplished by means of a common carrier shall be counted against the $75,000.00 limitation described in the preceding section if the taxpayer also during the same license year sells and delivers into the taxing jurisdiction using a delivery vehicle other than a common carrier. 
(c)  A common carrier, contract carrier, or similar delivery service making deliveries on behalf of others shall not be entitled to purchase a delivery license. 
(d)  The delivery license shall be calculated in arrears, based on the related gross receipts during the preceding license year. 
(e)  The purchase of a delivery license shall not, in and of itself, establish nexus between the taxpayer and the city for purposes of the taxes levied by or under the authority of Code of Ala. 1975, tit. 40 or other provisions of law, nor does the purchase of a delivery license conclusively determine that nexus does not exist between the taxpayer and the city. 
(Ord. No. 3358, § 21, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 22-22. - License classifications. 
    The following is a schedule of icense classifications: 
Code 2002 NAICS Titles/ 
Business License Codes Schedule 111998 Farming and crop production - agriculture, crop production, nursery, fruit, growers 5A 112990 Animal production - dairy, cattle, ranching, sheep, chickens, poultry 5I 113110 Forestry - logging, forestry, timber track operations, timber management 5I 114119 Fishing and hunting - hunting and trapping, finfish, shellfish, supplies 5I 115114 Agriculture support - cotton gins, farm management, post-harvest activities 5I 211111 Oil and gas extraction - natural gas liquid extraction crude extraction 5I 212299 Mining (except for oil and gas) all related mining activities 5I 213112 Mining support services - for oil and gas mining activities, oil/gas wells 5I 221122 Utilities - electric power or light company State 
regulated 221210 Utilities - natural gas company State 
regulated 221310 Utilities - water, sewage treatment, steam, and other State 
regulated 236220 Contractors - general contractors, commercial building, residential, subdivisions 2A General contractor - each person who, for a fixed price, commission, fee or wage, undertakes to construct, superintend, or engage in the construction, alteration, maintenance, repair, rehabilitation, remediation, reclamation, or demolition of any building, highway, sewer, structure, site work, grading, paving or project or any improvement where the cost of the undertaking is $50,000.00 in value, must be licensed by the Home Builders Licensure Board of Alabama. In addition, one who for a fixed price, fee, commission or wage exceeding $5,000.00 in value undertakes the construction or superintendents of construction, repair or renovation of a swimming pool is required to have a general contractor's license and must be licensed by the Home Builders Licensure Board. A residential home builder - one who constructs a residence or structure for sale or who, for a fixed price, commission, fee or wage undertakes or offers to undertake the construction or superintending the construction of any residence or structure which is not more than three floors in height and which does not have more than four units in an apartment complex or to repair, improve or re-improve thereof, to be used by another as a residence when the cost of the undertaking exceeds $10,000.00. Must be licensed by the Home Builders Licensure Board of Alabama. 237990 Contractors - heavy construction, highway, bridge, street, water, sewer 2B 238220 Contractors - specialty trade - plumbing, heating and air conditioning. Must be state licensed by appropriate state board. 2B 238320 Contractors - specialty trade - painting and wall covering 2B 238210 Contractors - specialty trade - electrical contractors. Must be state licensed by appropriate state board. 2B 238140 Contractors - specialty trade - masonry and stone contractors 2B 238310 Contractors - specialty trade - drywall, acoustical and insulation 2B 238340 Contractors - specialty trade - tile, marble, terrazzo and mosaic 2B 238350 Contractors - specialty trade - carpentry contractors 2B 238330 Contractors - specialty trade - floor coverings/all types 2B 238160 Contractors - specialty trade - roofing, siding and sheet metal 2B 238110 Contractors - specialty trade - concrete contractors 2B 237110 Contractors - specialty trade - water well drilling and irrigation 2B 238120 Contractors - specialty trade - structural steel erection 2B 238150 Contractors - specialty trade - glass and glazing contractors 2B 238910 Contractors - specialty trade - excavation and site development 2B 238910 Contractors - specialty trade - wrecking and demolition 2B 238290 Contractors - specialty trade - building equipment and mechanical install 2B 238130 Contractors - specialty trades contractors-non-general and non-heavy 2B 238990 Contractors-all other specialty contractors 2B 311991 Food manufacturing - meat, seafood, grain, fruit, dairy, animal, poultry processing 5I 312212 Beverage manufacturing - all types of soft drinks, bottled water, breweries, ice 5I 313112 Textile manufacturing - fabric, yarn, carpet, canvas, rope, twine, fabric mills 5I 314129 Other manufacturing - mill operations not covered in 313, rugs, linen, curtains 5J 315999 Apparel manufacturing - women, men, children, hosiery, lingerie outerwear, accessories 5I 316993 Leather and allied products manufacturing - shoes, luggage, handbag, related products, all footwear 5I 321999 Wood manufacturing - sawmills, wood preservation, veneer, trusses, millwork 5I 322229 Paper manufacturing - pulp, paper, and converted products, stationary, tubes, cores 5I 323110 Printing - screen, quick, digital, books, lithographic, handbills, commercial 5I 324199 Petroleum and coal manufacturing - asphalt, grease, roofing, paving products 5I 325998 Chemical manufacturing - of fertilizer, wood, pesticide, paint, soap, and resin 5I 326291 Plastic and rubber manufacturing - tires, pipe, hoses, belts, bottles, sheet, wrap, film 5I 327331 Nonmetallic manufacturing - clay, glass, cement, lime, pottery, ceramic, brick, tile 5I 331521 Primary metal manufacturing - iron, steel, aluminum, wire, copper, foundries 5I 332999 Metal fabrication - cutlery, structural, ornamental, machine shops 5I 333990 Machinery manufacturing - office machinery, industrial, engines, farm, HVAC 5I 334419 Computer and electronic manufacturing - audio, video, circuit boards, peripherals 5I 335211 Appliance manufacturing - small appliance, lighting, electrical, battery, freezer 5I 336112 Transportation manufacturing - manufacturing auto, truck, trailer, motor home, boat, ship and motorcycle 5I, E 337129 Furniture manufacturing - cabinets, office, household, beds, kitchen 2B 339999 Miscellaneous manufacturing - miscellaneous manufacturing, medical, dental, jewelry, sporting goods, toys, signs, all other 5I 421990 Wholesale trade - durable, vehicle, machinery, equipment, furniture 5I 422490 Wholesale trade - nondurable, paper, apparel, grocery, beverages, dairy 5I 422720 Wholesale trade - nondurable, wholesale gasoline distributor 5I 441310 Motor vehicle parts and accessories - auto, motorcycles, boats, parts and accessories 5A 441110 Motor vehicles-new and/or used automobiles, motorcycles, boats, etc., dealerships and lots 5A 442110 Furniture - furniture, home furnishings, stores, floor coverings, window 5A 443112 Electronic and appliance store - household, radio, television, computers 5A 444130 Building materials and gardening equipment dealers - hardware, paint, home center, wallpaper, nursery 5A 445120 Food and beverage stores - grocery, convenience store, markets 5A 445310 Package stores - selling beer, wine and liquor plus general merchandise 5A 446110 Health and personal care stores - drug, pharmacy, cosmetic, optical, health food 5A 447110 Gasoline retail - selling gasoline with or without convenience stores 5C 448190 Clothing and accessories - men, women, children, infant, shoe, jewelry 5A 451110 Sporting goods and hobbies - toy, fish, gun, books, games 5A 452990 General merchandise stores - department, warehouse clubs, superstores 5H 453310 Used merchandise stores - books, miscellaneous, consignment 5A 453220 Miscellaneous retailers - florist, gift, novelty, pet, art, tobacco, fireworks 5A 454210 Nonstore retailers - vending machine operators, direct selling, mail order 5F 454390 Other direct selling establishment - flea market operators 5I 454391 Nonstore retailer - other direct selling, peddler's license. Fruit/vegetable (temporary location) selling retail on streets, temporary vendors/commercial promoted special events 5D 481111 Air transportation - airline tickets, shipping, freight, charters service 5I 482110 Rail transportation - transportation, ticket offices, state regulated 11-51-124 5I 484110 Truck transportation - local, long-distance, freight, moving, and storage 5I 484230 Truck transportation - terminal - state regulated 37-3-33 State 
regulated 485114 Passenger transportation - bus terminals state regulated 37-3-33 State 
regulated 485320 Passenger transportation - buses, taxicabs, limousine service, buggy charters 8A 492110 Couriers - couriers and local messengers, services, local delivery services 5I 493110 Warehousing and storage - distribution, household, refrigerated, special (this does not include mini-warehouses and self-storage units # 531130) 5I 511110 Publishing industries except internet - newspaper, book, periodical, databases, software databases, software 5A 512131 Motion pictures - theatres, videos, recording, drive-ins, sound studios 8A 515112 Broadcasting - radio and television stations 5I 517310 Telecommunications - telephone local per Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-128 10A 517320 Telecommunications - telephone long distance per Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-128 10A 517212 Telecommunications - cellular and other wireless, paging 10A 517315 Telecommunications - resellers of service 10A 517510 Cable and other program distributions - cable and satellite providers 10A 519190 Information services and data processing - providing, storing, processing, access to information 5I 522110 Bank main office - not branch location or ATM 3A 522111 Bank branch or ATM - not main office of bank 3A 522120 Savings and loans - not branch location or ATM 3A 522121 Savings and loans branch or ATM - not main office of savings and loans 3A 522298 Pawnshop - whether title pawn or merchandise 5I 522390 Credit services - companies and activities related to credit and mediation check cashing, money order issuance, travelers check services, western union 3A 523999 Securities, commodity - brokerage, portfolio, investment, other financial services 3B 524126 Insurance company and/or its agents - casualty, fire, and/or marine premiums Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-51-120, 11-51-123 4C 524128 Insurance company and/or its agents - health, allied and all other premiums Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-51-120, 11-51-123 4D 524210 Agent office - administration of third parties, pension funds, annuities, etc. 4A 525990 Funds, trusts, other financial agencies - funds, plans, and/or programs organized to pool securities or other assets for others, other than the Alabama Municipal Funding Corp. 3C 531110 Lessors of residential buildings and dwellings - houses, apartments, duplex, mobile home, buildings. All lease/rental buildings/dwellings must comply with all applicable building and housing codes required by the city. Failure to comply will result in the revocation of license. 7E 531120 Lessor of nonresidential buildings (except mini-warehouses) 7A 531130 Rental and leasing - mini-warehouses and self-storage units 5I 531190 Lessor of other real estate property 7A 531210 Real estate - offices, agents, brokers, management. Must hold a license issued by the Alabama Real Estate Commission. 7B 532230 Rental and leasing - movie and video rental 5I 532310 Rental and leasing - auto, truck trailer, RV, all tangible property 5I 532490 Other rental and leasing - commercial, industrial, communication towers. (Any person that owns any tower or structure erected for the purpose of commercially using, leasing, renting or selling antenna or dish space for the receiving and/or broadcasting or relaying of wireless telephone, television, radio, microwave, or other communication signals. All towers must be permitted under other existing city ordinances prior to being licensed.) 5I 541110 Attorney/lawyers - individual and/or firm professional license 6 541111 Physician - individual and/or firm professional license. Must be licensed by appropriate state board. 6 541211 Accountant/CPAs - individual and/or firm professional license. Must be licensed by appropriate state board. 6 541213 Tax return preparation services 6 541310 Architect - individual and/or firm professional license. Must be licensed by appropriate state board. 6 541210 Dentist - individual and/or firm professional license. Must be licensed by appropriate state board. 6 541311 Chiropractor - individual and/or firm professional license. Must be licensed by appropriate state board. 6 541320 Optometrist - individual and/or firm professional license. Must be licensed by appropriate state board. 6 541330 Engineer - individual and/or firm professional license. Must be licensed by appropriate state board. 6 541360 Surveyor - individual and/or firm professional license (local). Must be licensed by appropriate state board. 6 541511 Computer programmer - individual and/or professional firm license 6 541810 Advertising agencies 6 541921 Photographer - studios, portrait, commercial, services 6 541940 Veterinarian - individual and/or firm professional license. Must be licensed by appropriate state board. 6 541990 Professional services not elsewhere classified - scientific, technical, interpreters 6 551990 Management companies - offices, enterprises, regional, corporate 6 561491 Repossession services-automobiles, boats, furniture, appliances, etc. 5I 561499 Administrative services-answering, employment, office, secretary 8A 561510 Travel agencies - travel, tour, accommodation services 5A 561621 Security systems services - alarms, monitoring. Must be licensed by the Alabama Electronic Security Board. 5I 561622 Locksmiths - shops, services, sales, repairs. Must be certified by the Alabama Electronic Security Board. 5A 561623 Locksmiths - automobile - does not require certification 5A 561710 Exterminating services - exterminating company and its services 8A 561720 Janitorial firm - janitorial cleaning services - individual or firm 8A 561730 Landscaping services - installing trees, shrubs, plants, gardens, lawns, retaining walls, care and maintenance of such. Must be certified by the department of agriculture. 6 561731 Lawn maintenance - mowing, trimming, routine maintenance of lawns or yards 8A 562111 Solid waste collection - garbage pick-up and hauling services. Must have franchise with the city. 8A 562212 Landfills - solid waste disposal, sludge disposal, trash disposal 5I 562991 Septic tank-pumping, cleaning, installation, renting of portable toilets. Must be state license by Alabama on Site Waste Water Board. 2C 562998 Waste management - grease traps, sewer clean-outs, storm basin, tank cleaning, disposal services 2C 611699 Educational services - technical, computer, sports, services, business 6 621111 Offices of physicians-individual and/or firm-private or clinics, centers 6 621210 Offices of dentist - individual and/or firm-private or clinics, centers 6 621310 Chiropractor - individual and/or firm - private or clinics, centers 6 621320 Optometrist - individual and/or firm-private or clinics, centers 6 621320 HMO - medical centers and services 11 621498 Outpatient Care Centers - all other types of services 11 621610 Home healthcare services - skilled nursing and personal care services in the home 11 621910 Ambulance - ambulance company and/or services (private operated) 8A 622110 Hospitals - surgical, substance abuse, psychiatric, general care, special 11 623110 Nursing care facilities - nursing homes - residential care facility, skilled nursing and rehabilitation care 11 623312 Home for elderly - care for elderly and continuing care facilities without skilled nursing care 11 624110 Social assistance - shelters, vocational, childcare, abuse, emergency assistant services, rehabilitation services 11 624410 Child day care services - day care center, pre-school centers 6B 711310 Arts and sports - dance companies, musical, teams, tracks, promoters, agents,boxing events, beauty pageants, rodeos, festivals, circus,non-school sports events - special events 5I 712110 Museums - museums and historical sites, zoos, botanical gardens, parks. Each person engaged in the business of owning or operating an arcade or game room in the city shall first consult with the police chief of the city and seek approval of the city council. 5A 713940 Fitness centers, health spas, recreational sports centers 8A 713990 All other musical and recreational industries 8A 721110 Accommodations - hotels, motels and similar facilities 7D 721191 Accommodations - bed and breakfast inns and services 7D 721211 Accommodations - RV parks, and travel trailer parks, campsites 7E 721310 Accommodations - roominghouses and boardinghouses 7D 722110 Restaurant - full service restaurant facility 5A 722211 Restaurant - limited facility or service (fast food, drive-in) 5A 722320 Caterers - and/or mobile food services 8A 722330 Mobile food services - (mobile) food stands, snack stands 8A 722410 Drinking establishment - club, lounge, bar or other 5I 811111 General automotive repair - engine replacement, repair 2B 811118 Repairs and maintenance - auto, paint/body, carwash, tuneup 2B 811192 Carwash, detailing 8A 811219 Repairs and maintenance - all electronic equipment 8A 811412 Repairs and maintenance - all appliances, home and garden equipment 8A 812111 Barbershops 6B 812112 Beauty salons 6B 812113 Nail salons 5I 812197 Tanning beds/salon 5I 812199 Other personal services - diet center, tattoo, body piercing, massage 5I 812210 Funeral homes and funeral services. Must have state license. 5I 812310 Coin-operated laundries and drycleaners 5A 812320 Dry cleaners and laundry services, except coin-operated 5A 812332 Industrial launderers and uniform supply 5I 812930 Parking lots and garages 5I 812990 All other personal services - bail bonding, wedding planner 8A 812991 Fortuneteller or clairvoyant - individual reader license 5I 910001 Category for number of - vending machines for all types vending 5F 910002 Category for number of - pool tables. Must be approved by the city council and operated only inside the corporate limits 5F 910003 Category for number of - amusement devices and/or games $35.00 920005 Category for number of - employees as a basis for calculating license E 930006 Category for number of - square feet used for calculating license amount S 999111 Unclassified miscellaneous business services not elsewhere classified wrecker services, meter readers, inventory computing, etc. 5I 999222 Unclassified miscellaneous personal services not elsewhere classified 5I  
(Ord. No. 3358, § 22, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 22-23. - License fee schedules. 
    The license fee schedule shall be governed by the license code of the city adopted by Ordinance No. 2418 and as amended by Ordinance Nos. 2555, 2556, 2592, 2667 and 3036. 
(Ord. No. 3358, § 23, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 22-24. - Exchange of information. 
(a)  The license officer may exchange tax returns, information, records, and other documents secured by the city, with other municipalities adopting similar ordinances for the exchange of taxpayer information, or with county or state authorities. The license officer may charge a reasonable fee for providing such information or documents. Any tax returns, information, records, or other documents so exchanged shall remain subject to the confidentiality provisions, restrictions, and criminal penalties for unauthorized disclosure as provided under state or city law. 
(b)  Any such exchange shall be for one or more of the following purposes: 
(1)  Collecting taxes due. 
(2)  Ascertaining the amount of taxes due from any person. 
(3)  Determining whether a person is liable for, or whether there is probable cause for believing a person might be liable for, the payment of any tax to a state, county, or city agency. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall prohibit the use of tax returns or tax information by the city in the proper administration of any matter administered by the license officer. The license officer may also divulge to a purchaser, prospective purchaser as defined pursuant to the regulations of the state department of revenue, or successor of a business or stock of goods the outstanding sales, use, or rental tax liability of the seller for which the purchaser, prospective purchaser as defined pursuant to the regulations of the state department of revenue, or successor may be liable pursuant to the Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-25, 40-23-82, or 40-12-224. 
(Ord. No. 3358, § 24, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 22-25. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3468, adopted Aug. 16, 2011, repealed § 22-25 which pertained to license fees in police jurisdiction, and derived from Ord. No. 3358, § 25, adopted Dec. 18, 2007. 
Secs. 22-26-22-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Alarm system installers generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-1A-1 et seq.; municipal authority to regulate alarm installation through licenses, fees, and inspections, Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-1A-8. 

Sec. 22-54. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm equipment supplier means any person selling, leasing, installing, repairing or maintaining automatic protection devices or signaling devices. 
    Alarm system means an automatic protection device or signaling device, or both, which sends a voice alarm or other signal over regular public telephone lines or by regular frequency to the police department of the city upon detection of an unauthorized intrusion. 
    Automatic protection device means an electrically operated instrument which automatically sends a voice alarm or other signal over regular public telephone lines or by radio frequency to the police department of the city upon detection of an unauthorized intrusion. 
    False alarm means an alarm signal transmitted or made by an alarm system or automatic detection device which indicated the existence of an emergency situation and such situation is transmitted to the police department of the city when, in fact, no such emergency situation exists. 
    Signaling device means an electrically operated instrument, other than an automatic protection device, which transmits alarms upon receipt of a stimulus from a detection apparatus. 
(Code 1995, § 22-86; Ord. No. 2570, § 1, 5-26-1992) 
Sec. 22-55. - Service charge for false alarms. 
    In addition to other penalties for violations of this article, there shall be levied and charged a service charge per false alarm upon such persons whose alarm emits in excess of three false alarms within 90 days after such system has been installed for more than 60 days. The amount of the service charge shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 22-88; Ord. No. 2570, § 2, 5-26-1992) 
Sec. 22-56. - Automatic protection devices and signaling devices; installation requirements. 
(a)  Prior written approval of police or fire department. It shall be unlawful for any person to install, operate or maintain any automatic protection device which automatically transmits a message or warning to the city police department or fire department telephone lines or numbers without prior written approval of the police or fire department. 
(b)  Service organization and business license required to sell, install or repair. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in selling, leasing, installing, repairing or maintaining automatic protection devices or signaling devices in the city unless such person maintains a service organization capable of promptly and efficiently repairing, maintaining and otherwise servicing such systems or devices, and unless such person has complied with the other provisions of this article and has obtained a valid business license in the city. 
(c)  Permit from police or fire chief; fee. No alarm equipment supplier shall sell, lease or install in an institution, a public or commercial building in the city or its police jurisdiction any automatic protection device or signaling device without applying for and securing a permit from the chief of police or fire chief or his designee upon a form to be furnished by the city. A fee as provided in the city license schedule shall accompany each application for an alarm installation. This fee shall not be refundable in instances in which the permit is refused. 
(d)  Report to police or fire chief of location; patron; installer. An alarm equipment supplier, prior to installing, repairing, testing or servicing any alarm system, shall report to the chief of police or fire chief or their designee the address or location at which such installation, repair, test or servicing is to be performed, the name of the person requesting the same and the name and resident of the person who are to make such installation. 
(e)  Filing of employee list with police or fire chief. Each alarm equipment supplier now or hereafter doing business in the city shall file with the chief of police and fire chief on or before the first day of each calendar month a list setting out the name, date of birth and residence address of each person employed by such alarm equipment supplier during the immediately preceding calendar month. 
(f)  Alarm audibility time limit; in excess declared nuisance. No person shall install, operate or maintain in the city any signaling device which is designed to emit or which may be permitted to emit a sound alarm which is audible on a public street or adjacent premises for a continuous period of time of more than 15 minutes. Alarms ringing for a period in excess of 15 minutes are declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Code 1995, § 22-89; Ord. No. 2570, § 3, 5-26-1992) 
Sec. 22-57. - False alarms. 
(a)  Create safety hazard; danger of auto collision; police and firefighter diversion. The city council hereby finds that false alarms in the city constitute a hazard to the safety of police officers and firefighters of the city and the public in general. False alarms enhance the dangers of automobile collisions en route to burglary, robbery or fire alarms, substantially increase police officers' and firefighters' man-hour costs and divert police and fire resources from regularly assigned duties. 
(b)  Responsibility of operator. Each person upon whose premises or upon premises in his charge, control or possession on which there is maintained or operated an alarm system, shall be responsible for all false alarms transmitted by such alarm system. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain an alarm system on any premises owned by him or in his charge, control or possession which transmits or emits in excess of three false alarms within 90 days after such system has been installed for more than 60 days. 
(c)  Report of corrective action by operator. The chief of police or fire chief may require from the appropriate person using, servicing, possessing or maintaining a faulty alarm system, proprietor alarm or audible alarm, a report in writing, within such reasonable period as is specified by the chief of police or fire chief, describing the corrective action which has been and will be taken to ensure the violation of this section will not reoccur. 
(Code 1995, § 22-90; Ord. No. 2570, § 4, 5-26-1992) 
Sec. 22-58. - Restrictions on use of alarm systems. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause or commit to be made or caused, upon any premises occupied or controlled by him, any loud and unnecessary noise or sound emitted from an audible alarm system which is physically annoying to persons or which is so harsh or so prolonged in its use, time and place as to occasion physical discomfort, or which is injurious to the health, peace, comfort, privacy or tranquility of the inhabitants of the city or to any one of them. It shall be considered a violation of this article for an audible alarm system to emit a sound, otherwise herein prohibited, for a time longer than 15 consecutive minutes or for such other length of time as may be prescribed by written agreement with the city police chief. This section shall apply to audible alarm systems, whether now or hereafter installed. 
(Code 1995, § 22-91; Ord. No. 2570, § 5, 5-26-1992) 
Secs. 22-59-22-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DETECTIVES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- State and county license requirements for detective agencies, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-12-93. 

Sec. 22-90. - License application; contents; fee; bond. 
(a)  Applicants for a license as a private investigator or detective as required by section 22-6, shall file letters of application with the chief of police. 
(b)  The application shall contain: 
(1)  Personal data of the applicant as to his date of birth, place of birth, education, law enforcement experience and business experience; 
(2)  A complete and detailed record of any civil suits or criminal cases in which the applicant has been either a party or a witness; 
(3)  The applicant's present address and place of employment; and 
(4)  The name of at least three references as to the applicant's moral character. 
(c)  The applicant shall tender with his application a sum of money for the first year's license. 
(d)  The applicant shall submit with his application a surety bond in the sum of $50,000.00 with a guaranty bonding company authorized to do business in the state as surety to indemnify anyone who may be injured by the words or acts of the applicant in following the vocation, profession or business as a private investigator or detective. 
(Code 1973, § 7-107; Code 1995, § 22-111) 
Sec. 22-91. - Investigation of applicant required. 
    The chief of police shall make an investigation of each applicant for a license as a private investigator or detective, as required by section 22-6. After a full and complete investigation he shall recommend to the city council whether a license should be granted to such person. 
(Code 1973, § 7-108; Code 1995, § 22-112) 
Sec. 22-92. - Approval of city council required; filing bond. 
(a)  A license as required in section 22-90 as a private investigator or detective shall be issued only on the approval of the city council after recommendation by the chief of police. 
(b)  On the issuance of a license, the surety bond filed by the applicant shall be filed in the office of the county probate judge, city division. The cost of such recording shall be added to the license fee. 
(Code 1973, § 7-109; Code 1995, § 22-113) 
Secs. 22-93-22-114. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GARAGE AND YARD SALES 

Sec. 22-115. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Garage sale means the sale of surplus or unwanted personal property accumulated in the maintenance or operation of a home or dwelling. 
    Rummage sale means the sale of personal property belonging to a religious, charitable, civic or service organization or the sale of such personal property for the benefit of a religious, charitable, civic or service organization. 
    Yard sale means a synonym for a garage sale or rummage sale and having the same meaning and/or purpose. 
(Code 1995, § 22-136) 
Sec. 22-116. - Permit required; fee. 
    Prior to the commencement of any such garage sale, rummage sale or yard sale within the corporate limits of the city a permit must first be obtained from the license department, an application for which shall be made in writing to the license department accompanied by a fee as provided in the city license schedule and by a list of the names of all owners of the property participating in the sale. 
(Code 1995, § 22-138; Ord. No. 2208, 7-5-1983) 
Sec. 22-117. - Conduct of sales. 
(a)  Frequency. No person or organization shall conduct such a sale more than once during any six consecutive months. 
(b)  Duration. No garage, rummage or yard sale shall continue for more than three consecutive days. 
(c)  By permittee. All such sales shall be conducted by the permittee who shall be one of the owners of property offered for sale. 
(d)  Location. All garage or yard sales shall be conducted at the residence of the permittee, all rummage or yard sales shall be conducted at the sites of a religious, charitable, civic or service organization, or such other place as shall be designated in the permit. 
(Code 1995, § 22-139; Ord. No. 2208, 7-5-1983) 
Sec. 22-118. - Signs; advertisement. 
(a)  No yard sign having an area of more than six square feet shall be permitted, nor shall any illuminated or animated sign be displayed. No sign shall be displayed prior to one day before the date of the sale, and all such signs shall be removed no later than the day next following the last day of such sale. 
(b)  No advertisement of any garage or rummage or yard sale shall be permitted on public property. 
(Code 1995, § 22-140; Ord. No. 2208, 7-5-1983) 
Secs. 22-119-22-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SALES OF GASOLINE AND LUBRICATING OIL[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Weights and measures generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 8-16-1 et seq.; regulation of petroleum products generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 8-17-80 et seq.; motor fuels marketing generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 8-22-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-150. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Distributor or seller means every person who engages in selling or delivering gasoline, or who engages in selling or delivering lubricating oils to the retail trade, within the city limits, or shipping, transporting or delivering such gasoline or lubricating oils, at or from his storage point or place of business within the city limits to any point within the city limits. 
    Gasoline means gasoline, naphtha and all other motor fuels commonly used in combustion engines; but shall exclude kerosene oil. 
(Code 1973, § 7-71; Code 1995, § 22-161) 
Sec. 22-151. - License tax-Gasoline. 
    Every distributor or seller shall pay a license tax to the city in an amount provided in the city license schedule on every gallon of gasoline sold or delivered within the city limits or shipped, transported or delivered by a distributor or seller at or from his storage point or place of business within the city limits to any point within the city limits. 
(Code 1973, § 7-72; Code 1995, § 22-162) 
Sec. 22-152. - Same-Lubricating oils. 
    In addition to the license tax provided for in section 22-151, every retail distributor or seller of lubricating oils, or any substitute therefor, shall pay a license tax to the city in an amount provided in the city license schedule on every quart of such lubricating oils sold or delivered to the retail trade within the city limits. 
(Code 1973, § 7-73; Code 1995, § 22-163) 
Sec. 22-153. - Same-Within police jurisdiction. 
    The license tax of every distributor or seller of motor fuels and lubricating oils, having his place of business wholly within the police jurisdiction of the city, and having no place of business within the city limits, shall pay a license tax as provided in the city license schedule. 
(Code 1973, § 7-74; Code 1995, § 22-164) 
Sec. 22-154. - Distributors and sellers outside city; license taxes. 
    No distributor or seller having no place of business within the city limits, or the city's police jurisdiction, shall make any sales or deliveries of gasoline, or sell to the retail trade or public lubricating oil therein without first obtaining a license from the city clerk and treasurer to do so. Such seller or distributor shall be liable for and shall pay the same license tax as that fixed and specified in section 22-151. 
(Code 1973, § 7-75; Code 1995, § 22-165) 
Secs. 22-155-22-176. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GASOLINE METERS 

Sec. 22-177. - Required; sellers. 
    Every person selling gasoline at retail within the city limits shall have the gasoline measured through meters. Every gasoline pump, or other container by whatever name through which the gasoline is delivered, shall be equipped with a meter. 
(Code 1973, § 7-77; Code 1995, § 22-176) 
Sec. 22-178. - Consumers' pumps; meters required. 
    Each pump, tank or other container owned and used by any consumer of gasoline who is not a dealer shall be equipped with a meter to indicate the true measurement of gasoline discharged from such tank, pump or container. 
(Code 1973, § 7-78; Code 1995, § 22-177) 
Sec. 22-179. - Specification of meters; inspection; attachment to pumps or containers. 
(a)  The meters specified in this article shall be of a standard type to meet the specifications of the inspector of weights and measures. The meters shall be subject to inspection at all times by the inspector. Such meters shall be read at prescribed intervals by such inspector. 
(b)  The meters shall be properly attached to pumps or containers so as to show the true reading and measurement of the gasoline discharged by such vessel. They shall be so attached as to be conveniently read. 
(Code 1973, § 7-79; Code 1995, § 22-178) 
Sec. 22-180. - Tampering with meters; record of readings. 
(a)  No person shall tamper with the meters attached to gasoline pumps or containers or turn back the reading on the meter except under orders of the inspector of weights and measures. 
(b)  A correct record shall be made and kept of the readings of the meters and of any turning back of the indicators on the meters. 
(Code 1973, § 7-80; Code 1995, § 22-179) 
Sec. 22-181. - Filling station license; meters required. 
    The city clerk and treasurer shall not issue a license for the operation of any gasoline filling station unless the pumps and containers used and to be used in such station have been metered as required in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 7-81; Code 1995, § 22-180) 
Secs. 22-182-22-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Going-out-of-business sales generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 8-13-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-201. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fire and other altered goods sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer goods damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water or other means. 
    Going-out-of-business sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand the business will cease and be discontinued at its present location, including, but not limited to, the following sales: adjuster's, adjustment, alteration, assignee's, bankrupt, benefit of administrator's, benefit of creditors', benefit of trustees, building coming down, closing, creditor's committee, creditor's end, executor's final days, forced out of business, insolvents, last days, lease expires, liquidation, loss of lease, mortgage sale, receiver's, trustee's, and quitting business. 
    Goods means any goods, wares, merchandise or other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated under this article. 
    Removal-of-business sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale will cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand and will then move to and resume business at a new location in the city or will then continue business from other existing locations in the city. 
(Code 1973, § 7-49; Code 1995, § 22-202) 
Sec. 22-202. - Article supplemental to license schedule. 
    The provisions of this article are intended to augment and be in addition to the provisions of the city license schedule. Where this article imposes a greater restriction upon persons, premises, businesses, or practices than is imposed by the city license schedule then this article shall control. 
(Code 1973, § 7-51; Code 1995, § 22-201) 
Sec. 22-203. - Exemptions to article. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following persons: 
(1)  Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials. 
(3)  Duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auction. 
(4)  Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication, who publishes in good faith, any advertisement, without knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character, or that the provisions of this article have not been complied with. 
(Code 1973, § 7-52; Code 1995, § 22-203) 
Secs. 22-204-22-229. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

Sec. 22-230. - Required. 
    A license issued by the city clerk and treasurer shall be obtained by any person before selling or offering to sell any goods at a sale to be advertised or held out by any means to be one of the following kinds: 
(1)  Going-out-of-business sale; 
(2)  Removal-of-business sale; and 
(3)  Fire and other altered stock sale. 
(Code 1973, § 7-50; Code 1995, § 22-216) 
Sec. 22-231. - Established business a requisite; exception. 
(a)  Any person who has not been the owner of a business advertised or described in the application for a license for a period of at least 12 months prior to the date of the proposed sale shall not be granted a license. 
(b)  Upon the death of a person doing business in this city his heirs, devisees or legatees shall have the right to apply at any time for a license under this article. 
(Code 1973, § 7-53; Code 1995, § 22-217) 
Sec. 22-232. - Interval between sales. 
    Any person who has held a sale, as regulated under this article, at the location stated in the application, within one year from the date of such application shall not be granted a license. 
(Code 1973, § 7-54; Code 1995, § 22-218) 
Sec. 22-233. - Restricted to one location. 
    Where a person applying for a license under this article operates more than one place of business, the license issued shall apply only to the one store or branch specified in the application. No other store or branch shall advertise or represent that it is cooperating with the licensed location, or in any way participating in the licensed sale. No licensed location shall advertise or represent that any other store or branch is cooperating with it or participating in any way in the licensed sale. 
(Code 1973, § 7-55; Code 1995, § 22-219) 
Sec. 22-234. - Application; contents. 
(a)  A person desiring to conduct a sale regulated by this article shall make a written application to the revenue department. 
(b)  The application shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The true name and address of the owner of the goods to be the object of the sale. 
(2)  The true name and address of the person from whom he purchased the goods to be sold and the price therefor, and if not purchased, the manner of such acquisition. 
(3)  A description of the place where such sale is to be held. 
(4)  The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease and the effective date of termination of such occupancy. 
(5)  The dates of the period of time in which the sale is to be conducted. 
(6)  A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to the sale, including the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of goods thereby and the manner in which the sale will be conducted. 
(7)  The means to be employed in advertising such sale together with the proposed content of any advertisement. 
(c)  The application shall be accompanied by an inventory as prescribed in section 22-235. 
(Code 1973, § 7-56; Code 1995, § 22-220) 
Sec. 22-235. - Inventory required with application; goods. 
(a)  The applicant shall attach to his application a complete and detailed inventory of the goods to be sold at such sale as disclosed by the applicant's records. 
(b)  All goods included in such inventory shall have been purchased by the applicant for resale on bona fide orders without cancellation privileges and shall not comprise goods purchased on consignment. 
(c)  An inventory shall not include goods ordered in contemplation of conducting a sale regulated under this article. Any unusual purchase or additions to the stock of goods of the business affected within 90 days before the filing of an application shall be deemed to be of such character. 
(Code 1973, § 7-57; Code 1995, § 22-221) 
Sec. 22-236. - Fee; renewal. 
(a)  Any applicant for a license under this article shall submit to the revenue department with his application a license fee as provided in the city license schedule. 
(b)  Any applicant for a renewal license shall submit to the revenue department with his renewal application a renewal license fee as provided in the city license schedule. 
(Code 1973, § 7-58; Code 1995, § 22-222) 
Sec. 22-237. - Term. 
    A license issued under this article shall authorize the sale described in the application for a period of not more than 45 consecutive days, Sundays and legal holidays excluded, following its issuance. 
(Code 1973, § 7-59; Code 1995, § 22-223) 
Sec. 22-238. - Renewal procedure. 
(a)  The revenue department shall renew a license for one period of time only. This period shall be in addition to the 45 days permitted in the original license and shall not exceed 36 consecutive days, Sundays and holidays excluded, when he finds: 
(1)  Facts exist justifying the license renewal. 
(2)  The licensee has filed an application for renewal. 
(3)  The licensee has submitted with the application for renewal a revised inventory showing the items listed on the original inventory remaining unsold and not listing any goods not included in the original application and inventory. 
(b)  For the purposes of subsection (a)(3) of this section, any application for a license under the provisions of this article covering any goods previously inventoried as required, shall be deemed to be an application for renewal, whether presented by the original applicant, or by any other person. 
(Code 1973, § 7-60; Code 1995, § 22-224) 
Sec. 22-239. - Nature of sale; goods. 
(a)  The license shall authorize only the one type of sale described in the application at the location named in the application. 
(b)  The license shall authorize only the sale of goods described in the inventory attached to the application. 
(Code 1973, § 7-61; Code 1995, § 22-225) 
Sec. 22-240. - Surrender. 
    Upon being issued a license under this article for a going-out-of-business sale, the licensee shall surrender to the revenue department all other business licenses he may hold at that time applicable to the location and goods covered by the application for a license under this article. 
(Code 1973, § 7-62; Code 1995, § 22-226) 
Sec. 22-241. - Transferability. 
    Any license provided for in this article shall not be assignable or transferable. 
(Code 1973, § 7-63; Code 1995, § 22-227) 
Sec. 22-242. - Licensee's duties. 
    A licensee under this article shall: 
(1)  Make no additions whatsoever, during the period of the licensed sale, to the stock of goods set forth in the inventory attached to the application for license. 
(2)  Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or misleading advertising. 
(3)  Conduct the licensed sale in strict conformity with any advertising or holding out incident thereto. 
(4)  Keep available at the place of sale a duplicate copy of the inventory submitted with the application and present such duplicate to inspecting officials upon request. 
(5)  Keep any noninventoried goods separated and apart from the goods listed in the filed inventory as being objects of sale and shall make such distinction clear to the public by placing tags on all inventoried goods in and about the place of sale apprising the public of the status of all such goods. 
(Code 1973, § 7-64; Code 1995, § 22-228) 
Secs. 22-243-22-262. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - GOLD AND SILVER SALES 

Sec. 22-263. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Gold and silver does not mean coins of the United States of America, or any foreign country. 
    Purchaser of gold or silver means any person who purchases gold or silver for resale at a later date. 
(Code 1995, § 22-251; Ord. No. 2085, § 1, 2-26-1980; Ord. No. 2121, § 1, 2-10-1981) 
Sec. 22-264. - Records required; contents, method of entries, defacing of entries. 
(a)  Every purchaser of gold or silver shall keep at his place of purchase a permanently bound book, with pages numbered by the manufacturer. 
(b)  He shall enter or cause to be entered in such book in ink: 
(1)  A minute description of all gold or silver bought by him in the city. 
(2)  The time when such property was received or bought. 
(3)  Particular mention of any prominent marks on any article. 
(4)  The name, sex, color, apparent age and general description and place of residence of the person from whom such property was bought. 
(5)  Wherever such gold or silver bears a number or the name of the manufacturer or other descriptive mark, the description provided for this section shall include such number, name of manufacturer, and other descriptive marks. 
(c)  The purchaser shall make the entries, or cause the entries to be made in the book at the time such gold or silver is received. The purchaser shall make the entries by making the first entry at the top of the first page of the book. Subsequent entries in the book shall be made in the order in which the gold or silver to which the respective entries pertain were bought. No purchaser shall remove, or permit to be removed, any page or part of page from such book or erase or obliterate, or permit to be erased or obliterated, any entry made upon any page of such book. 
(Code 1995, § 22-252; Ord. No. 2085, § 2, 2-26-1980) 
Sec. 22-265. - Inspection of records; exhibition of goods. 
(a)  Each purchaser during the hours of business, when requested by the chief of police or other police officer of the city, shall submit and exhibit such book provided for in section 22-264 for the inspection of chief of police or other police officer. 
(b)  Upon demand, the purchaser shall exhibit any goods or personal property which may be in the place of purchase of the purchaser, or which may have been bought and be kept by him at any place. 
(Code 1995, § 22-253; Ord. No. 2085, § 3, 2-26-1980) 
Sec. 22-266. - Purchasing from minors. 
    No purchaser shall buy or receive any gold or silver from any person under the age of 19 years. 
(Code 1995, § 22-255; Ord. No. 2085, § 5, 2-26-1980) 
Sec. 22-267. - Fifteen-day waiting period. 
    It shall be unlawful for a purchaser of gold or silver to sell, exchange, alter, destroy, melt or remove from his place of business any gold or silver, or silver objects, received, bought or exchanged by him for a period of 15 days after the report required in section 22-254. 
(Code 1995, § 22-256; Ord. No. 2121, § 2, 2-10-1981) 
Secs. 22-268-22-297. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MASSAGE THERAPY ESTABLISHMENTS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Alabama Massage Therapy Licensure Act, Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-43-1 et seq.; municipality has power to enact local regulations regarding zoning and occupational license tax regarding massage therapists and massage therapy establishments as long as regulations are not inconsistent with the Act, Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-43-19. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-298. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following term, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to it in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Massage therapy establishment means a site, premises, or business where therapeutic massage and related touch therapy modalities are practiced by a licensed massage therapist; including mobilization of the soft tissue which may include skin, fascia, tendons, ligaments, and muscles, for the purpose of establishing and maintaining good physical condition; effleurage, petrissage, tapotement, compression, vibration, stretching, heliotherapy, superficial hot and cold applications, topical applications, or other therapy which involves movement either by hand, forearm, elbow, or foot, for the purpose of therapeutic massage; the external application and use of herbal or chemical preparations and lubricants such as salts, powders, liquids, nonprescription creams, mechanical devises such as T-bars, thumpers, body support systems, heat lamps, hot and cold packs, salt glow, steam cabinet baths or hydrotherapy, as well as any massage, movement therapy, massage technology, myotherapy, massotherapy, oriental massage techniques, structural integration, or polarity therapy. The term shall not include a regularly licensed hospital, clinic or dispensary, where laser therapy, microwave, injection therapy, manipulation of the joints, or any diagnosis or treatment of an illness that normally involves the practice of medicine, chiropractic, physical therapy, podiatry, nursing, occupational therapy, veterinary, acupuncture, osteopathy, orthopedics, hypnosis, or naturopathics occurs. 
(b)  The definitions set forth in Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-43-3 (Massage Therapists-Definitions), shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this article. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-43-3, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-43-3. 
(Code 1995, § 22-276; Ord. No. 1974, § 1, 5-10-1977) 
Sec. 22-299. - Display of sign. 
    Every massage parlor shall display a legible sign not larger than permitted by the city zoning ordinance, upon which sign the words "licensed masseur" or "licensed masseuse," or both shall conspicuously appear thereon. Such sign shall contain letters no less than three inches in height and shall be displayed in such a manner that the words "licensed masseur" or "licensed masseuse" may be readily observed or read by persons upon entering the premises occupied by any massage parlor. 
(Code 1995, § 22-277; Ord. No. 1974, § 2, 5-10-1977) 
Sec. 22-300. - Compliance with specifications of license. 
(a)  No massage parlor shall operate under any name or conduct its operation under any designation not specified in its license issued by the city in accordance with this article. 
(b)  No massage shall be administered or applied by any masseur or masseuse licensed under this article except upon the premises of the regular place of business for which a license to operate a massage parlor has been duly issued by the city. 
(Code 1995, § 22-278; Ord. No. 1974, § 3, 5-10-1977) 
Sec. 22-301. - Compliance with health regulations and inspections. 
    Any massage parlor licensed under the provisions of this article shall at all times comply with all health regulations, rules and requirements as shall now or hereafter be promulgated by the county department of health. Any premises used for the purposes of a massage parlor shall, during all hours of operation, be made open and available to inspection by the county department of health for the purpose of ensuring the massage parlor's compliance with such health rules, regulations and requirements. 
(Code 1995, § 22-279; Ord. No. 1974, § 4, 5-10-1977) 
Sec. 22-302. - Cleanliness. 
(a)  No towels, wash cloths or other linen items that have not been boiled and laundered since last used shall come in contact with the body or any part thereof of any customer or patron at a massage parlor. 
(b)  Every person applying or administering massages shall cleanse his hands thoroughly by washing with soap and hot water before attending or massaging any person. 
(c)  Any person while applying or administering massages shall be clothed from the shoulders to the knees by a robe, smock or other apparel so that the person of the customer shall be protected from bodily contact with the person applying or administering the massage except for the hands and arms of such person applying or administering such massage. 
(d)  Any massage parlor licensed pursuant to this article shall be equipped with running hot and cold water and with all appliances, furnishings and materials as may be necessary to enable persons employed in and about such massage parlor to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 22-280; Ord. No. 1974, § 5, 5-10-1977) 
Sec. 22-303. - Employees having prior conviction for prostitution. 
    It shall be a violation of this article for any licensee under the provisions of this article to employ any operator, attendant, masseur, masseuse or other employee to perform or administer massages who has within the past 36 months been convicted for, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to, prostitution in any court. 
(Ord. No. 1974, § 6, 5-10-1977) 
Sec. 22-304. - Manner of administering massages. 
    No masseur, masseuse or other employee or attendant in any massage parlor shall apply or administer any massage or other treatment to any person behind locked doors nor shall he at any time massage, manipulate, fondle or otherwise touch or have physical contact with the genitals or private parts of any patron, client or other person in any massage parlor. No customer, patron, client or other person shall at any time while in any massage parlor disrobe completely or become nude or expose his genitals or buttocks while in the presence of any other person of either sex. No masseur, masseuse or employee or attendant shall at any time massage any member of the opposite sex. 
(Code 1995, § 22-281; Ord. No. 1974, § 7, 5-10-1977) 
Sec. 22-305. - Use as dormitory. 
    No massage parlor shall be used as and for a dormitory or place of sleep, nor shall any licensee under this article permit any massage parlor to be so used. 
(Code 1995, § 22-283; Ord. No. 1974, § 8, 5-10-1977) 
Secs. 22-306-22-328. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

Sec. 22-329. - Business license required; contents. 
    No massage parlor shall be opened to members of the public or operated for any other purpose without the owner thereof first having obtained a business license from the city, which such business license shall contain thereon the name of each masseur, masseuse or attendant employed for such purpose by such licensed business. 
(Code 1995, § 22-296; Ord. No. 1974, § 12, 5-10-1977) 
Sec. 22-330. - Operator's license required; verification of applicant's freedom from disease. 
    No applicant for a license to conduct or operate a massage parlor nor any applicant for a masseur or masseuse license as required in this section shall be granted such license unless he shall first present for inspection to the city a written verification by a licensed physician, bearing a date not more than 20 days prior to the date of application, evidencing that such applicant is free of any contagious, infectious, or communicable disease. No masseur, masseuse or other employee or attendant applying or administering massages shall be employed in any massage parlor without first having obtained a license as provided in this article. 
(Code 1995, § 22-297; Ord. No. 1974, § 9, 5-10-1977) 
Sec. 22-331. - Qualifications of applicant. 
    Any applicant for a license under sections 22-300 through 22-333 and 22-335 shall, at the time of applying therefor, present at least two persons to the city chief of police or such other person as he shall designate who are over 21 years of age and who both have a residence and business address in the city who shall attest under oath in writing or orally, or both, as the chief of police or his designee may direct, to the good character of the applicant and to the fact that the applicant is a person qualified and skilled as a bona fide masseur or masseuse who is trained, experienced and knowledgeable in the art of kneading, massaging and striking the muscular parts of the human body and that the applicant is learned and expert in his knowledge of the human anatomy as well as the circulatory and nervous system of the human body. 
(Code 1995, § 22-298; Ord. No. 1974, § 15, 5-10-1977) 
Sec. 22-332. - License-Investigation of applicant; approval or denial; appeal. 
(a)  The chief of police, health official, and building official shall conduct an investigation of each applicant and their proposed or existing massage therapy establishment. A report of such investigation and a copy of the police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the application. 
(b)  Should the chief of police or his designee, after considering the application together with the reports of the health official and building official, and the sworn statements submitted on behalf of such applicant, discover information inconsistent or contrary to the provisions of this article, then the chief of police or his designee shall disapprove such application within 15 days after the date of the filing thereof. The chief of police may, when an investigation cannot be completed within 15 days, issue a temporary permit to the applicant to expire 15 days from the date of issuance, whereupon the chief of police shall then approve or deny the application. If the application is denied, the applicant may appeal such denial in writing within ten days thereafter, which such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk and treasurer. Thereafter the city council shall at a regular or adjourned meeting of the city council hear such appeal. The applicant shall be permitted to present such relevant evidence as the applicant shall wish for consideration by the city council. Such appeal hearing shall be held not later than 21 days from the filing thereof with the city clerk and treasurer. 
(Code 1995, § 22-300; Ord. No. 1974, § 16, 5-10-1977) 
Sec. 22-333. - Same-Issuance; renewal. 
    Upon approval of an application either by the chief of police or the city council, the city clerk and treasurer shall be authorized to issue, upon payment by the applicant of the sum provided in the city license schedule a license for the current license year to such applicant, which license shall contain a license number together with the applicant's name, address, age, sex, name of employer, place of employment, signature, and a passport-type photograph of at least two inches by two inches in size, made within 30 days of the application and furnished to the chief of police by the applicant or made by the city at the request of the applicant. Any application for a reissue of a license as required in this section or for the renewal of any license required hereunder this division for a subsequent license year shall be accompanied by the written verification of a licensed physician as required by section 22-330 and by duplicate photographs as described in this section. Upon any application for a license reissue or any renewal, the applicant shall surrender the old license or shall provide the city with a written affidavit that such license is either lost or destroyed together with the details of such loss or destruction. 
(Code 1995, § 22-301; Ord. No. 1974, § 17, 5-10-1977) 
Sec. 22-334. - Same-Fees. 
    Every owner, proprietor or operator of a massage parlor which applies manual, mechanical or other massages to the human body, trunk or limbs for a fee, hire, reward or without such fee, hire or reward and applies or administers such manual, mechanical or other massages to members of the public generally or to other persons, shall pay a license fee therefor to the city based upon gross receipts as follows: 
(1)  On annual gross receipts less than $10,000.00, the sum per year as provided in the city license schedule. 
(2)  On annual gross receipts in excess of $10,000.00, the sum as provided in the city license schedule. 
(3)  In addition to the license payments in subsections (1) and (2) of this section and any other license payments provided for in this section such owner, proprietor or operator shall pay annually to the city for each individual masseur or masseuse or other attendant who shall be employed at any time during a license year by such licensee for the purpose of applying or administering massages, the sum as provided in the city license schedule. 
(Code 1995, § 22-302; Ord. No. 1974, § 13, 5-10-1977) 
Sec. 22-335. - Same-Change of place of employment; reissuance; fee. 
(a)  Upon any change of employer or place of employment of any licensee under this division, such licensee shall apply to the city clerk and treasurer of the city for a reissue of the existing license which such reissued license shall show upon its face the name and business address of the new employer of such licensee as well as applicant's address, age, sex, and signature, for which reissue the licensee shall pay to the city a fee as established by ordinance or resolution of the city council, from time to time. That fee shall be available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. Upon any such reissue, such licensee shall surrender his replaced or old license. 
(b)  No masseur or masseuse shall work for any owner, operator or proprietor whose name and business address is not identical to that shown upon such masseur's or masseuse's license issued under this division. 
(Code 1995, § 22-303; Ord. No. 1974, § 19, 5-10-1977) 
Sec. 22-336. - Same-Exhibit or display upon request. 
    Every masseur or masseuse licensed in accordance with this division, while engaged in any activity licensed in this division, shall at all times carry upon his person such license or any reissue thereof and shall exhibit the license to any client or customer upon request or to any police officer of the city or any license or health inspector or other similar official. 
(Code 1995, § 22-304; Ord. No. 1974, § 18, 5-10-1977) 
Sec. 22-337. - Alteration; amendment; defacement. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person except the city clerk and treasurer to change, amend or deface any license issued under this article, except upon the expiration of the license period shown thereon. 
(Code 1995, § 22-305; Ord. No. 1974, § 10, 5-10-1977) 
Secs. 22-338-22-362. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - MUSIC VENDING MACHINES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation and licensing of music vending machines authorized generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-100 et seq. 

Sec. 22-363. - Unlawful operation. 
    No person shall operate, or permit to be operated, in places of business within the city limits and the city's police jurisdiction, music vending machines, phonographs or other contrivances dispensing music, unless such person has complied with section 22-364. 
(Code 1973, § 7-82; Code 1995, § 22-326) 
Sec. 22-364. - License required. 
    Any person seeking to operate music vending machines, phonographs or other contrivances dispensing music, shall, before installing such mechanisms, first obtain a license for the operation of the device. 
(Code 1973, § 7-83; Code 1995, § 22-327) 
Sec. 22-365. - Supervision of licensees. 
    Any person issued a license as required by section 22-364 shall be subject to the strict supervision of the chief of police. Such persons shall be subject to the rules and regulations governing the operation of such contrivances as may be prescribed by the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 7-84; Code 1995, § 22-328) 
Sec. 22-366. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  The city council may prescribe such rules and regulations as may be necessary to govern and control the operation of music vending machines, phonographs or other contrivances dispensing music that may be installed pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The city council shall regulate: 
(1)  The type of mechanism so used; 
(2)  The hours during which the devices shall be allowed to operate; 
(3)  The tone and volume with which the device shall be operated; and 
(4)  Any other rules and regulations necessary and not in conflict with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 7-85; Code 1995, § 22-329) 
Sec. 22-367. - Hours of operation. 
    The city council shall not prescribe any rules and regulations which would permit the operation of music vending machines, phonographs or other contrivances dispensing music between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Sundays, and between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on days other than Sundays. 
(Code 1973, § 7-86; Code 1995, § 22-330) 
Secs. 22-368-22-392. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- State and county license requirements for peddlers and itinerant vendors, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 40-12-139, 40-12-172 and 40-12-174. 

Sec. 22-393. - Soliciting in parking lot. 
    No person operating a parking lot within the city limits shall solicit business on the public streets of the city, or advertise or solicit business in any loud, obscene, boisterous or indecent manner or language. 
(Code 1973, § 15-137; Code 1995, § 22-351) 
Sec. 22-394. - Solicitors; security required. 
    No person shall solicit within the city limits orders, where no license is required, for goods or other articles of value, where such solicitors require a payment before such goods are delivered, without first filing with the city clerk and treasurer security to be approved by the city clerk and treasurer to ensure the delivery of the goods or other articles of value sold or for which the order was taken. This section shall not be so construed as to tax interstate commerce. 
(Code 1973, § 15-29; Code 1995, § 22-352) 
Sec. 22-395. - Use of sidewalks to display goods, wares or merchandise. 
    No person may utilize the sidewalks of the city for the purpose of displaying any goods, wares or merchandise for sale or for the purpose of advertising merchandise except as herein set out: 
(1)  Any person desiring to utilize the sidewalks for the displaying of goods, wares and merchandise for sale or advertisement shall not obstruct a minimum of six feet of sidewalk for the free passage of pedestrian on said sidewalk. Merchandise can only be displayed between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
(2)  Each person displaying any goods, wares or merchandise for sale or advertisement on the sidewalks of the city shall have liability insurance in a minimum amount of $100,000.00 per person and $300,000.00 per accident, insuring the person and the city for any loss which may be incurred as a result of the person displaying said goods, wares or merchandise in the city. 
(3)  Violation of this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor and subject the person so convicted to the general penalties as described in section 1-8. 
(Code 1995, § 22-353; Ord. No. 2628, §§ 1-3, 7-19-1994) 
Secs. 22-396-22-418. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - PUBLIC MARKETS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to establish farmers markets, Code of Ala. 1975, § 2-5-17. 

Sec. 22-419. - Intent of article. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the sale of any watermelons, fruits or other produce on any of the streets within the city limits by any person having the legal right to sell such watermelons, fruits or other produce. It is the purpose of this article to regulate traffic on the streets within the city limits. 
(Code 1973, § 7-119; Code 1995, § 22-376) 
Sec. 22-420. - Established. 
    The city council shall, from time to time, establish such public market places as the needs of the city may require. 
(Code 1973, § 7-114; Code 1995, § 22-377) 
Sec. 22-421. - Exemption of license for users of stalls. 
    No privilege license shall be required of persons who pay rent on stalls in the public markets. 
(Code 1973, § 7-115; Code 1995, § 22-378) 
Secs. 22-422-22-440. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - TREE SURGEONS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Entomology, plant pathology, horticulture, floriculture, and tree surgery generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 2-28-1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-441. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to it in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Tree surgeon means any person who, for consideration, cuts, trims or otherwise removes trees or portions of trees. 
(Code 1995, § 22-401) 
Sec. 22-442. - License required; fee. 
    Any tree surgeon operating within the corporate limits of the city shall be required to be licensed by the city. The license shall be in the amount provided in the license schedule of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 22-403; Ord. No. 2205, 5-31-1983) 
Sec. 22-443. - Permit required for each job. 
    Prior to the commencement of each and every single job by any tree surgeon within the corporate limits of the city, the tree surgeon shall be required to purchase a permit for the job from the city clerk and treasurer. The fee for each permit granted to any tree surgeon shall be as provided in the city license schedule, payable to the city clerk and treasurer. 
(Code 1995, § 22-404; Ord. No. 2205, 5-31-1983) 
Sec. 22-444. - Removal of debris. 
    Each tree surgeon doing work within the corporate limits of the city is hereby required to remove all limbs, tree trunks and other debris resulting from any work done by the tree surgeon. 
(Code 1995, § 22-405; Ord. No. 2205, 5-31-1983) 
Sec. 22-445. - Property owners and utility companies exempted. 
    Property owners doing work on their own property and utility companies are hereby exempted from this article. 
(Code 1995, § 22-406; Ord. No. 2205, 5-31-1983) 
Secs. 22-446-22-473. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - METAL RECYCLERS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- State and county licensing requirements for junk dealers, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-12-116. 

Sec. 22-474. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Metal recycling refers to any person, firm or entity which engages in the recycling of metal or metal products, or which purchases metal or metal products, including without limitation scrap metal or scrap metal products, for any purpose, including the recycling or reuse, whether or not in the original form, of the same. 
(Ord. No. 3332, § 1, 4-17-2007) 
Sec. 22-475. - Duties of metal recycling business. 
    Every person, firm or entity engaged in the business of metal recycling within the city, shall do each of the following with respect to transactions in which said person, firm or entity purchases metal or metal products: 
(1)  Require photographic identification of each person selling property. 
(2)  Enter upon the records of a ledger or book maintained specifically for such purpose, the following information concerning the transaction: 
a.  A clear and accurate description of the property purchased, including model and serial number if indicated on the property; 
b.  The name, residence address and date of birth of the seller; 
c.  Date and time of the purchase transaction; 
d.  Copy of photographic identification obtained and identification number of seller; 
e.  Description of the seller, including approximate height, sex and race; and 
f.  Amount of money paid for purchase. 
(3)  Permit inspection by or provide a copy of the ledger or record of items purchased to any law enforcement officer immediately upon request, and immediately permit inspection of any such items which remain in the possession of the purchaser. 
The records required by this section shall be maintained for a period of time not less than three years. 
(Ord. No. 3332, § 2, 4-17-2007) 
Sec. 22-476. - Prohibited acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or entity engaged in metal recycling or the purchase of metal products to do any of the following: 
(1)  Fail to comply with the recordkeeping requirements of this article; 
(2)  Fail to make an entry of any material matter in the record book; 
(3)  Make any false entry into said record book; or 
(4)  Refuse access to the record book to any law enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 3332, § 3, 4-17-2007) 
Sec. 22-477. - Exception. 
    The provisions of the section shall not apply to transactions consisting solely of the purchase of aluminum cans. 
(Ord. No. 3332, § 4, 4-17-2007) 
Chapter 26 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to exercise police jurisdiction over cemeteries generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-22; cemeteries and burial grounds generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-40 et seq.; dead bodies generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-19-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Removal of body from grave. 
    No person shall, from wantonness or for the purpose of dissecting or sale, remove the dead body of any human being from its place of interment. 
(Code 1973, § 2-59; Code 1995, § 30-1) 
State Law reference- Abuse of a corpse, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-11-13. 
Sec. 26-2. - Damaging or defacing cemetery property. 
    No person shall wilfully or maliciously injure, deface, remove or destroy any tomb, monument, gravestone or other memorial of the dead, or any fence or any enclosure about any tomb, monument, gravestone or memorial, or wilfully and wrongfully destroy, remove, cut, break or injure, any tree, shrub or plant, within any cemetery or graveyard. 
(Code 1973, § 2-60; Code 1995, § 30-2) 
State Law reference- Desecration of venerated objects generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-11-12. 
Sec. 26-3. - Burial and removal permits required; certificate of death; prohibited acts. 
(a)  No person, for himself, or as an officer, agent or employee of any other person, shall inter, cremate or otherwise finally dispose of a dead human body or permit the same to be done, or remove such body from the primary registration district in which the death occurred or the body was found, without the authority of a burial or removal permit issued by the local registrar of the district in which the death occurred or in which the body was found. 
(b)  No such person shall refuse or fail to furnish correctly any information in his possession, or furnish false information, affecting any certificate or record required by the health laws of the city. 
(c)  No such person shall willfully alter, other than as provided by law, or falsify any certificate of death or any record established by the health laws of the city. 
(d)  No person, being required by the health laws of the city to fill out a certificate of death and file the certificate with the local registrar, or deliver it, upon request, to any person charged with the duty of filing the same certificate, shall fail, neglect or refuse to perform such duty in the manner required by the health laws of the city. 
(e)  No person, who is a local registrar, deputy registrar or subregistrar, shall fail, neglect or refuse to perform his duty as required by the health laws of the city, and by the instructions and directions of the state registrar. 
(Code 1973, § 2-61; Code 1995, § 30-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-19-3(1-4). 
Sec. 26-4. - Graves-Price per space. 
    The price per grave space for cemetery lots at Cedar Hill Cemetery shall be determined on a per lot basis. The price per lot shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 30-4; Ord. No. 2594, § I, 10-19-1993) 
Sec. 26-5. - Same-Opening and closing; fees. 
    The cost of opening and closing graves at Cedar Hill Cemetery shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 30-5; Ord. No. 2594, § II, 10-19-1993) 
Sec. 26-6. - Same-Prices for foundations; markers; benches; monuments. 
    The price for foundations and markers, benches and monuments at Cedar Hill Cemetery shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 30-6; Ord. No. 2596, § I, 10-26-1993) 
Sec. 26-7. - Minimum dimensions of grave plot. 
    No crypt or mausoleum shall be placed on any lot or plot within Cedar Hill Cemetery which consists of less than a 48-grave plot, rectangular in shape, and with the minimum dimensions of 50 feet by 38 feet. 
(Code 1995, § 30-7; Ord. No. 1993, § 1, 11-8-1977) 
Sec. 26-8. - Setbacks for grave plot. 
    Should any such crypt or mausoleum be constructed on a lot of the size prescribed in section 26-7, there shall be a minimum of 14.6-foot setback from the front and rear of the lot and a 21.6-foot setback from each side. 
(Code 1995, § 30-8; Ord. No. 1993, § 2, 11-8-1977) 
Sec. 26-9. - Minimum size of crypt or mausoleum. 
    The minimum size for such crypt or mausoleum shall be seven feet in width and nine feet in length. 
(Code 1995, § 30-9; Ord. No. 1993, § 3, 11-8-1977) 
Secs. 26-10-26-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DIRECTOR 

Sec. 26-37. - Appointment. 
(a)  There is created the position of cemetery director of the Cedar Hill Cemetery, as a position under the classified service. 
(b)  Upon certification of a list of applicants qualified for the position by the county personnel board, the mayor is authorized and directed to appoint a qualified and certified applicant to fill the position. 
(Code 1973, § 2-57; Code 1995, § 30-31) 
Sec. 26-38. - Duties. 
    The cemetery director shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Sell lots at the Cedar Hill Cemetery. 
(2)  Collect payments on lots sold and turn the payments in to the clerk and treasurer. 
(3)  Keep accurate records of the sale price charged, the payments received, the interest charged and earned and the date of all transactions with reference to cemetery lots. 
(4)  Maintain historical records as to the burial of the dead in the cemetery. 
(5)  Plan for and supervise the extension of the Cedar Hill Cemetery for the survey and sale of additional lots at the cemetery. 
(6)  Plan for and execute a beautification program at the cemetery. 
(7)  Assist in the plans and arrangements for the burial of the dead at the cemetery. 
(8)  Provide and maintain a system for termination of contracts for the purchase of lots in the cemetery upon failure of the purchaser to carry out the terms of the contract. 
(Code 1973, § 2-58; Code 1995, § 30-32) 
Chapter 30 - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Charitable fraud generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-9-70 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Charitable means and includes the words patriotic, philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, or fraternal, either actual or purported. 
    Contribution means and includes the words alms, food, clothing, money, property, subscription or pledge, and also donations under the guise of loans of money or property. 
    Cost of promotion means, in connection with a charitable solicitation, the reasonable cost of acquiring goods or merchandise or an entertainment event when such is used in connection with the solicitation but does not include the cost of selling the goods or admissions nor the cost of bona fide educational materials. No cost included in the definition of the term "cost of solicitation" shall be considered a cost of promotion. 
    Cost of solicitation means all costs of whatever nature incurred in raising the funds solicited, except bona fide educational material in such instances where the solicitation plan involves the promotion or sale of merchandise or an entertainment event. The cost of such merchandise or entertainment shall not be considered as part of the cost of solicitation. Compensation in whatever form paid to a professional promoter or professional solicitor is part of the cost of solicitation. 
    Professional promoter means a person who for compensation plans, promotes, conducts, manages or carries on or attempts to plan, promote, conduct, manage or carry on any drive or campaign for the purpose of solicitation of contributions for or on behalf of any charitable person or engages in the business of soliciting contributions for charitable purposes. A bona fide officer or regular employee of a charitable person shall not be deemed a professional promoter by reason of his participation in charitable solicitations made by or on behalf of his employer. 
    Professional solicitor means any person, other than a professional promoter, who is employed or retained for compensation to make solicitations in connection with a charitable solicitation. A bona fide officer or regular employee of a charitable person shall not be deemed a professional solicitor by reason of his participation in charitable solicitations made by or on behalf of his employer. 
    Religious and religion or church mean any activity directly involving the promulgation or observance of any system of worship or to the building or maintenance of places of worship. The terms "religious" and "religion" or "church" as used in this chapter do not include charitable activities, even though carried on or sponsored by a religious organization. 
    Solicit and solicitation mean the request, directly or indirectly, of money, credit, property, financial assistance, or other thing of value on the plea or representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance, or other thing of value shall be used for a charitable purpose as those purposes are defined in this section. These terms shall also mean and include, but not be limited to, the following methods of securing such money, credit, property, financial assistance, or other thing of value: 
(1)  Any oral or written request. 
(2)  The making of any announcement to the local press or by telephone concerning a local appeal or campaign to which the public is requested to make a contribution for any charitable purpose connected therewith. 
(3)  The distribution, circulation, posting, or publishing of any handbill, written advertisement, or other local publications. 
(4)  The sale of, or the offer or attempt to sell any advertisement, advertising space, book, card, chance, coupon, device, membership, merchandise, subscription, ticket or other thing. 
    Solicitation means and shall be deemed to have taken place when the request is made, whether or not the person making the request receives any contribution referred to in this section. 
(Code 1973, § 15-2; Code 1995, § 34-2) 
Sec. 30-2. - Legislative findings of city council. 
(a)  The city council finds, determines and declares that: 
(1)  Numerous persons and organizations have been and are soliciting funds in the city on the representation that such funds are to be used for charitable purposes, when, in truth and in fact, such funds are being used in large part for the private profit of unscrupulous individuals promoting such solicitation. 
(2)  A variety of frauds and misleading devices are employed in such solicitations. 
(3)  Persons engaged in the business of promoting solicitations fail to properly account for funds solicited. 
(4)  Telephone solicitations by professional solicitors and professional promoters are a cause of annoyance to the individuals solicited, and, in many cases, tactics used by such solicitors are coercive, abusive or misleading. 
(5)  As a result of such pernicious activities, honest, deserving and needed charities suffer. 
(6)  Residents of the city have been and are in constant peril of being defrauded and imposed upon due to a lack of adequate regulation of charitable solicitations. 
(b)  The city council believes that if the public were given full information concerning the solicitations, it could protect itself against victimization by disreputable fundraisers, and therefore it is necessary in the interest of the public welfare of the city for the city council to regulate solicitations for charitable purposes. 
(Code 1973, § 15-1; Code 1995, § 34-1) 
Sec. 30-3. - Exceptions to chapter. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter, with the exception of the applicable requirements of sections 30-6, 30-37, 30-38, 30-42, 30-43, and 30-44 shall not apply to any person soliciting charity for himself if such person is blind or incapacitated and unable to work. 
(b)  All solicitations by political parties and bona fide candidates for public office are specifically exempted from the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 15-3; Code 1995, § 34-3) 
Sec. 30-4. - Notice of intent. 
(a)  Required to be filed; contents. Any person, except churches and their directly connected agencies, desiring to conduct a charitable solicitation or on whose behalf a charitable solicitation is to be conducted shall file, at least 60 days prior to the commencement thereof, with the city council and clerk and treasurer a notice of intent containing the following information: 
(1)  The proposed use of the net proceeds of the solicitation under the general headings required for reports under subsection (a)(5) of this section. 
(2)  The manner in which the solicitation shall be conducted, and an estimate of the cost of solicitation and the cost of promotion, if any, and of the net proceeds expected for the charitable purpose. 
(3)  If a professional promoter or any professional solicitor is to be employed, a copy of the contract of each. 
(4)  A certified copy of the resolution or other action authorizing the solicitation. 
(5)  A report of all the receipts of the person conducting the solicitation during his preceding fiscal year or all of his receipts from solicitations during the most recent year in which a charitable solicitation was conducted by or on behalf of such charitable person. Such report shall show the gross amount raised by solicitation, during the period covered, what portion thereof, if any, is attributable to promotional activities, the cost of promotion, the cost of solicitation and the amounts, if any, paid to each professional promoter and professional solicitor. The report shall also show what portion of the proceeds, if any, was allocated for local use and what portion, if any, was allocated to a national organization. 
(b)  Report of fund allocation and use. The proportions allocated respectively to local use or to a national organization shall each be broken down in the report under the following categories insofar as they are applicable or among such other categories as may be approved by the city council: 
(1)  Agency administration. 
(2)  Information and public education activities. 
(3)  Social services. 
(4)  Hospital care. 
(5)  Educational institutions. 
(6)  Research. 
(7)  Other civic or philanthropic purposes. 
(8)  Capital improvements. 
(c)  Waiver of filing. The city council may, in its discretion, waive the filing of such statements as are duplicated substantially by reports already on file pursuant to this section or to any other section of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 15-13; Code 1995, § 34-4) 
Sec. 30-5. - Written receipt required; exception. 
(a)  Any person receiving money or anything having a value of $1.00 or more from any contributor under a solicitation made pursuant to a permit granted under this chapter shall give to the contributor, upon request, a written receipt signed by the solicitor showing plainly the name and permit number of the person under whose permit the solicitation is conducted, the date, and the amount received. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any contributions collected by means of a closed box or receptacle used in solicitation with the written approval of the city council, where it is impractical to determine the amount of such contributions. 
(Code 1973, § 15-14; Code 1995, § 34-5) 
Sec. 30-6. - Misrepresentation in solicitations. 
(a)  No person shall directly or indirectly solicit contributions for any purpose by misrepresentation of his name, occupation, financial condition, social position, residence, or principal place of business. No person shall make or cause to be made any misstatement, deception, or fraud in connection with any solicitation of any contribution for any purpose in the city, or in any application or report filed under this chapter. 
(b)  No charitable organization or professional fundraiser soliciting contributions shall use a name, symbol, or statement so closely related or similar to that used by another charitable organization or governmental agency that the use would tend to confuse or mislead the public. 
(c)  No charitable organization or professional fundraiser shall solicit funds by the use of statements or material that would indicate that such funds were being raised for an organization or agency from which such organization or agency has not received explicit permission for the raising of such funds in accordance with other provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 15-10; Code 1995, § 34-6) 
Sec. 30-7. - Books and records required. 
    No person shall solicit any contributions for any charitable purpose without maintaining a system of accounting whereby all donations to it and all disbursements by it are entered upon the official books or records of the person's treasurer or other financial officer. 
(Code 1973, § 15-11; Code 1995, § 34-7) 
Sec. 30-8. - Report to city council required. 
    All persons registered and issued permits under this chapter shall furnish to the city council and clerk and treasurer, within 60 days after the solicitation has been completed, a report and financial statement showing the amount raised by the solicitation; the amount expended in collecting such funds, including a report of the wages, fees, commissions and expenses, paid to any person in connection with much solicitation; and the disposition of the balance of the funds collected by the solicitation. In the case of charitable organizations maintaining a permanent office in the city, the wages of regular fulltime staff employees may be entered as a total figure. The entire report filed by the person shall be available for public inspection. The permit holder shall make available to the city council, or to any person designated in writing by the city council as its representative for such purpose, all books, records, and papers whereby the accuracy of such report may be verified. 
(Code 1973, § 15-12; Code 1995, § 34-8) 
Sec. 30-9. - Solicitation from occupants of motor vehicles. 
    Solicitation of funds for charitable purposes from occupants of motor vehicles on the streets and at the intersections of streets in the city is prohibited. 
(Code 1995, § 34-9; Ord. No. 2225, 1-31-1984) 
Secs. 30-10-30-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGISTRATION AND PERMIT 

Sec. 30-37. - Required; exception. 
(a)  No person shall solicit contributions within the city, for any person or charitable purpose unless the person, for whose benefit the solicitation is conducted, is registered with the city council, and a permit for such solicitation has been issued by the city council. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not apply: 
(1)  To any solicitation made by and on behalf of a person or charitable purpose if conducted by members or officers thereof voluntarily and without remuneration for such solicitation, among the established and bona fide membership thereof or the normal constituency or supporters thereof; or 
(2)  If the solicitation is in the form of collections or contributions of regular assembly or services of such person or charitable purpose. 
(Code 1973, § 15-4; Code 1995, § 34-31) 
Sec. 30-38. - Application; contents; changes. 
(a)  An application for registration and a permit to solicit shall be made to the city council upon forms prescribed by it. Such application shall be sworn to or affirmed and filed with the city council not less than 60 days prior to the time at which the permit applied for shall become effective; provided, however, that the city council may, for good cause shown, allow the filing of an application less than 60 days prior to the effective date of the registration and permit applied for. 
(b)  The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address or principal office of the person applying for the permit. 
(2)  If the applicant is not an individual, the names and addresses of the applicant's principal officers and executives and a copy of the resolution, if any, authorizing such solicitation, certified to as a true and correct copy of the original by the officer having charge of the applicant's records. 
(3)  The purpose for which solicitation is to be made, the total amount of funds proposed to be raised thereby, and the use or disposition to be made of any receipts therefrom. 
(4)  A specific statement, supported by facts and figures, if any, showing the need for the contributions to be solicited. 
(5)  The names and addresses of the persons by whom the receipts of such solicitations shall be disbursed. 
(6)  The names and addresses of the persons who shall be in direct charge of conducting the solicitation, and the names of all fundraisers connected or to be connected with the proposed solicitation if the fundraisers shall receive any paid compensation for their services. 
(7)  An outline of the methods to be used in conducting the solicitation. 
(8)  The time when such solicitation will be made, giving the preferred dates and the hour of day for the commencement and termination of such solicitation. 
(9)  The estimated cost of the solicitation. 
(10)  The amount of any wages, fees, commissions, expenses, or emoluments to be expended or paid to any person in connection with such solicitations, and the names and addresses of all such persons. The city council may elect not to require such information as to regular staff of charitable organizations maintaining a permanent office in the city. 
(11)  A financial statement for the past preceding fiscal year of any funds collected for charitable purposes by the applicant, the statement giving the amount of money so raised, together with the cost of raising it, and final distribution thereof. 
(12)  A full statement of the character and extent of the charitable work being done or to be done by the applicant, showing how much thereof is being done or to be done in the city. 
(13)  A statement to the effect that if registration and a permit is granted, it will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the city or by any department or officer thereof. 
(14)  Such other information as may be reasonably required by the city council in order for it to determine the kind, character, and method of the proposed solicitation, and whether such solicitation is in the interest of, and not inimical to, the safety, convenience, or welfare of the residents of the city. 
(c)  If, while any application is pending, or during the term of any permit granted thereon, there is any substantial change in fact, policy, or method that would materially alter the information given in the application, the applicant shall notify the city council in writing thereof within 72 hours after such change. Should the applicant fail to so notify the city council, any permit issued to the applicant prior thereto shall stand suspended until a hearing is had pursuant to section 34-39. 
(Code 1973, § 15-5; Code 1995, § 34-32) 
Sec. 30-39. - Disclosure of cost of solicitation. 
    The cost of solicitation for a charitable solicitation shall be disclosed on the application for such permit. 
(Code 1973, § 15-8; Code 1995, § 34-33) 
Sec. 30-40. - Fees. 
    The city council shall establish a schedule of fees based upon the amount raised by solicitations on behalf of the person during its preceding fiscal year and the city's total expense of regulating charitable solicitations during the preceding calendar year. 
(Code 1973, § 15-6(b); Code 1995, § 34-34) 
Sec. 30-41. - Investigation of application; access to records. 
(a)  The city council and clerk and treasurer shall examine all applications filed under section 30-38 and make, or cause to be made, such further investigation of the application and the applicant as the city council and clerk and treasurer deems necessary in order for it to perform its duties under this article. 
(b)  Upon request by the city council, the applicant shall make available for inspection by the city council, or any person designated in writing by the city council as its representative for such purpose, all of the applicant's books, records, and papers at any reasonable time a permit is in effect, or after a permit has expired. 
(Code 1973, § 15-15; Code 1995, § 34-35) 
Sec. 30-42. - Standards for granting; notice of denial. 
(a)  The city council shall grant the registration and permit as provided in section 30-38 whenever it finds or reasonably believes: 
(1)  All of the statements made in the application are true. 
(2)  The applicant, or if the applicant is not an individual person, that its managing officers and managing agents be of good character and reputation for honesty and integrity. 
(3)  The local control and supervision of the solicitation will be under local, responsible and reliable persons. 
(4)  The applicant is not engaged in any fraudulent transaction or enterprise. 
(5)  The solicitation will not be a fraud on the public. 
(6)  The solicitation is prompted solely by a desire to finance the charitable cause described in the application, and will not be conducted primarily for private profit. 
(7)  That the kind, character, and method of the proposed solicitation are such that the solicitation will be in the interests of and not inimical to the safety, convenience, or welfare of the residents of the city. 
(b)  The city council shall file with its secretary for public inspection a written statement of its findings of fact and its decision upon each application. If the application is denied, the city council shall notify the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the address given in the application, stating the reasons therefor. 
(Code 1973, § 15-7; Code 1995, § 34-36) 
Sec. 30-43. - Content; identification card; transferability or assignability. 
(a)  Registrations and permits issued under this article shall bear the name and address of the person to whom the permit is issued, the serial number of the permit, the date issued, the dates within which the permit holder may solicit, and a statement that the permit does not constitute an endorsement by the city or by any of its departments, officers, or employees of the purpose or of the persons conducting this solicitation. All permits must be signed by the city clerk and treasurer. 
(b)  Each solicitor of the charitable organization will be provided with an information card or similar identification signed by the person having control and supervision of the solicitation. The card or identification shall carry on its face the name and address of the person to whom the permit was issued, the number of the permit, and the dates during which the permit holder may solicit. Any individual soliciting without the card or identification shall be deemed to be in violation of this article. The card or identification shall be provided for the individual solicitor by and at the expense of the permit holder. 
(c)  Any permit issued by the city council under this article shall not be transferable or assignable. 
(Code 1973, § 15-16; Code 1995, § 34-37) 
Sec. 30-44. - Denial of application; hearing; report. 
(a)  If the city council denies an application for registration and permit, it shall notify the applicant of its decision and the grounds therefor by certified mail, return receipt requested. Within five days after the receipt of such notification, the applicant may file a written request for public hearing on the application, together with exceptions to the grounds upon which the city council based its denial of the application. 
(b)  Upon the filing of such request, the city council shall fix a time and place for the hearing, within 15 days after the request is filed, and notify the applicant thereof. At the hearing, the applicant may present evidence in support of his application and exceptions. Any interested person may be allowed to participate in the hearing to present evidence in opposition to the application and exceptions. Within ten days after the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall render a written report either granting or denying the application and state the grounds upon which the decision is based. 
(c)  A copy of the report shall be served upon the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested. The report shall constitute a public record. 
(Code 1973, § 15-17; Code 1995, § 34-38) 
Sec. 30-45. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  For cause; notice. Whenever it is shown or whenever the city council has reason to believe that any person registered under this article has violated any of the provisions thereof, or that any promoter, agent, or solicitor of a permit holder has misrepresented the purpose of the solicitation, the city council shall immediately give the permit holder written notice to show cause in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the hearing to be held as soon as practicable to determine whether or not the permit should be revoked. This notice must contain a statement of the facts upon which the city council acted in suspending the permit. 
(b)  Hearing. At the hearing, the permit holder and any other interested persons shall have the right to present evidence as to the facts upon which the city council based the suspension of the permit and any other facts which may aid the city council in determining whether this article has been violated and whether the purpose of the solicitation has been misrepresented. 
(c)  Written statement of revocation. If, after such hearing, the city council finds that this article has been violated or the purpose of the solicitation has been misrepresented, it shall, within two days after the hearing, file in its office for public inspection and send to the permit holder by registered mail, or serve him in any manner provided by general law for the service of notices, a written statement of the facts upon which it bases such a finding and immediately revoke the permit. 
(d)  Cancellation of suspension. If, after the hearing, the city council finds that this article has not been violated and the purpose of the solicitation has not been misrepresented, it shall, within two days after the hearing give to the permit holder a written statement canceling the suspension of the permit and stating that no violation or misrepresentation was found to have been committed. 
(e)  Notice to police chief. In all cases where a suspension of the permit occurs, the chief of police shall be notified immediately by the city council of the suspension or revocation of any permit issued under this article. In like manner, the city council shall immediately notify the chief of police, subsequent to any hearing on the decision of the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 15-18; Code 1995, § 34-39) 
Chapter 34 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Alabama Emergency Management Act of 1955, Code of Ala. 1975, § 31-9-1 et seq.; powers of governing body during local state of emergency, Code of Ala. 1975, § 31-9-10. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Civil emergency means: 
(1)  A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power to execute by three or more persons acting together without authority of law. 
(2)  Any natural disaster or manmade calamity including a flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the corporate limits of the city resulting in the death or injury of persons or the destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
    Curfew means a prohibition against any person from walking, running, loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the city, except persons officially designated for duty with reference to the civil emergency. 
(Code 1995, § 38-1) 
Sec. 34-2. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter or any executive order issued by the mayor pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter shall be guilty of an offense against the city and shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1995, § 38-2) 
Sec. 34-3. - Proclamation by mayor. 
    When in the judgment of the mayor a civil emergency is deemed to exist, he shall forthwith proclaim in writing the existence of the emergency. Such a proclamation shall be effective for five days, unless extended by the city council. 
(Code 1995, § 38-3) 
State Law reference- Authority of mayor to close certain places in case of riot, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-82. 
Sec. 34-4. - Order of curfew may follow proclamation. 
    After proclamation of a civil emergency by the mayor and while the emergency is in effect, the city council may order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the city or to the city as a whole as they deem advisable, and the curfew shall be applicable during such hours of the day or night as they deem necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare. 
(Code 1995, § 38-4) 
Sec. 34-5. - Orders authorized after proclamation. 
    After proclamation of a civil emergency and while the emergency is in effect, the mayor may also in the interest of public safety and welfare make any or all of the following orders: 
(1)  Order the closing of all retail liquor stores. 
(2)  Order the closing of all beer taverns. 
(3)  Order the closing of all private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of intoxicating liquor or beer is permitted. 
(4)  Order the discontinuance of the sale of beer. 
(5)  Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container, other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle. 
(6)  Order the closing of gasoline stations and other establishments, the chief activity of which is the sale, distribution or dispensing of liquid flammable or combustible products. 
(7)  Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever. 
(8)  Order the closing of any or all establishments or portions thereof, the chief activity of which is the sale, distribution, dispensing or giving away of firearms or ammunition. 
(9)  Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection of life and property. 
(Code 1995, § 38-5) 
Secs. 34-6-34-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 

Sec. 34-29. - Disaster committee; creation; purpose; members; policies and plans. 
(a)  There is hereby created a disaster committee, and such committee shall serve the purpose of being available to and assisting the mayor when there is a catastrophe, a casualty, an emergency, terrible accident, unfortunate event, and/or any disposal, release or threatened release of any hazardous substances or wastes within the city. 
(b)  The committee shall consist of each councilmember of the city council. The term of the committee members shall correspond to their official tenure as councilmember's. 
(c)  The committee shall make policies and plans that will be implemented in the event of a disaster. 
(Code 1995, § 38-31; Ord. No. 2613, 3-1-1994) 
Secs. 34-30-34-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER RATIONING 

Sec. 34-47. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Water means water supplied by the waterworks of the city, either directly or indirectly, by the Bessemer Water Service or through another entity. 
(Code 1995, § 38-51) 
Sec. 34-48. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or shall do any act prohibited by this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. 
(Code 1995, § 38-52; Ord. No. 2435, § 7, 6-28-1988) 
Sec. 34-49. - Enforcement of article. 
    Upon the publication of a declaration of a water service emergency by the mayor under section 34-50: 
(1)  Police officers. Every police officer of the city shall, in connection with his duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Discontinuance of service. The waterworks of the city shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this article by the discontinuance of water service, subject to the provisions of section 34-53 in the event of a violation of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 38-53; Ord. No. 2435, § 6, 6-28-1988) 
Sec. 34-50. - Declaration of water service emergency; article takes effect. 
    Whenever, upon request by the waterworks of the city or upon other determination by the mayor in consultation with such officials as he deems appropriate, the mayor determines that a water service emergency exists in the city, and the mayor issues and publishes a declaration of the existence of such a water emergency, this article shall become immediately effective upon the publication of such declaration in a daily newspaper generally circulated in the city. 
(Code 1995, § 38-54; Ord. No. 2435, § 2, 6-28-1988) 
Sec. 34-51. - Application of article. 
    Upon the publication of declaration by the mayor of a water service emergency under section 34-50, the provisions of this article shall apply to all persons using water both in the city and outside the city, within the police jurisdiction thereof. 
(Code 1995, § 38-55; Ord. No. 2435, § 3, 6-28-1988) 
Sec. 34-52. - Use and withdrawal of water; prohibitions. 
    The use and withdrawal of water by any person for the following purposes is hereby prohibited: 
(1)  Watering yards. The sprinkling, watering or irrigating of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, ground covers, plants, vines, gardens, vegetables, flowers, or any other vegetation. 
(2)  Washing mobile equipment. The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, trailer houses, railroad cars or any other type of mobile equipment, except as to motor vehicles where such washing is accomplished by a commercial automatic carwash installation engaged in the business of washing motor vehicles. 
(3)  Cleaning outdoor surfaces. The washing of sidewalks, driveways, filling station aprons, porches and other outdoor surface. 
(4)  Cleaning buildings. The washing of the outside of dwellings; the washing of the inside and outside of office buildings. 
(5)  Cleaning equipment and machinery. The washing and cleaning of any business or industrial equipment and machinery. 
(6)  Ornamental fountains. The operation of any ornamental fountain or other structure making a similar use of water. 
(7)  Swimming pools. Swimming and wading pools not employing a filter and recirculating system. 
(8)  Escape through defective plumbing. The escape of water through defective plumbing, which shall mean the knowing permission for defective plumbing to remain out of repair. 
(Code 1995, § 38-56; Ord. No. 2435, § 4, 6-28-1988) 
Sec. 34-53. - Exception to section 34-52. 
    The health officer shall have the authority to permit a reasonable use of water in any case necessary to maintain adequate health and sanitation standards, but such reasonable use shall not include any use prohibited by section 34-52. 
(Code 1995, § 38-57; Ord. No. 2435, § 5, 6-28-1988) 
Chapter 38 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal planning, zoning, and subdivisions generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-1 et seq.; regional planning commissions generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-85-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1-38-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - URBAN RENEWAL AND REDEVELOPMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of municipalities to plan and undertake urban renewal projects generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 24-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 38-19. - Legal authority. 
(a)  The project area, as shown in Plate 1: Project Area Map, encompasses the boundaries of the urban renewal plan for the downtown area of the city, entitled "Urban Redevelopment and Urban Renewal Plan for the Downtown Area in the City of Bessemer, Alabama," adopted by the city council on January 5, 1999 by Resolution No. 001-99. 
(b)  The downtown area redevelopment project is authorized under state law, as a separate, distinct and independent urban renewal and redevelopment project and is in accordance with the department of community development goals and objectives. 
(c)  The goals and objectives of the plan have identified a set of design review standards, adopted by the city council. 
(Code 1995, § 40-26; Ord. No. 3051, § 1, 1-5-1999) 
Sec. 38-20. - Urban renewal and redevelopment project description. 
(a)  Project summary. 
(1)  The project will establish a land use plan for the project area to define the development of urban neighborhoods, commercial development and office development in the targeted project area. 
(2)  The project includes public improvements, such as, landscaping, lighting, infrastructure (water and sanitary sewer), street improvements and acquisition, demolition and resale of property to be developed for uses appropriate to the project area. 
(3)  The project will carry out the development of residential, retail, office, commercial, parks, and open spaces. 
(4)  The project will make provisions for the revitalization of commercial property, as shown in Plate 1: Project Area Map, incorporated herein by reference. 
(b)  Boundary. Plate 1: Project Area Map shows the boundary of the project area which lies between 22nd Street and Highway 150 (14th Street) in the north-south direction and between Clarendon Avenue and I-59/20 in the east-west direction. Plate 1 is incorporated herein by reference. 
(c)  Redevelopment plan objectives. 
(1)  To prevent the spread or the development of blight and blighting factors and deteriorating conditions; 
(2)  To eliminate all blighted and deteriorated conditions and the affects of blighting and deteriorating influences of improved and unimproved property; 
(3)  To eliminate dilapidation, overcrowding, obsolescence, inappropriate design, faulty arrangements, poor site conditions, a lack of ventilation, light and sanitary facilities, excessive land coverage, deleterious land use, obsolete site layout, diversity of ownership or unusual conditions of title, and under-utilization; 
(4)  To promote sound growth of the downtown area and the community; 
(5)  To promote a practical and efficient transportation and traffic pattern that utilizes proper traffic flow and access management, emphasizing a balance between vehicular, transit, bicycle, pedestrian and other modes of travel and to minimize any disruption to existing and new development; 
(6)  To promote the development of sound retail businesses, offices/office complexes and urban residential neighborhoods; 
(7)  To provide and improve public services such as streets, sidewalks, lighting, utilities/infrastructure, parks, open spaces, plazas, landscaping, public place/park furniture and to create an attractive and inviting environment for pedestrians; 
(8)  To preserve and rehabilitate historic structures in the historic district, parts of which lie in the project area, which have been or may be designated by the city, the state or the United States Department of Interior; and 
(9)  To promote viable, well-designed urban residential neighborhoods, within the project area, with appropriate public infrastructure and amenities. 
(Code 1995, § 40-27; Ord. No. 3051, § 2, 1-5-1999; Ord. No. 3522, § I, 9-2-2014) 
Sec. 38-21. - Land use plan. 
(a)  Plate VII. The Plate VII: Proposed Land Use Map shows the land use categories described in this subsection and is incorporated herein by reference: 
(1)  Commercial/residential. 
(2)  Service/commercial. 
(3)  Cultural and institutional. 
(4)  Central business district. 
(b)  Land use provisions and building requirements. Land use and building requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Permitted uses. 
a.  Commercial/residential. The commercial/residential land use category shall include commercial uses and the types of residential uses which are suited to an urban environment. The commercial uses shall include retail, personal services, recreational, religious, tourist-oriented, offices and other related commercial uses which are compatible with urban residential uses. These uses shall comply closely with the requirements identified in the following districts of the city zoning ordinance, July 1996: C-2 (central business) and C-6 (planned shopping). Any use, not included in the zoning ordinance, will be adapted to the development plan in keeping with the spirit of the urban fabric and environment of downtown Bessemer. New construction for residential uses shall be permitted and so shall the rehabilitation, renovation and/or conversion of existing structures to residential uses. It is recommended that buildings and structures, which are renovated or newly constructed, should be complemented with open spaces, parks, plazas, and green space amenities, where architectural and urban design can afford such amenities. Off-street parking, as an ancillary use, shall be permitted as per the existing requirements, reflected in city codes. Alternative parking ideas, through the aid of physical design practices, to suit the urban environment of the city is highly recommended. Off-street parking and loading shall also be permitted and such shall be planned to adhere to design schemes which will include landscaping and adequate buffers, screens and noise-abatement measures. Existing commercial services, warehousing and light industrial activities, which are not in any conflict with other permitted uses in this category, shall act as prototypes for any proposed commercial, warehousing and light industrial uses. Commercial services, warehousing and light industrial uses, which are currently in existence but are in conflict with other uses, may not be expanded and their useful life may not be extended. An improvement in design from an aesthetic and functional perspective is highly recommended. 
b.  Service/commercial. This category shall include commercial, commercial services, auto/truck sales and services, building material sales, light industrial, research and development facilities, retail and office uses, warehousing, wholesaling. These uses shall comply closely with the requirements identified in the following districts of the city zoning ordinance, July 1996: C-1 (neighborhood commercial), SC-1 (neighborhood shopping center), C-2 (central business), C-3 (community business), C-4 (arterial services), C-5 (general business) and I-1 (light industrial). New construction for these uses shall be permitted and so shall the rehabilitation, renovation and/or conversion of existing structures to accommodate these permitted uses. Any use, not included in the zoning ordinance, will be adapted to the development plan in keeping with the spirit of the urban fabric and environment of downtown Bessemer. For the purpose of accommodating these and other permitted uses, ancillary off-street parking and loading facilities shall also be permitted and such ancillary uses shall be planned to adhere to design schemes which will include landscaping and adequate buffers, screens and noise-abatement measures. Alternative parking ideas through the aid of physical design practices, to suit the urban environment of the city are highly recommended. Uses pertaining to construction, light industrial, industrial maintenance, manufacturing and utilities, which are similar in nature to those preexisting, are also permitted, provided that such uses do not conflict with other uses permitted in this category. All preexisting uses of construction, light industrial, industrial maintenance, manufacturing and utilities, which do conflict with other uses permitted in this category, may neither be expanded nor may their useful life be extended. 
c.  Cultural and institutional. This category shall include cultural and entertainment complexes, governmental activities, research facilities and other related uses. Residential, retail, recreational, religious, office and other commercial support uses, which complement the cultural and institutional uses mentioned above, shall also be permitted. Other related uses permitted in this category are: Open spaces, parks, plazas, and other green space amenities. New construction for these uses shall be permitted and so shall the rehabilitation, renovation and/or conversion of existing structures to accommodate these permitted uses. All prescribed uses shall be incorporated, in keeping with the spirit of the urban fabric and environment of downtown Bessemer. For the purpose of accommodating these and other permitted uses, ancillary off-street parking and loading facilities shall also be permitted and such ancillary uses shall be planned to adhere to design schemes which will include landscaping and adequate buffers, screens and noise-abatement measures. Alternative parking ideas through the aid of physical design practices, to suit the urban environment of the city is highly recommended. Uses pertaining to light industrial, unrelated commercial and wholesaling, which are similar in nature to those preexisting, are also permitted, provided that such uses do not conflict with other uses permitted in this category. All preexisting uses of light industrial, unrelated commercial and wholesaling, which do conflict with other uses permitted in this category, may neither be expanded nor may their useful life be extended. 
d.  Central business. This category shall include uses which are standard central business district uses, such as, offices, support services, specialty and retail activities, cultural and entertainment activities, residential facilities, hotels, personal services, open spaces, parks, plazas, and other green space amenities, and other related uses. New construction for these uses shall be permitted and so shall the rehabilitation, renovation and/or conversion of existing structures to accommodate these permitted uses. All prescribed uses shall be incorporated, in keeping with the spirit of the urban fabric and environment of downtown Bessemer. For the purpose of accommodating these and other permitted uses, ancillary off-street parking and loading facilities shall also be permitted and such ancillary uses shall be planned to adhere to design schemes which will include landscaping and adequate buffers, screens and noise-abatement measures. Alternative parking ideas through the aid of physical design, to suit the city's urban environment are highly recommended. 
(2)  Building requirements for land to be acquired. 
a.  The city shall enter into a redevelopment agreement with a redeveloper/redevelopers (referred to as redeveloper, hereinafter), when acquiring a particular piece of property for redevelopment. Such property shall be shown on the plate proposed acquisition plan map and shall be referred to as acquisition property hereinafter. 
b.  The redevelopment agreement shall provide for the following: 
1.  All acquisition property used in the project area, by the redeveloper, shall be for the uses and purposes designated in the city urban renewal plan; 
2.  The redeveloper will begin improvements upon a building, as required by the city urban renewal plan, within a time-period determined by the city; 
3.  The redeveloper will comply with the conditions, deemed necessary, proper or convenient by the city, when carrying out the purposes of the Code of Ala. 1975, tit. 24, chs. 2 and 3, and the city urban renewal plan; and 
4.  The requirements of the city urban renewal plan shall be effectively implemented through the instruments of conveyance which allow the incorporation of covenants and conditions pertaining to the land. These covenants and conditions shall be for the sole use and benefit of the city. The redeveloper shall comply with the covenants and conditions of the plan as deemed necessary, proper, or convenient by the city. 
c.  The redeveloper shall not impose any restrictions on the basis of national origin, race, religion, sex, or color, by entering into, executing, or being a party to any covenant, conveyance, or any other written instrument, which would restrict the sale, lease, use or occupancy of the project area, or any part thereof, or any improvements placed thereon. The redeveloper shall duly comply with all federal, state, and local laws, in effect from time to time, that prohibit discrimination or segregation on the basis of national origin, race, religion, sex, or color. 
d.  Landscape treatment shall be applied to all land that is not covered by buildings, structures, paved parking, loading, or service areas. Landscape treatment shall include, but not be limited to, paved areas for pedestrian circulation, decorative surface treatments, and planting such as trees, shrubs, ground cover, grass and flowers. The extent and details of landscaping shall be determined by the nature of the development and shall augment the utility of the site, enhance the aesthetics of the structures, soften and relieve the effects of parking and paved areas, and provide visual harmony. The property owner shall be responsible for all landscaping and maintenance of this landscaping. 
e.  All exterior surface parking areas shall be paved with a hard, dust-free and erosion resistant material. Such areas shall be appropriately screened from all adjacent streets and sidewalks with, but not limited to, masonry walls, fences, trees, and shrubs planted at a regular, appropriate interval or a combination of these. Parking lots shall be designed with landscaped islands to accommodate deciduous trees at a minimum rate of one per 2,500 square feet of gross parking area. 
f.  All off-street loading spaces shall be provided as needed and shall conform with minimum design standards. Adequate maneuvering spaces shall be provided within the property lines. 
g.  No refuse or garbage shall be permitted to remain outside any building, except as permitted under codes and regulations. There shall be designated areas for the location of containers and receptacles to afford refuse and garbage and all such containers and receptacles shall be properly screened. 
h.  No signs shall be permitted except for those which identify the property or the use conducted thereon. There shall be no animated or pulsating signs. Any sign shall be located within the confines of the property. 
i.  The regulations and limitations of the city zoning ordinance shall apply to the project area. 
(3)  Provisions that apply to properties not being acquired. Properties that are not acquired, but are within the project area, shall be subjected to the conditions of subsection (b)(1) of this section, pertaining to permitted uses. Owners of properties located outside the acquisition area but within the project area, who acquire property that lie within the acquisition area and develop the two jointly, shall comply with all the provisions under subsection (b)(2) of this section, pertaining to building requirements for land to be acquired. 
(4)  Special building requirements. 
a.  All buildings within the 16 block downtown core, bounded by the railroad tracks to the northeast, 6th Avenue to the northwest, parts of 17th and 18th Streets to the southwest and 1st Avenue to the southeast, shall be intensely developed to promote pedestrian activities. The core area will encourage the development of high-intensity retail and other commercial uses at the sidewalk level and will discourage architecturally unaesthetic uses such as blank walls, parking garages/lots/facilities and curbcuts. 
b.  Parking shall be kept at a minimum on 18th and 19th Streets which are the ingress and egress of the project area and the 16 block core downtown area. 
(Code 1995, § 40-28; Ord. No. 3051, § 3, 1-5-1999) 
Sec. 38-22. - Creation of a design review board. 
(a)  Creation. The city council will create a design review board (hereafter DRB) to perform the duties and responsibilities of the city in accepting, considering, and approving or rejecting applications for certificates of appropriateness, as set out in the bylaws of the DRB. 
(b)  Members, number, appointment, terms, compensation, officers, rules and regulations. 
(1)  This board shall be composed of not less than seven members who shall have demonstrated experience or training in the fields of architecture, urban planning, or law. The DRB will be composed of the following persons: 
a.  Three members will serve by virtue of position. Those shall be: 
1.  The director of economic and community development; 
2.  Tthe director of building and inspection services; and 
3.  The chairman of the historic preservation commission. 
These members will serve on the DRB for the duration of their employment in these positions. 
b.  One member shall be a member of the city council and shall be appointed by the city council. 
c.  One member shall be an architectural design professional and shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council for a three-year term. 
d.  Two members shall be selected from the downtown business community and shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council for three-year terms. 
(2)  Members of the DRB may be removed for cause by the city council. 
(3)  Members of the DRB may select a chairman and vice-chairman and such other officers as the members deem necessary. The DRB shall adopt rules of procedure and shall communicate those rules of procedure to the city council and mayor. The rules of procedure shall specify what number of members of the DRB shall constitute a quorum. 
(4)  Members of the DRB will serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for reasonable expenses incurred on behalf of the DRB, in accordance with the rules of regulations for the reimbursement of expenses adopted by the DRB. 
(5)  The DRB may employ such professional, technical, office and other personnel, as may be necessary, to carry out the purposes and responsibilities of the DRB. 
(6)  Meetings of the DRB shall be public meetings and shall be held at designated times and places as are specified in the bylaws of the DRB. 
(7)  Members of the DRB may be reappointed. 
(8)  The city reserves the right and may delegate the duty to the design review committee (DRB) to review and approve the redeveloper's plans and specifications for redevelopment or rehabilitation. Such plans shall conform with the provisions of the city urban renewal plan and the harmonious development of the project area. All such review and approval shall be concerned with, but not limited to, urban design standards, site planning, architectural treatment, materials and color, lighting, signs, parking, loading, landscaping, detailed building plans, elevations, and construction specifications. Such review and approval shall be given in accordance with procedures as specified in the bylaws of the design review committee. 
(Code 1995, § 40-29; Ord. No. 3051, § 4, 1-5-1999) 
Sec. 38-23. - Development objectives plan. 
(a)  Objectives. The development objectives plan of the city urban renewal plan, incorporated herein by reference, shall include development objectives for the project area to guide the city in its review of all proposed developments in the project area. These objectives shall apply to all the properties within the project area. 
(1)  Urban neighborhood. 
(2)  Office/commercial. 
(3)  Research and development/business. 
(4)  Off-street parking. 
(5)  Institutional/semi-public/utility. 
(6)  Retail services, dining and entertainment facilities. 
(b)  Provisions for development; permitted uses. 
(1)  The urban neighborhood category shall include the following: dwellings and related uses, retail commercial uses to serve residents, employees and others, offices, hotels, conference centers, restaurants, banks, showrooms, ancillary off-street parking facilities and other related or nonconflicting uses. Urban neighborhood development uses shall be located within the commercial/residential, service/commercial and the cultural and institutional land use areas. 
(2)  The office/commercial category shall include the following: retail, personal services, recreational, office, ancillary off-street facilities, complementary residential facilities and other related or nonconflicting uses. Office/commercial development uses shall be located within the commercial/residential, service/commercial and central business district land use areas. 
(3)  The research and development/business category shall include the following: research and development firms, laboratories, offices, ancillary retail facilities, ancillary off-street parking facilities and other related or nonconflicting uses. Research and development/business development uses shall be located within the commercial/residential, service/commercial and cultural and institutional land use areas. 
(4)  The off-street parking category shall include the following: parking lots, parking decks, commercial facilities and other related or nonconflicting uses. It is the intent of the city urban renewal plan to encourage the development of commercial facilities and other pedestrian amenities along the street level of all existing and new parking decks. The off-street parking development uses shall be located within the commercial/residential land use areas. 
(5)  The institutional/semipublic/utility category shall include the following: places of worship and related uses, educational facilities, public utility facilities and other institutional and semipublic uses and other related or nonconflicting uses. Institutional/semipublic/utility development shall be located within the commercial/residential and cultural and institutional land use areas. 
(6)  The retail services, dining and entertainment facilities category shall include the following: banks and other legal lending institutions, delicatessens, hotels, offices, pharmacies and medical supply stores, restaurants, lounges, retail stores and personal service establishments and other related or nonconflicting uses. Retail services, dining and entertainment facilities development uses shall be located within the commercial/residential, cultural and institutional and central business districts. 
(c)  Revision and amendment of development objectives. 
(1)  The city planning commission shall have the authority to review the city urban renewal plan development objectives, from time to time. Based on the findings derived from these reviews, the city planning commission may amend the plan development objectives when it is determined that such amendments are necessary, proper and appropriate to uphold the spirit of the overall objectives of this plan. 
(2)  The decision of the city planning commission to amend the development objectives shall require the adopting of a resolution describing the amendment so made. Such resolution shall be adopted in a similar manner by which a resolution is adopted recommending the adoption of an urban renewal and urban redevelopment plan to the city council. The said amendment to the development objectives shall be effective upon adoption and a copy of the same shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and another copy shall be attached to the copy of the city urban renewal plan, also maintained in the files of the city clerk. 
(Code 1995, § 40-30; Ord. No. 3051, § 5, 1-5-1999) 
Sec. 38-24. - Project implementation. 
(a)  Authority and redevelopment. In implementing the city urban renewal plan, the city shall purchase or have the authority to acquire by the exercise of eminent domain a part of the project area that it deems necessary, convenient or proper to proceed with the purposes of the project. The city may also enter into an agreement with a redeveloper as it deems necessary, convenient, or proper to develop any part or whole of the project area, in accordance with the requirements set out herein. 
(b)  Public improvements. In addition to the improvements of the properties identified in the blighting conditions map, necessary minor repairs to storm drains, streets, street lighting, etc., will be undertaken. 
(c)  Acquisition. The city council has determined that it is necessary, desirable and in the interest of the public to acquire any identified properties by purchase or by the exercise of eminent domain. All such properties shall be acquired by fee simple or any interest therein and the existing structures thereon may be demolished or rehabilitated as appropriate for redevelopment. Likewise, other properties may be acquired and demolished or rehabilitated if the city council deems it to be necessary, desirable and in the public interest so that all such acquired properties shall constitute a part of the acquisition property. The city council may also acquire alleys and require the vacation of all acquired alleys for redevelopment if it is deemed necessary, desirable and in the public interest for such acquisition and vacation to take place. Such acquisition shall take place on a case-by-case basis. 
(d)  Disposition. The proposed acquisition plan is that properties that are considered blighted/blighting shall be considered on a case-by-case method. Upon assessment of each piece of property, the need to dispose of by means of sale, lease, conveyance or other to redevelopers shall be determined. Those parcels which are meant to be subdivided or combined may be done so by virtue of surveys that describe the precise details and shall be determined as necessary, proper or convenient by the city. 
(e)  Rehabilitation and new construction plan review. The redeveloper shall submit detailed plans to the design review committee, for new construction, including parking lots, or the rehabilitation of any property, located in the project area, not to be acquired under the provisions of the city urban renewal plan. The design review committee will review all the submitted plans, using any and all procedures defined in the bylaws of the DRB, for conformance with the provisions of the city urban renewal plan and the desired, harmonious development of the project area, and as such these shall concern, but not be limited to, urban design, site planning, architectural treatment, materials and color, lighting, signs, parking, loading, landscaping, building plans, building elevations and construction details. Upon the approval of the plans, a certificate of appropriateness will be issued by the DRB and the redeveloper may submit applications for building, soil erosion, and/or sedimentation control permits for any property located in the project area. When the design review committee approves the plans submitted by a redeveloper as being consistent with the objectives of the city urban renewal plan, the city shall authorize the processing of the plans for the issuance of the necessary building permit. 
(f)  Commercial revitalization. Commercial revitalization shall take place in conformance with the provisions of the design review process, applicable city codes, property maintenance standards, incentive programs, and the management and technical assistance to business people, property owners, and residents of the project area. 
(g)  Demolition. All applications requesting demolition permits shall be submitted to the design review committee for review and approval. The written approval, from the design review committee, of such an application shall be regarded as authorization for the processing of a demolition permit. If an application submitted to the design review committee has not been acted upon by the design review committee for a period of six months, as per proof presented by the property owner, then the building inspection services shall process the application for a demolition permit. 
(h)  Relocation. 
(1)  All efforts of acquisition, demolition and construction by a redeveloper, shall be undertaken in stages, as presented in the city urban renewal plan, so as to minimize any disruption to the surrounding, existing businesses and establishments. 
(2)  It is the explicit right of the city to provide or require a redeveloper to provide all assistance, as the city deems necessary, proper and convenient to effectuate the purposes of the city urban renewal plan. 
(3)  There shall be no permanent residents in the acquisition property. 
(i)  Zoning. Existing zoning classifications for the project area, as shown in the city zoning map, shall comply with the adoption of the city urban renewal plan. In the event that a zoning classification change is requested or applied for, all the established procedures, as described in the city zoning ordinance, shall be considered, including but not limited to ending notices to affected property owners and the right of such property owners to be heard in a public hearing. 
(j)  Historic preservation. The review and approval of plans submitted for rehabilitation or demolition may include consideration for the preservation of historic structures and districts, in accordance with the city urban renewal plan, which have been or may be designated by the city, the state or the United States Department of the Interior. 
(Code 1995, § 40-31; Ord. No. 3051, § 6, 1-5-1999) 
Sec. 38-25. - Enforcement and penalty provisions. 
(a)  Enforcement. Compliance with the terms of this article shall be enforced by the city's department of buildings and inspection. 
(1)  Failure to comply with a certificate of appropriateness shall be a violation of this article. The discontinuance of work or the lack of progress towards achieving compliance with a certificate of appropriateness, as laid out in the bylaws of the DRB shall be considered a failure to comply with the terms of this article. 
(2)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit, impair, or limit in any way the power of the city's department of buildings and inspection to prevent the alteration, construction, restoration, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or removal of buildings, structures, appurtenant fixtures, or outdoor signs in the project area in violation of the provisions of this article. 
(3)  The enforcement of any remedy provided in this article shall not prevent the use and enforcement of any other remedy provided for by this Code for violations of validly enacted ordinances of the city or state statutes. 
(b)  Violations. Whenever, by the provisions of this article and after review by the design review committee, the performance of any act is required or prohibited regarding the alteration, construction, demolition, or outdoor signage of any property under the jurisdiction of this article, a parties' failure to comply with such provisions shall constitute a violation of this article and shall be deemed a class A misdemeanor. 
(c)  Liability for violations. The owner, tenant or occupant of any land or structure, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, or maintains any situation that is contrary to the requirements of this article shall be held responsible for the violation and be subject to the penalties and remedies provided therein. 
(d)  Procedure of notification upon discovery of violation. 
(1)  Upon discovery of a violation of this section, the design review committee shall notify in writing by first class mail the party responsible for said violation. Such notice shall indicate the provisions of this article violated, the nature of the violation, the action necessary to correct the violation, the date by which this violation must be remedied and the penalties for noncompliance. Service of such notice shall be deemed completed at the time of deposit in the post office or any United States mailbox in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, and addressed to the person to be notified at his last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records. Proof of this notice may be made by a return receipt signed by the recipient notified by United States mail. 
(2)  After written notification of such violation from the design review committee to the party responsible and the latter's subsequent failure to rectify the situation, the committee will notify the city's department of buildings and inspection of the noncompliance with this article. An authorized employee of that department or an employee of the city shall serve a notice of noncompliance to the party responsible for the violation indicating the provisions of this article violated, the nature of the violation, and ordering the action necessary to correct the violation. This notice shall be in the form of a written citation, signed by an authorized employee of the city's department of buildings and inspection and shall be delivered to the offender either at his residence or at his place of business or at the place where the violation occurred. This notice shall specify a date and time when the party responsible and/or their agents are commanded to appear before the municipal court of the city. If said party do not appear on the date specified, a warrant will be issued for this party's arrest. 
(e)  Penalty. Violation of any provision of this article shall subject the responsible party to a criminal penalty not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 or imprisonment not to exceed six months or both and costs of court for each offense. Penalties imposed upon a corporation shall consist of the fine only, plus costs of court. Each day that a violation is allowed to continue in violation of this article shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(f)  Remedies. Any use of land or a structure, or construction or alteration of a structure in violation of this article is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se. The imposition of any penalty under the provisions of this section does not prevent equitable relief in the form of an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to correct or abate such violation or to prevent occupancy of such building structure. 
(Code 1995, § 40-32; Ord. No. 3051, § 7, 1-5-1999) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-45-9 and 11-45-9.1. 
Sec. 38-26. - Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city building and zoning codes, not to prevent any property owner from making any use of his property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances, and regulations. 
(Code 1995, § 40-33; Ord. No. 3051, § 8, 1-5-1999) 
Sec. 38-27. - Conflict. 
    In the instance of a conflict between this article and Ordinance No. 2541 (historic preservation commission), Ordinance No. 2541 shall take precedence. 
(Code 1995, § 40-34; Ord. No. 3051, § 9, 1-5-1999) 
Secs. 38-28-38-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WESTERN AREA URBAN RENEWAL AND REDEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 38-58. - Legal authority. 
(a)  The project area, as shown in Figure 1, Project Area Map, encompasses the boundaries of the urban renewal plan for the western area of the city, entitled Urban Redevelopment and Urban Renewal Plan for the Western Area in the City of Bessemer, Alabama, adopted by the city council, on December 17, 2002 by Resolution No. 666-02. 
(b)  The western area redevelopment project is authorized under Code of Ala. 1975, tit. 24, chs. 2 and 3, as amended, as a separate, distinct, and independent urban redevelopment and renewal project and is in accordance with the department of community development goals and objectives. 
(c)  The goals and objectives of the plan have identified a set of design review standards, adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 3207, § I, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 38-59. - Urban redevelopment and renewal project description. 
(a)  Project summary. The project will establish a land use plan for the project area to define the development of urban neighborhoods, commercial development and industrial development in the targeted project area. The project includes public improvements, such as, landscaping, lighting, infrastructure (water and sanitary sewer), street improvements and acquisition, demolition and resale of property to be developed for uses appropriate to the project area. The project will improve conditions for the continued development of residential, office, commercial, industrial, and recreational land uses. The project will make provisions for the revitalization of commercial, industrial, and residential property, as shown in Figure 10, Existing Land Use Map. 
(b)  Boundary. Figure 1, Project Area Map shows the boundary of the project area which lies predominantly northwest of Interstate 20/59 between the McAshan Drive Interchange (I-20/59 Exit #104) to the south and Murphy's Lane (County Road 36) and Valley Creek to the north. Figure 1 is incorporated herein by reference. 
(c)  Redevelopment plan intent. 
(1)  To prevent the spread or the development of blight and blighting factors and deteriorating conditions; 
(2)  To eliminate all blighted and deteriorated conditions and the effects of blighting and deteriorating influences of improved and unimproved property; 
(3)  To eliminate dilapidation; overcrowding; obsolescence; inappropriate design; faulty arrangements; poor site conditions; a lack of ventilation, light and sanitary facilities; excessive land coverage; deleterious land use; obsolete site layout; diversity of ownership or unusual conditions of title and under-utilization; 
(4)  To promote sound growth of the project area and the community; 
(5)  To promote a practical and efficient transportation and traffic pattern that utilizes proper traffic flow and access management, emphasizing a balance between vehicular, transit, bicycle, pedestrian and other modes of travel and to minimize any disruption to existing and new development; 
(6)  To promote the development of sound retail, service, and office businesses, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and residential neighborhoods; 
(7)  To provide and improve public services such as streets, sidewalks, lighting, utilities/infrastructure, parks and open spaces, and landscaping to create an attractive and inviting environment for pedestrians and motorists; 
(8)  To preserve and rehabilitate historic structures in the project area, which have been or may be designated as such by the city, the state or the United States Department of the Interior; and, 
(9)  To promote viable, well-designed residential neighborhoods, within the project area, with appropriate public infrastructure and amenities. 
(Ord. No. 3207, § II, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 38-60. - Development goals and objectives. 
(a)  General intent and application. The development goals and objectives of the urban redevelopment and urban renewal plan for the western area in the city, incorporated herein by reference, shall include goals and objectives for the project area to guide the city in its review of all proposed developments in the project area. These objectives shall apply to all the properties within the project area. 
(b)  Goals and objectives. The goals and objectives are as follows: 
(1)  Goal 1. To encourage well-planned industrial development in and around the Powder Plant Road corridor. The objectives are as follows: 
a.  Establish appropriate zoning regulations to ensure industrial development is planned and designed to preserve the scenic nature of the area. 
b.  Establish appropriate design guidelines that facilitate well-planned, attractive industrial and heavy commercial developments. 
c.  Develop a transportation plan for the project area to determine potential need for new roads to serve industrial growth and the accommodation of the future northern beltway. 
(2)  Goal 2. To develop the Visionland Parkway and the Academy Drive area as a regional recreational and commercial tourist center. The objectives are as follows: 
a.  Promote the theme park and outlet center as regional attractions to tourists and area residents. 
b.  Improve traffic access and visibility of the theme park and outlet center from Interstate 20/59. 
c.  Encourage supporting recreational development adjacent to the theme park and outlet center. 
d.  Take advantage of access to the theme park and outlet center from the future northern beltway and future Cedar Hill/VisionLand Parkway interchange. 
e.  Refurbish the existing municipally-owned golf course (Frank House Municipal Golf Course) by installing new, updated irrigation equipment to ensure adequate water supply and updating the clubhouse facility to provide handicap accessible restrooms and meeting facilities. 
(3)  Goal 3. To encourage commercial development in support of the theme park and outlet center. The objectives are as follows: 
a.  Establish commercial zoning at the future Cedar Hill/VisionLand Parkway interchange for I-20/59. 
b.  Establish commercial zoning at the intersection of Powder Plant Road and VisionLand Parkway. 
c.  Encourage the revitalization and/or redevelopment of single-family residential areas adjacent to the theme park, outlet center, and future Cedar Hill/VisionLand Parkway interstate interchange. 
(4)  Goal 4. To enhance the visual quality and experience of the Academy Drive, Powder Plant Road, and VisionLand Parkway corridors. The objectives are as follows: 
a.  Establish design guidelines for industrial and commercial development within the project area to ensure appropriate site development, landscaping, and building design. 
b.  Preserve and protect natural, scenic areas through landscape easements, buffers, and other development regulations. 
c.  Develop appropriate signage standards to prevent visual clutter associated with industrial and commercial developments along the Academy Drive, Powder Plant Road, and Visionland Parkway corridors. 
d.  Collaborate with the Metropolitan Planning Organization on the design of the proposed northern beltway within the project area to integrate this roadway within the overall development plans for the project area. 
(5)  Goal 5. To encourage well-planned commercial and industrial development around the McAshan Drive interchange (#104) of Interstate 20/59. The objectives are as follows: 
a.  Establish design guidelines for commercial and industrial development around the interchange to ensure appropriate site development, landscaping, and building design. 
b.  Develop appropriate signage standards to prevent "visual clutter" associated with commercial developments along McAshan Drive. 
(6)  Goal 6. To expedite the commercial growth of the Academy Way Business Park. The objectives are as follows: 
a.  Provide adequate road access to facilitate commercial development. 
b.  Provide adequate water and sewer infrastructure. 
c.  Establish design guidelines for commercial development to ensure appropriate site development, landscaping, and building design. 
(c)  Revision and amendment of development objectives. Revision and amendment of development objectives: 
(1)  The city planning commission shall have the authority to review the urban redevelopment and urban renewal plan for the western area in the city development goals and objectives from time to time. Through the findings of these reviews, the planning commission may amend these goals and objectives when it is determined that such amendments are necessary and appropriate to uphold the spirit of the overall intentions of this plan. 
(2)  The decision of the city planning commission to amend the development goals and objectives shall require the adoption of a resolution describing the amendments so made. Such resolution shall be adopted in a similar manner by which it adopts a resolution for the adoption of an urban redevelopment and urban renewal plan to the city council. The said amendment to the development goals and objectives shall be effective upon adoption and a copy of the same shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and another copy shall be attached to the copy of the urban redevelopment and urban renewal plan for the western area in the city, also maintained in the files of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 3207, § III, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 38-61. - Land use plan. 
(a)  Figure 12, Proposed Land Use Concept shows the land categories described as follows and is incorporated herein by reference: 
(1)  Agricultural; 
(2)  Commercial/general; 
(3)  Commercial/neighborhood; 
(4)  Commercial/office; 
(5)  Industrial and manufacturing/heavy; 
(6)  Industrial and manufacturing/light; 
(7)  Institutional; 
(8)  Parks and recreation; 
(9)  Residential/single-family; 
(10)  Residential/multifamily. 
(b)  Land use provisions and building requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Permitted uses. 
a.  Agricultural. The agricultural land use category shall include all agricultural uses and the types of residential uses which are suited to agricultural areas. The agricultural uses shall include farming, the raising of fowl and livestock, commercial activities associated with agricultural production, and low density residential uses. These uses shall comply with the requirements identified in the A-1 agricultural district of the city zoning ordinance, July 1996. 
b.  Commercial/general. The general commercial land use category shall include commercial services, retail sales, hotel and conference facilities, cultural and entertainment activities, and other related uses serving the community-at-large and surrounding areas. These uses shall comply with the requirements identified in the following districts of the zoning ordinance, July 1996: C-3 community business, C-4 arterial services, C-6 planned shopping, and C-7 health and institutional. For the purposes of accommodating these uses, ancillary off-street parking and loading facilities shall also be permitted and such ancillary uses shall be planned to adhere to design schemes which shall include landscaping and adequate buffers, screens, and noise abatement measures as necessary. 
c.  Commercial/neighborhood. The neighborhood commercial land use category shall include commercial and personal services, retail sales, offices, cultural and recreational activities, and other related uses intended to serve residential neighborhoods lying within and adjacent to the project area. These uses shall comply with the requirements identified in the following districts of the zoning ordinance, July 1996: C-1 neighborhood commercial, SC-1 neighborhood shopping center, C-7 health and institutional, and O-1 office services. For the purposes of accommodating these uses, ancillary off-street parking and loading facilities shall also be permitted and such ancillary uses shall be planned to adhere to design schemes which shall include landscaping and adequate buffers, screens, and noise abatement measures as necessary to provide compatibility with surrounding residential neighborhoods. The site layout and design of neighborhood commercial areas and associated off-street parking facilities are recommended to encourage pedestrian safety and accessibility from and within adjacent neighborhoods and building design of a character and scale appropriate to surrounding residential areas. 
d.  Commercial/office. The office commercial land use category shall include offices and office complexes, research and development facilities, support services, and other related uses. These uses shall comply with the requirements identified in the following districts of the zoning ordinance, July 1996: O-1 office services and C-7 health and institutional. For the purposes of accommodating these uses, ancillary off-street parking and loading facilities shall also be permitted and such ancillary uses shall be planned to adhere to design schemes which shall include landscaping and adequate buffers, screens, and noise abatement measures as necessary. 
e.  Industrial and manufacturing/heavy. The heavy industrial and manufacturing land use category shall include manufacturing facilities, processing plants, mining and extraction operations, and other related high intensity industrial uses. These uses shall comply with the requirements identified in the following districts of the zoning ordinance, July 1996: I-2 heavy industrial, I-3 industrial, I-3-S strip mining, and I-O obnoxious odors. For the purposes of accommodating these uses, ancillary off-street parking and loading facilities shall also be permitted and such ancillary uses shall be planned to adhere to design schemes which shall include landscaping and adequate buffers, screens, and noise abatement measures as necessary. 
f.  Industrial and manufacturing/light. The light industrial and manufacturing land use category shall include wholesaling, warehousing, and distribution centers; truck and bus terminal facilities; heavy equipment sales and repair services; light industrial, fabricating, and assembly operations; planned industrial development; and other related uses. These uses shall comply with the requirements identified in the I-1 light industrial and I-6 planned industrial districts of the city zoning ordinance, July 1996. For the purposes of accommodating these uses, ancillary off-street parking and loading facilities shall also be permitted and such ancillary uses shall be planned to adhere to design schemes which shall include landscaping and adequate buffers, screens, and noise abatement measures as necessary. 
g.  Institutional. The institutional land use category shall include churches, schools, libraries, hospital, government buildings, and other related uses. These uses shall comply with the requirements identified in the following districts of the zoning ordinance, July 1996: INST-1, INST-2, and INST-3 institutional districts. For the purposes of accommodating these uses, ancillary off-street parking and loading facilities shall also be permitted and such ancillary uses shall be planned to adhere to design schemes which shall include landscaping and adequate buffers, screens, and noise abatement measures as necessary. 
h.  Parks and recreation. The parks and recreation land use category shall include theme and amusement parks, campgrounds, sports venues, golf ranges, zoos, and other related uses. These uses shall comply with the requirements identified in the PRD planned recreational district of the city zoning ordinance, July 1996. For the purposes of accommodating these uses; ancillary off-street parking and loading facilities shall also be permitted and such ancillary uses shall be planned to adhere to design schemes which shall include landscaping and adequate buffers, screens, and noise abatement measures as necessary. 
i.  Residential/single-family. The homes single-family residential land use category shall include traditional single-family, duplexes, and patio/garden homes, as well as schools, parks, churches, child care centers, and other related uses which serve the residents of such neighborhoods. These uses shall comply with the requirements identified in following districts of the zoning ordinance, July 1996: R-1 single-family, R-2 single-family, R-3 single-family/two-family residential, and R-3-A patio home/garden home. For the purposes of accommodating related nonresidential uses as stated above, ancillary off-street parking and loading facilities shall also be permitted and such ancillary uses shall be planned to adhere to design schemes which shall include landscaping and adequate buffers, screens, and noise abatement measures as necessary to provide compatibility with surrounding residential neighborhoods. The site layout and design of such uses and associated off-street parking facilities are recommended to encourage pedestrian safety and accessibility from and within adjacent neighborhoods and building design of a character and scale appropriate to surrounding residential areas. 
j.  Residential/multifamily. The multifamily residential land use category shall include apartment buildings and complexes, single- and two-family dwellings, condominiums, patio/garden homes, townhouses, as well as schools, parks, churches, child care centers, and other related nonresidential uses which serve the residents of such neighborhoods. These uses shall comply with the requirements identified in the following districts of the zoning ordinance, July 1996: R-4 multifamily residential-low density and R-5 multifamily residential-medium density. For the purposes of accommodating related nonresidential uses as stated above, ancillary off-street parking and loading facilities shall also be permitted and such ancillary uses shall be planned to adhere to design schemes which shall include landscaping and adequate buffers, screens, and noise abatement measures as necessary to provide compatibility with surrounding residential neighborhoods. The site layout and design of such uses and associated off-street parking facilities are recommended to encourage pedestrian safety and accessibility from and within adjacent neighborhoods and building design of a character and scale appropriate to surrounding residential areas. 
(2)  Building requirements for land to be acquired are as follows: 
a.  The city shall enter into a redevelopment agreement with a redeveloper (referred to as "redeveloper", hereinafter), when acquiring a particular piece of property for redevelopment. Such property shall be shown on Figure 17, Property Ownership/Acquisition Map; such property shall be referred to as acquisition property hereinafter. The redevelopment agreement shall provide for the following: 
1.  All the acquisition property used in the area, by the redeveloper, shall be for the purposes designated in the urban redevelopment and urban renewal plan for the western area in the city; 
2.  The redeveloper will begin improvements upon a building or commence construction of improvements, as required by the urban redevelopment and urban renewal plan for the western area in the city, within a time period determined by the city; 
3.  The redeveloper will comply with the conditions, deemed necessary, proper or convenient by the city, when carrying out the purposes of the Code of Ala. 1975, tit. 24, chs. 2 and 3, and the urban redevelopment and urban renewal plan for the western area in the city; and, 
4.  The requirements of the urban redevelopment and urban renewal plan for the western area in the city shall be effectively implemented through the instruments of conveyance that allow the incorporation of covenants and conditions pertaining to the land. These covenants and conditions shall be for the sole use and benefit of the city. The redeveloper shall comply with the covenants and conditions of the plan as deemed necessary, proper or convenient by the city. 
b.  The city hereby authorizes the existing urban renewal design review board (hereafter DRB) to review and approve the redeveloper's plans and specifications for redevelopment or rehabilitation. Such plans shall conform with the provisions of the urban redevelopment and urban renewal plan for the western area in the city and the harmonious development of the project area. All such review and approval shall be concerned with, but not limited to, urban design standards, site planning, architectural treatment, materials and color, lighting, signs, parking, loading, landscaping, and detailed building plans, elevations and construction specifications. 
c.  The redeveloper shall not impose any restrictions on the basis of national origin, race, religion, sex or color, by entering into; executing; being a party to any covenant, conveyance; or any other written instrument, which would restrict the sale, lease, use or occupancy of the project area, or any part thereof, or any improvements placed thereon. The redeveloper shall duly comply with all federal, state and local laws, in effect from time to time, that prohibit discrimination or segregation on the basis of national origin, race, religion, sex or color. 
d.  Landscape treatment shall be applied to all land that is not covered by buildings, structures, paved parking, loading or service areas. Landscape treatment shall include, but not be limited to, paved areas for pedestrian circulation, decorative surface treatments and planting such as trees, shrubs, ground cover, grass and flowers. The extent and details of landscaping shall be determined by the nature of the development and shall augment the utility of the site, enhance the aesthetics of the structures, soften and relieve the effects of parking and paved areas; and, provide visual harmony. The property owner shall be responsible for all landscaping and maintenance. 
e.  All exterior surface parking areas shall be paved with a hard, dust-free and erosion resistant material. Such areas shall be appropriately screened from all adjacent streets and sidewalks with, but not limited to, masonry walls, fences, trees and shrubs planted at an appropriate, regular interval or a combination of these. Parking lots shall be designed with landscaped islands to accommodate deciduous trees at a minimum rate of one per 2,500 square feet of gross parking area. 
f.  All off-street loading spaces shall be provided as needed and shall conform with minimum design standards. Adequate maneuvering spaces shall be provided within the property lines. 
g.  No refuse or garbage shall be permitted to remain outside any building, except as permitted under city codes and regulations. There shall be designated areas for the location of containers and receptacles to afford refuse and garbage; and all such containers and receptacles shall be properly screened. Areas designated for the location of such containers shall not be permitted within the required front setback of a property. Areas designated for such containers and receptacles shall be located in the rear of the building or in a similar location which obscures the view of such receptacle from a public right-of-way. 
h.  No signs shall be permitted except for those which identify the property or the use conducted thereon. There shall be no animated or pulsating signs. All signs shall be located within the confines of the property. 
i.  All regulations and limitations of the city zoning ordinance shall apply to the project area. 
(Ord. No. 3207, § IV, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 38-62. - Project implementation. 
(a)  Authority and redevelopment. In implementing the urban redevelopment and urban renewal plan for the western area in the city, the city shall purchase or have the authority to acquire by the exercise of eminent domain a part of the project area that it deems necessary, convenient or proper to proceed with the purposes of the project. The city may also enter into an agreement with a redeveloper, as it deems necessary, convenient or proper, to develop any part or the whole of the project area, in accordance with the requirements set out herein. 
(b)  Public improvements. In addition to the recommended improvements to properties identified in Figure 16, Proposed Public Improvements Map, necessary minor repairs to storm drains, streets, street lighting, etc., shall be undertaken. This shall include the planning of future public roads and other infrastructure needed to support the continued growth and redevelopment of the project area. 
(c)  Acquisition. As shown in the acquisition map, the city council has determined that it is necessary, desirable and in the interest of the public to acquire all the identified properties by purchase or by the exercise of eminent domain. All such properties shall be acquired by fee simple or any interest therein and the existing structures thereon may be demolished as appropriate for redevelopment. Likewise, other properties may be acquired and demolished if the city council deems it to be necessary, desirable and in the public interest so that all such acquired properties shall constitute a part of the acquisition property. The city council may also acquire alleys and require the vacation of all acquired alleys for redevelopment if it is deemed necessary, desirable and in the public interest for such acquisition and vacation to take place. 
(d)  Disposition. The acquisition map shows all the properties/parcels which are to be disposed of by means of sale, lease, conveyance or other to redevelopers. Those parcels which are meant to be subdivided or combined may be done so by virtue of surveys that describe the precise details and shall be determined as necessary, proper or convenient by the city. 
(e)  Rehabilitation and new construction plan review. The redeveloper shall submit detailed plans to the design review board, for new construction, including parking lots, or the rehabilitation of any property located in the project area, not to be acquired under the provisions of the urban redevelopment and urban renewal plan for the western area in the city. The design review board will review all the submitted plans for conformance with the provisions of the urban redevelopment and urban renewal plan for the western area in the city and the desired, harmonious development of the project area, and as such these shall concern, but not be limited to, urban design, site planning, architectural treatment, materials and color, lighting, signs, parking, loading, landscaping, building plans, building elevations and construction details. Upon the approval of the plans, the redeveloper may submit applications for building or soil erosion and sedimentation control permit for any property which is located in the project area. When the design review board approves the plans submitted by a redeveloper as being consistent with the objectives of the urban redevelopment and urban renewal plan for the western area in the city, the city shall authorize the processing of the plans for the issuance of the necessary building permit. 
(f)  Commercial revitalization. Commercial revitalization shall take place in conformance with the provisions of the design review process, applicable city codes, property maintenance standards, incentive programs, and the management and technical assistance to business people, property owners and residents of the project area. 
(g)  Demolition. All applications requesting demolition permits shall be submitted to the design review board for review and approval. The written approval, from the design review board, of such an application shall be regarded as authorization for the processing of a demolition permit. If an application submitted to the design review board has not been acted upon by the design review board for over a period of six months, as per proof presented by the property owner, then the building inspection services shall process the application for a demolition permit. 
(h)  Relocation. 
(1)  All efforts of acquisition, demolition and construction, by a redeveloper, shall be undertaken in stages, as presented in the urban redevelopment and urban renewal plan for the western area in the city, with the intent to minimize any disruption to existing development. 
(2)  It is the explicit right of the city to provide or require a redeveloper to provide all assistance, as the city deems necessary, proper and convenient, to effect the purposes of the urban redevelopment and urban renewal plan for the western area in the city. 
(3)  There shall be no permanent residents in the acquisition property. 
(i)  Zoning. Existing zoning classifications for the project area, as shown in the city zoning map, shall apply with the adoption of the urban redevelopment and urban renewal plan for the western area in the city. In the event that a zoning classification change is requested or applied for, all established procedures, as described in the city zoning ordinance, shall be considered, including but not limited to sending notices to affected property owners and the right of such property owners to be heard in a public hearing. 
(j)  Historic preservation. The review and approval of plans submitted for rehabilitation or demolition may include consideration for the preservation of historic structures and districts, in accordance with the urban redevelopment and urban renewal plan for the western area in the city, which have been or may be designated by the city, the state or the United States Department of the Interior. 
(Ord. No. 3207, § V, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 38-63. - Design review board created. 
    The city council hereby authorizes the existing urban renewal design review board (hereafter DRB) to perform the duties and the responsibilities of the city in accepting, considering, and approving or rejecting applications for certificates of appropriateness, as set out in the bylaws of the DRB. 
(Ord. No. 3207, § VI, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 38-64. - Enforcement and penalties provisions. 
(a)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Compliance with the terms of this article shall be enforced by the city department of buildings and inspection. 
(2)  Failure to comply with a certificate of appropriateness shall be a violation of this article. The discontinuance of work or the lack of progress towards achieving compliance with a certificate of appropriateness, as laid out in the bylaws of the design review board shall be considered a failure to comply with the terms of this article. 
(3)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit, impair, or limit in any way the power of the city department of buildings and inspections to prevent the alteration, construction, restoration, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or removal of buildings, structures, appurtenances, or outdoor signs in the project area in violation of the provisions of this article. 
(4)  The enforcement of any remedy provided in this article shall not prevent the use and enforcement of any other remedy provided for by the code of the city for violations against validly enacted ordinances of the city or state statutes. 
(b)  Violations. Whenever, by the provisions of this article and after review by the design review board, the performance of any act is required or prohibited regarding the alteration, construction, demolition, or outdoor signage of any property under jurisdiction of this article, a parties' failure to comply with such provisions shall constitute a violation of this article and shall be deemed a class A misdemeanor. 
(c)  Liability for violations. The owner, tenant, or occupant of any land or structure, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, or maintains any situation that is contrary to the requirements of this article shall be held responsible for the violation and be subject to the penalties and remedies provided therein. 
(d)  Procedure of notification upon discovery of violation. 
(1)  Upon discovery of a violation of this section, the design review board shall notify in writing by first class mail the party responsible for said violation. Such notice shall indicate the provisions of the article violated, the nature of the violation, the action necessary to correct the violation, the date by which this violation must be remedied, and the penalties for noncompliance. Service of such notice shall be deemed completed at the time of deposit in the post office or any United States mailbox in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, and addressed to the person to be notified at his last known business or residence address as appears in the public records. Proof of this notice may be made by a return receipt signed by the recipient notified by United States mail. 
(2)  After written notification of such violation from the design review board to the party responsible and the latter's subsequent failure to rectify the situation, the board will notify the city's department of building and inspections of the noncompliance with this article. An authorized employee of that department or an employee of the city shall serve a notice of noncompliance to the party responsible for the violation indicating the provisions of this article violated, the nature of the violation, and ordering the action necessary to correct the violation. 
(3)  This notice shall be in the form of a written citation, signed by an authorized employee of the city's department of building and inspections and shall be delivered to the offender either at their residence, at their place of business, or at the place where the violation has occurred. This notice shall specify a date and time when the party responsible and/or agents are commanded to appear before the municipal court of the city. If said party does not appear on the date specified, a warrant will be issued for this party's arrest. 
(e)  Penalty. Violation of any provision of the article shall subject the responsible party to a criminal penalty not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00, or imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both and costs of court for each offense. Penalties imposed upon a corporation shall consist of the fine only, plus costs of court. Each day that a violation of this article continues, it shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(f)  Remedies. Any use of land or a structure or construction or alteration of a structure, in violation of this article, is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se. The imposition of any penalty under the provisions of this section does not prevent equitable relief in the form of an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to correct or abate such violation or to prevent occupancy of such building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 3207, § VII, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 38-65. - Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city building and zoning codes, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of his property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 3207, § VIII, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 38-66. - Conflict. 
    In the instance of a conflict between this article and Ordinance No. 2541 (Historic Preservation Commission), Ordinance No. 2541 shall take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 3207, § IX, 12-17-2002) 
Chapter 42 - COURT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal courts generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Willful failure to appear. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully fail to appear in the municipal court, pursuant to his written bond or in response to a traffic citation given by a police officer of the city, for which the fine has not been paid, or an appearance made in accordance with the ordinances of the city, or willfully fail to appear from time to time as the court may direct, regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested. Any failure to appear shall be presumed prima facie to be willful. 
(Code 1973, § 22-16; Code 1995, § 42-1; Ord. No. 2011, § 1, 2-21-1978) 
Sec. 42-2. - Assessment of court costs, fees upon convictions for violations of traffic and nontraffic offenses. 
(a)  Upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, for a violation of any traffic ordinance or any applicable law of the state related to traffic offenses, there shall be taxed against the defendant, as court costs and fees, an amount not to exceed the court costs and fees then levied in the district court of the county (Bessemer Division), and further provided that in all cases which are nol prossed before conviction the court may, in the discretion of the municipal judge, tax all the court costs and fees in an amount not to exceed the court costs and fees then levied in the district court of the county (Bessemer Division). 
(b)  Upon conviction in the municipal court of the city for a violation of any nontraffic ordinance or any applicable law of the state related to nontraffic offenses, there shall be taxed against the defendant, as court costs and fees, an amount not to exceed the court costs and fees then levied in the district court of the county (Bessemer Division), and further provided that in all cases which are nol prossed before conviction the court may, in the discretion of the municipal judge, tax all costs and fees in an amount not to exceed the court costs and fees then levied in the district court of the county (Bessemer Division). 
(c)  Upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, for violation of any offense for driving while under the influence of alcohol, there shall be taxed against the defendant, as court costs and fees, an amount not to exceed the court costs and fees then levied in the district court of the county (Bessemer Division) and further provided that in all cases which are nol prossed before conviction the court may, in the discretion of the municipal judge, tax all costs and fees in an amount not to exceed court costs and fees then levied in the district court of the county (Bessemer Division). 
(d)  All costs taxed, as herein provided, shall be collected by the court clerk and paid into the city treasury, and all said costs shall be in addition to officers' fees provided by law. The costs in every case tried before the municipal judge shall be entered on a trial docket and in no case shall any person be entitled to any fees unless such fees are clearly set out on the docket, and it shall be the duty of the municipal judge to enforce this provision. Such costs shall automatically be increased in the future as permitted by state law. 
(Ord. No. 3218, § 1, 4-15-2003) 
Secs. 42-3-42-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL JUDGES 

Sec. 42-23. - Appointment; terms; presiding judge; qualifications; vacancies; oath; hearing of applicable cases. 
(a)  The city council shall, by vote of a majority of its members, appoint judges of the municipal court. 
(b)  The term of office of the municipal judges shall be two years or until a successor has been appointed and qualified. This provision shall not be construed as an automatic renewal of a successive two-year term. 
(c)  The mayor shall designate a presiding judge, who shall have such additional duties and powers and be entitled to receive such additional compensation as provided by ordinance. 
(d)  Each judge must be licensed to practice law in this state and must be a qualified elector of the state. No judge shall be otherwise employed in any capacity by the city during his term of office. 
(e)  The office of a municipal judge shall be vacant if he dies, resigns or is removed, and vacancies shall be filled by the city council in the same manner as original appointments are made. 
(f)  Each municipal judge shall, before assuming office, take and sign the oath provided by the state constitution, and a copy thereof shall be filed in the office of the secretary of state, the administrative director of courts and the clerk and, provided that failure to file as required by this subsection shall not render invalid any act, order or judgment of the municipal judge. 
(g)  Municipal judges shall be subject to all grounds of disqualification from hearing specific cases as are applicable to circuit judges. 
(Code 1995, § 42-26; Ord. No. 1998, § 4, 11-22-1977; Ord. No. 2369, § 2, 1-13-1987) 
Sec. 42-24. - Number. 
    The city shall have two parttime municipal judges. 
(Code 1995, § 42-27; Ord. No. 1998, § 4, 11-22-1977; Ord. No. 2369, § 2, 1-13-1987) 
Sec. 42-25. - Powers and duties. 
    The powers and duties of municipal judges shall be the same powers and duties as those set out under state law. 
(Code 1995, § 42-28; Ord. No. 2369, § 6, 1-13-1987) 
Sec. 42-26. - Compensation. 
    The salaries of the municipal judges shall be fixed from time to time by the city council and paid by the city, but no judge's salary shall be diminished during his term. 
(Code 1995, § 42-29; Ord. No. 2369, § 7, 1-13-1987) 
Sec. 42-27. - Adoption of state statutes. 
    The city council adopts as part of this article, all other provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-1 et seq., which have not specifically been set forth in this article. 
(Code 1995, § 42-30; Ord. No. 2369, § 8, 1-13-1987) 
Secs. 42-28-42-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INDIGENT DEFENSE SYSTEM[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipality retaining a court is required to provide indigent defense services, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-9. 

Sec. 42-58. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Appointed counsel means any attorney licensed to practice law in the state who is appointed by the court to represent one or more indigent defendants. 
    Indigent defendant means any person charged in a proceeding in the municipal court for which proceeding representation by counsel is constitutionally required and who under oath or affirmation states that he is unable to pay for his defense and who is found by the court to be financially unable to pay for the defense. 
    Indigent defense system means any method or mixture of methods for providing legal representation to indigent defendants, including use of appointed counsel or any alternative method meeting constitutional requirements. 
(Ord. No. 3292, § 3, 11-1-2005) 
Sec. 42-59. - Title. 
    This article shall also be known as the Indigent Defense Ordinance of the City of Bessemer, Alabama. 
(Ord. No. 3292, § 1, 11-1-2005) 
Sec. 42-60. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Establish the indigent defense system to be used in the municipal court of the city; 
(2)  Provide for the collection, accounting and disbursement of monies used in the indigent defense system; and 
(3)  Provide legal counsel for any person found to be indigent by the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 3292, § 2, 11-1-2005) 
Sec. 42-61. - Provision of indigent defense services. 
    Pursuant to state law, indigent defense services in the municipal court of the city, shall be provided pursuant to the provisions of this section, as follows: 
(1)  Appointment of counsel. Any indigent defendant who has been determined by a judge of such court to be an indigent shall be entitled to counsel and the municipal judge making such determination shall appoint an attorney at law from the roster of attorneys authorized to practice law in this state to represent such indigent defendant. 
(2)  Roster of attorneys. The clerk of the municipal court shall keep and maintain a roster of attorneys licensed to practice law in this state from which municipal judges shall appoint attorneys to represent indigent defendants. Attorneys licensed to practice in this state may sign-up with the clerk of the municipal court to be placed on the roster. It is the desire and intent of the governing body that the appointment of attorneys from the roster be made as follows: 
a.  The roster of attorneys shall be kept in chronological order in the order that attorneys sign up for the roster. 
b.  That appointments be made commencing with the first name on the roster and continuing down the roster to the next name on the roster, in order, until the names on the rosters are exhausted at which time appointments shall re-commence from the top of the roster. 
c.  In order to provide immediate representation for incarcerated indigent defendants appearing before the municipal court and in cases where indigent defendants appear before the court for plea negotiations, guilty pleas and sentence impositions from previous appearances and the next attorney on the roster of attorneys is not available in court, and it would otherwise be proper and expedient to appoint indigent counsel so as not to delay such cases, the next attorney on the roster, present in court, may be appointed to represent said indigent defendants. 
d.  Except as set forth in section, unless good cause exists (the next attorney on the roster is not available, cannot provide adequate representation or when a conflict of interest is evident), the order of appointment shall continue in chronological order. 
e.  The clerk of the municipal court, or his designee, shall make the roster of attorneys available at each session of the municipal court with clear delineation of the last attorney to have been appointed. 
(3)  Compensation. Compensation of counsel appointed by a judge of the municipal court shall be paid by the city from the proceeds of the fair trial tax pursuant to state law, in amounts not in excess of $60.00 per hour for time expended in court and $40.00 per hour for time reasonably expended out of court in the preparation of such case. The total fees to any one attorney in any one case, from the time of appointment through the trial of the case, shall not, however, exceed $500.00, unless leave is granted to exceed said sum is made by the appointing judge. Counsel shall also be entitled to be reimbursed for any expenses reasonably incurred in such defense to be approved in advance by the trial judge, but in no individual case shall such expenses exceed one-half of the allowable attorney fees provided in this subsection. 
(4)  Fee petition. Within a reasonable time after the conclusion of the trial or after an acquittal or other judgment disposing of the case, counsel shall submit to the trial judge a fee petition or bill for services rendered, in the form prescribed by the presiding judge, not to exceed the amount provided in subsection (3) of this section, and such bill if approved by the trial judge shall be submitted by the clerk of the municipal court to the treasurer of the city for payment from the proceeds of the fair trial tax, as authorized under state law. 
(5)  Fair trial tax. Pursuant to state law, the clerk of the municipal court shall collect the appropriate fair trial tax on all applicable cases and deposit the moneys in the general fund of the city. Upon using and expending so much of the moneys as is necessary to defray the costs of providing representation for indigent defendants in the municipal court and after payment of such costs, the city shall pay into the state treasury any funds not used for that purpose with an accounting of the moneys expended. Attorney's fees to be paid by the city from this fund must be claimed on the proper fee declaration form duly authenticated and authorized by the signature of the municipal judge. The clerk of the municipal court and the treasurer of the city shall render an accounting of such funds to the state treasurer, as required by law, with a copy of said accounting to the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 3292, § 4, 11-1-2005) 
Chapter 46 - EMERGENCY SERVICES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1-46-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - E-911 SERVICE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency telephone service generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-98-1 et seq. 

Sec. 46-19. - City emergency telephone communication district-Creation. 
    There is hereby created the city emergency telephone communication district, which shall encompass all of the territory lying within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 46-26; Ord. No. 2331, § 1, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 2603, § I, 12-21-1993) 
Sec. 46-20. - Same-City council to govern. 
    The city emergency telephone communication district shall be governed by members of the city council. The city council recognizes that should other governmental entities in the county elect to become subscribers to the E-911 emergency service, the geographical boundaries, the designation, and the constituency of the city council of the emergency telephone communication district will be appropriately changed as provided for in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-98-1 et seq. 
(Code 1995, § 46-27; Ord. No. 2331, § 2, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 2603, § II, 12-21-1993) 
State Law reference- Authority of council to serve as the boards, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-98-4(e). 
Sec. 46-21. - Levy of emergency telephone service charge; collection; disbursal of funds; reduction of levy. 
    The city councilmembers of the emergency telephone communications district shall: 
(1)  Levy on all of the telephone subscribers within the emergency telephone communications district an emergency telephone service charge in an amount not to exceed five percent of the local service tariff rates charged to these subscribers by the telephone companies servicing the communication district; 
(2)  Collect from local telephone companies on a quarterly basis the amount collected by these companies attributable to the emergency telephone service charge to telephone subscribers; 
(3)  Disburse funds collected from the emergency telephone service charge, or any other source in the discharge of its responsibilities under law; and 
(4)  Where the revenues set in subsection (1) of this section prove to be in excess of the amounts needed to operate the service, the city council shall reduce the subscribers' levy accordingly. 
(Code 1995, § 46-228; Ord. No. 2331, § 4(a), (c)-(e), 7-1-1986) 
State Law reference- Authority to levy service charge, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-98-5(a); to reduce charge, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-98-5(b). 
Secs. 46-22-46-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AMBULANCE SERVICE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Ambulances, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-18-1 et seq.; local regulation of ambulances, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-18-7. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-46. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    ADPH means the Alabama Department of Public Health. 
    ADPH/OEMST means Alabama Department of Public Health Office of Emergency Medical Service and Trauma. 
    Ambulance means a motor vehicle including a convalescent ambulance that is intended to be used for and is maintained or operated for the transportation to a medical care facility of persons who are sick or injured. 
    Ambulance driver means any individual who has successfully completed the Emergency Vehicle Operation Course (EVOC) as prescribed by the ADPH/OEMST and who has been granted a current valid license by the ADPH/OEMST. 
    Emergency medical technician, basic (EMT-B) means any person 18 years of age or older who has successfully completed the basic emergency medical technician course of instruction, or its equilvalent, as approved by the state board of health or its designee, and passed the state EMT basic examination and who has been granted a current and valid license by the state board of health or its designee. 
    Emergency medical technician, intermediate (EMT-I) means any person 18 years of age or older who has successfully completed the intermediate emergency medical technician course of instruction, or its equivalent, as approved by the state board of health or its designee, and passed the state EMT intermediate examination and who has been granted a current and valid license by the state board of health or its designee. 
    Emergency medical technician paramedic (EMT-P) means any person 18 years or older who has successfully completed the EMT paramedic course of instruction, or its equilvalent, as approved by the state board of health or its designee, and passed the state EMT paramedic examination and who has been granted a current and valid license by the state board of health or its designee. 
    Fire chief means the chief of the Bessemer Fire Department, or such member of the fire department as he may from time to time designate to act for him under this chapter. 
    Mutual aid means an agreement made between two like entities to provide assistance to each other in times of emergencies. 
    Patient means an individual who receives or requests medical care, or for whom medical care is requested, because such individual is sick or injured. 
    Public safety dispatch center means the location that houses the dispatchers for the fire department and police department of the city. 
    Public safety-emergency medical dispatcher (dispatcher) means an individual, trained to meet ADPH/OEMST requirements, who receives emergency calls, dispatches and maintains communications with fire, police and public safety personnel. 
(Code 1995, § 46-51; Ord. No. 1938, § 2, 5-25-1976) 
Sec. 46-47. - Applicability of article. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to the operation of any ambulance while traveling without a patient into, through or from the city, or while being used to transport a patient through the city, or from without the city to a location within the city. 
(Code 1995, § 46-52; Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 5-25-1976) 
Sec. 46-48. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or fail to comply therewith or with any requirement thereof, or who shall do any act prohibited therein or fail to do any act required therein, shall, upon conviction, be punished within the limits of and as provided by the Code of Alabama for a misdemeanor. Each offense and each day's continuance of the offense shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1995, § 46-53; Ord. No. 1938, § 22, 5-25-1976) 
Sec. 46-49. - Liability insurance required. 
    No permit required by this article or business license shall be granted to any person to operate any ambulance upon the streets of the city until such person shall have first filed with the city clerk and treasurer a personal injury and property damage liability insurance policy issued to such person by a public liability insurance company authorized to do business in the state providing insurance coverage for each ambulance as follows: 
(1)  For each ambulance the insurance policy shall provide insurance coverage in the amount of $500,000.00 for personal injury or death arising from any one accident, $100,000.00 for property damage liability, and $1,000,000.00 per occurrence for injury to or death of a person, or damage to property, resulting from an accident or collision arising out of or occurring by reason of the careless or negligent operation of such vehicle by such person, his agent, servant or employee, or by any person in possession of such vehicle. 
(2)  The insurance coverages required by this section shall at all times be maintained for the full amount. The policy of insurance required by this section to be filed with the city clerk and treasurer shall contain a clause obligating the company issuing the insurance to give not less than 30 days' written notice to the city clerk and treasurer before cancellation thereof. Notice of cancellation shall not relieve the company issuing such policy of liability for any injury or claim arising before the cancellation becomes effective. The cancellation of any such policy shall have the effect of suspending the permit of such person to operate the ambulances or invalid coaches covered thereby until a new policy complying with the provisions of this section is filed with the city clerk and treasurer. 
(3)  Every insurance policy required under this section shall contain a provision for a continuing liability thereunder to the full amount thereof, notwithstanding any recovery thereon, that the liability of the insurer shall not be affected by the insolvency or the bankruptcy of the insured, and that until the policy is cancelled the insurance company will not be relieved from liability on account of nonpayment of premium, or any act or omission by the named insured. Such policy of insurance shall be further conditioned for the payment of any kind and all judgments, up to the limits of the policy, recovered against any person other than the owner, his agent or employee who may operate the ambulance with the consent or acquiescence of the owner. 
(Code 1995, § 46-54; Ord. No. 1938, § 9, 5-25-1976) 
Sec. 46-50. - Emergency calls-Communications. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of any person operating ambulances, upon receiving an emergency call, to first report such call to the dispatcher on duty at the public safety dispatch center, give the name of the person requesting the ambulance and/or the address of the response location, or the circumstances under which the call was received and obtain the oral permission of such dispatcher before sending, permitting or driving any ambulance to answer such emergency call. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the dispatcher at the public safety dispatch center, upon receiving a request for permission to send or drive an ambulance to answer an emergency call made as provided in this section to immediately give permission thereof, unless an ambulance has already been permitted to go to the scene of the same accident or emergency, in which case such dispatcher shall refuse permission for another ambulance to answer such call unless he is convinced that more than one ambulance is necessary to take care of the emergency properly. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to send, drive, permit or allow an ambulance to answer an emergency call without having first obtained permission from the dispatcher as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person operating any ambulance or place of business wherein an ambulance service business is conducted, or any place used in connection therewith to permit any radio at such place of business or in any vehicle used by such business to be so adjusted or tuned to receive messages or signals on frequencies assigned by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to police, firefighters, or contract ambulance service of the city unless such private ambulance or ambulance service business has been designated as an emergency vehicle receiving station to be assigned the use of frequencies assigned to the city. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any radio station licensed by the FCC for these frequencies. 
(Code 1995, § 46-55; Ord. No. 1938, § 17, 5-25-1976) 
Sec. 46-51. - Same-Response; personnel. 
    All emergency calls will be responded to as outlined in this article concerning permission, communication, reporting and traffic law obedience. There shall be no less than two emergency personnel in the vehicle on all emergency calls, an attendant-driver and a paramedic, for purposes of patient care and ambulance driving. These must be licensed personnel as required by the ADPH/OEMST. 
(Code 1995, § 46-56; Ord. No. 1938, § 18, 5-25-1976) 
Sec. 46-52. - Same-Record. 
    Each holder of an ambulance license issued under this article shall maintain accurate records concerning the transportation of each patient within the city or from one place therein to another place within or beyond its limits, upon forms in words and figures substantially as follows: Such records shall be available for inspection by the fire chief at any reasonable time, and copies thereof shall be made available by the holder of such license within 24 hours after a request by the fire chief. 
(Code 1995, § 46-57; Ord. No. 1938, § 19, 5-25-1976) 
Sec. 46-53. - Calling ambulance without cause. 
    No person shall knowingly and willfully summon an ambulance or report that an ambulance is needed when such person knows that the services of such ambulance are not needed. 
(Code 1973, § 15-120.1; Code 1995, § 46-58) 
Sec. 46-54. - Obedience of driver to traffic laws, ordinances and regulations. 
(a)  The driver of an ambulance, when responding to an emergency call or while transporting a patient, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but such privileges are subject to the conditions stated in this section, and shall be exercised only when such driver has reasonable grounds to believe that an emergency in fact exists requiring the exercise of such privileges. 
(b)  Subject to the provisions of this section the driver may: 
(1)  Park or stand, irrespective of the otherwise applicable provisions of law, ordinance or regulation; 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, only after coming to a complete stop; 
(3)  Exceed the maximum speed limits permitted by law, ordinance or regulation so long as he does not endanger life or property; and 
(4)  Disregard laws, ordinances or regulations governing direction or movement or turning in specified directions. 
(c)  The provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall not relieve the driver of an ambulance from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(Code 1995, § 46-59; Ord. No. 1938, § 20, 5-25-1976) 
Secs. 46-55-46-81. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUSINESS LICENSE 

Sec. 46-82. - Ambulance license-Required. 
(a)  No person, either as owner, agent or otherwise, shall furnish, operate, conduct, maintain, advertise or otherwise be engaged in or profess to be engaged in the business or service of the transportation of patients upon the streets, alleys or any public way or place in the city unless he holds a currently valid business license for an ambulance issued under this division. 
(b)  No ambulance shall be operated, and no individual shall drive, attend or permit an ambulance to be operated for such purposes on the streets, alleys or any public place or public way in the city, unless such ambulance shall be under the immediate supervision and direction of a person who is holding a currently valid license as an ambulance driver or an EMT licensed by the ADPH/OEMST. 
(c)  No such license, however, shall be required for an ambulance or for the ambulance driver, EMT of an ambulance which: 
(1)  Is rendering assistance to licensed ambulances in the case of a major catastrophe or emergency with which the licensed ambulances of the city are insufficient or unable to cope; 
(2)  Is rendering mutual aid assistance to licensed ambulances. Mutual aid agreements by licensed ambulances with non-licensed ambulances must be approved by the fire chief; 
(3)  Is operated from a location or headquarters outside the city in order to transport patients who are picked up beyond the limits of the city to locations within the city, or through the city, but no such outside ambulance shall be used to pick up patients within the city for transportation to locations within the city. 
(Code 1995, § 46-71; Ord. No. 1938, § 3, 5-25-1976) 
Sec. 46-83. - Same-Application. 
    Application to the city council for an ambulance license under this division shall be made and sworn to upon such forms as may be prepared or prescribed by the city clerk and shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant and of the owner of the ambulance service, including the owner's residence and place of business. 
(2)  The trade or corporate name under which the applicant does business and proposes to do business. 
(3)  The location and description of the places from which it is intended to operate. 
(4)  The names and addresses where previous and current ambulance service has or is provided by the applicant. 
(Code 1995, § 46-72; Ord. No. 1938, § 4, 5-25-1976) 
Sec. 46-84. - Same-Hearing upon application; issuance or denial. 
    Within 21 days after the application has been filed with the city clerk, the city council shall set a date for a hearing investigated by the fire chief on the application, and at the hearing, or upon any date to which the hearing is continued, shall hear all evidence offered by any party that may be presented bearing upon such application. If the city council finds that the applicant is ready, willing and able to comply with all the provisions of this article, state law and that the territory proposed to be served by the operation under the license is, in the opinion of the city council, not adequately served by ambulance facilities, and that the public necessity and convenience require the issuance of such license, then such application shall be granted and a license issued to operate such number of ambulances upon the streets of the city as the city council deems in the public interest, which license shall be issued by the city clerk upon payment to the city by the applicant of a license fee. The amount for an ambulance service license shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 46-73; Ord. No. 1938, § 5, 5-25-1976) 
Sec. 46-85. - Same-Transferability of license. 
    Any change of ownership of an ambulance for which a license has been or shall have been granted under this article shall terminate such license and shall require a new application and new license and conformance with all the requirements of this article as upon an original application. 
(Code 1995, § 46-74; Ord. No. 1938, § 7, 5-25-1976) 
Sec. 46-86. - Same-Revocation of license. 
(a)  The city council may and is hereby authorized to suspend or revoke an ambulance license issued under this division for failure of a licensee to comply or to maintain compliance with, or for his violation of any applicable provisions, standards or requirements of this article, or for regulations promulgated under this article, or for failure to operate or cause to be operated for which such license was issued, or when, in the opinion of the city council, the public necessity, convenience or good renders such revocation advisable, upon not less than ten days' notice to the licensee and after a public hearing. 
(b)  An ambulance equipment and/or premises inspection report of the ADPH/OEMST or fire chief, shall be prima facie evidence of compliance or noncompliance with, or violation of the provisions, standards and requirements provided in this division, and of the regulations promulgated under this article. 
(c)  Upon suspension, revocation or termination of an ambulance license under this division, such ambulance service shall cease operations as such, and no person shall permit such ambulance service to continue operations as such. 
(d)  Each written complaint received by the city or an officer or employee thereof relating to the operations of ambulance services or their employees in the city shall, in addition to such other action as may be taken thereon, be referred to the fire chief and public safety committee. 
(Code 1995, § 46-75; Ord. No. 1938, § 16, 5-25-1976) 
Sec. 46-87. - Inspection of ambulances. 
(a)  Subsequent to issuance of an ambulance license, the fire chief shall cause to be inspected each ambulance and its equipment and premises. 
(b)  All reports resulting from inspections by the ADPH/OEMST will be provided to the fire chief within 24 hours of said inspections. 
(c)  Each ambulance or invalid coach, its equipment and the premises designated in the application, and all records relating to its maintenance and operation as such shall be open to inspection by the fire chief or his designated representative at any time during the usual hours of operation. 
(Code 1995, § 46-76; Ord. No. 1938, § 8, 5-25-1976) 
Sec. 46-88. - Investigation and report by fire chief. 
    Each and every application for an ambulance license filed with the city clerk shall be immediately referred by him to the fire chief for investigation and report. The fire chief shall investigate the facts set out in the application and report to the public safety committee the results of his investigation, as follows: 
(1)  His finding as to the truth or falsity of the facts set out in the application. 
(2)  Whether or not the applicants ambulances and equipment comply with all requirements of the ADPH/OEMST. 
(3)  Whether or not the personnel employed by the applicant comply with all requirements of the ADPH/OEMST. 
(4)  Any facts which he has which bear upon or may bear upon the question of whether or not the applicant is a responsible and proper person or company to conduct or work in the proposed business. 
(5)  Provide a recommendation as to weather or not the public necessity and convenience require or will be served by the proposed ambulance service. 
(Code 1995, § 46-77; Ord. No. 1938, § 10, 5-25-1976) 
Sec. 46-89. - Fire department ambulance service provider. 
(a)  The fire department will utilize one or more licensed ambulance services to provide patient transport for calls that originate through the public safety dispatch center. 
(b)  The fire chief will recommend the ambulance service to be used by the fire department to the mayor for approval. 
(c)  Ambulance services providing transport service arising out of the public safety dispatch center will not be compensated in any manner by the city. 
(d)  On all calls where fire department personnel are on the scene, fire department personnel will be in charge of the scene and ambulance personnel shall cooperate and assist fire department personnel. 
(1)  If any disagreement over patient care should arise, the online medical control physician shall be contacted immediately. 
(2)  Fire department personnel will maintain the right to provide and/or assist with patient care during transport to receiving medical facility. 
(e)  Ambulance services shall have the capability to provide continuous operation to ensure that ambulances consistently respond to calls for emergency services within the city. 
(f)  The ambulance service provider will be responsible to dispatch a mutual aid service, in the event that they are unable to respond on request. The provider will notify the dispatch center that the call has been rolled and provide the name and ETA of the responding ambulance service. 
(g)  The ambulance service provider will respond within 12 minutes to all calls requested by the fire department. This response time shall be complied with no less than 90 percent of the time. 
(h)  The ambulance service provider will provide the fire chief with a monthly report of response times of the provider for all calls originating out of the public safety dispatch center. 
(1)  Report shall be provided no later than the tenth day of each month. 
(2)  Time period will be from the first day of each month to the last day of each month. 
(i)  The fire chief may at any time suspend or terminate the use of an ambulance service providing transport for the fire department for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to comply with any part of this division. 
(2)  Failure to maintain required response times. 
(3)  Any act involving dishonesty, fraud or deceit which gives rise to a cause of action by any person. 
(4)  For any reason deemed to be in the best interest of the citizens and employees of the city. 
(j)  A suspended or terminated ambulance service may appeal to the mayor of the city. 
(k)  If an employee of the ambulance service has any grievance or complaint against the city, fire department or any employee of the city, a supervisor of the ambulance service should give notice of the same to the fire chief, in writing and with sufficient detail to allow the problem to be addressed in a reasonable manner. Employees of the ambulance service should follow the chain of command up to the supervising manager of the ambulance service, who may then determine whether to make a written grievance to the fire chief. Employees of the ambulance service, other than a supervising manager should not lodge complaints with the fire chief. 
(Code 1995, § 46-82; Ord. No. 1938, § 15, 5-25-1976) 
Chapter 50 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Levy of stormwater fees. 
(a)  Under the authority of Acts 1995, p. 1835 (No. 95-775) and pursuant to the city's police powers, the city herby levies upon each parcel of real property or portion thereof located in the corporate limits of the city a fee to be established by the city council, from time to time. The purpose of the fee is for funding the city's stormwater program and to comply with the requirements of any national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit held by the city: 
(1)  The fee is levied on properties designated by the county tax assessor pursuant to Amendment No. 325 to the Constitution of Alabama, 1901, and Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-8-1, as class I and class II land use classifications in an amount per parcel or portion thereof located in the corporate limits of the city. 
(2)  The fee is levied on the properties designated by the county tax assessor pursuant to Amendment No. 325 to the Constitution of Alabama, 1901, and Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-8-1, as class III use classification in an amount per parcel or portion thereof located in the corporate limits of the city. 
(3)  There will be no exemptions for this fee on any parcels located within the city, regardless of whether ad valorem taxes are exempted for such parcels, except for those parcels designated by the county tax assessor as schools, churches or owner occupied residences for which homestead exemption has been allowed by the tax assessor and for which the over age 65 years exemption has been allowed by the tax assessor. 
(b)  The procedures implemented by the tax assessor and tax collector of the county necessary and appropriate to assess and collect this fee are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set out fully. All stormwater fees, collected pursuant to this section by the tax assessor and tax collector of the county will be remitted to the city. 
(c)  The mayor is hereby authorized to take whatever actions are necessary to implement the assessment and collection of this fee as authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 3334, 6-12-2007; Ord. No. 3360, 2-6-2008) 
State Law reference- Stormwater discharges into municipal separate storm sewers, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-89C-1 et seq. 
Secs. 50-2-50-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 50-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article into the MS4 or community water which occurs by chance and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence. 
    Adverse impact means any deleterious effect on waters or wetlands, including their quality, quantity, surface area, species composition, aesthetics or usefulness for human or natural uses which are or may potentially be harmful or injurious to human health, welfare, safety or property or to biological productivity, diversity or stability, or which would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property. 
    Agriculture means activities undertaken on land for the production of plants, crops, and animals which are useful to man. 
    Alabama Department of Environmental Management (ADEM) means the state regulatory agency, created under Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-22A-1 et seq., responsible for administering and enforcing the stormwater laws of the United States of America and the State of Alabama. 
    Applicant means any person or governmental agency who executes the necessary forms to procure approval of best management practices plans from the official. 
    Best management practices (BMP) means activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and management practices designed to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters to the MS4. Best management practices also include treatment requirements, operating procedures and practices to control facility site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal or drainage from raw material storage and construction sites. 
    Best management practices plan or BMP plan means a set of drawings and/or other documents submitted by a person as a prerequisite to obtaining a permit, which contain all of the information and specifications pertaining to BMP. 
    Clean Water Act (CWA) means the federal act (33 USC 1251 through 1387) which was formerly referred to as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act and Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, Public Law 92-500, as amended by Public Law 95-217, Public Law 95-576, Public Law 6-483 and Public Law 97-117, 33 USC 1251 through 1387. 
    Clearing means the removal of trees and brush from the land, not including the ordinary mowing of grass or the maintenance of previously cleared areas. 
    Community waters means any or all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wetlands, wells and other bodies of natural or artificial surface or subsurface water into which the MS4 outfalls flow. 
    Contour means a line of equal elevation above a specified datum, usually mean sea level. 
    Contour line means a line joining points having or representing equal elevations. 
    Discharge means the passing of water or other liquid through an opening or along a pipe, conduit or channel; the rate of flow of water, silt, or other mobile substance which emerges from a pipe, conduit or channel, usually expressed as cubic feet per second, gallons per minute or million gallons per day. 
    Drainage means the removal of surface water from a given area either by gravity or by pumping; commonly applied to surface water and groundwater. 
    Drainage area means that area contributing runoff to a single point measured in a horizontal plane, which is enclosed by a ridge line; the area of a drainage basin or watershed, expressed in acres, square miles or other unit of area. 
    Engineer means a person currently licensed by the Alabama State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors to provide engineering services. 
    Erosion means wearing away of lands by running water. 
    Erosion control means the application of measures to reduce erosion of land surfaces. 
    Grading means any act by which soil is cleared, stripped, stockpiled, excavated, scarified or filled, or any combination thereof. 
    Illicit connection means any manmade conveyance connecting an illicit discharge directly to the MS4. 
    Illicit discharge means any discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except discharges pursuant to an NPDES permit (other than the NPDES MS4 permit issued to the City of Bessemer by ADEM) and discharges which are specifically excepted from this article. 
    Minor extension means an addition to an existing utility pipeline or other utility line in which the land disturbed consists of fewer than 7,500 linear feet. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) means a system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catchbasins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels and storm drains), owned or operated by a city, town or county or other public body (created by, or pursuant to, state law) having jurisdiction over stormwater. 
    NPDES means national pollutant discharge elimination system. 
    Official shall be the person responsible, on behalf of the city, to enforce the provisions of this article as a part of the city's stormwater management program. The official shall be the city engineer and/or director of building inspections. 
    Outfall means a point source (meaning any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel or other floating craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged, but not including return flows from irrigated agriculture or agricultural water runoff) at the point of a discharge to waters of the United States of America. 
    Permit means any permit issued pursuant to this article. 
    Permittee means a person, party, government entity and all others who receive a permit to discharge under the NPDES. 
    Pollutant includes, but is not limited to, the pollutants specified in Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-22-1(b)(3) and any other effluent characteristics specified in a permit. 
    Pollutant loading means the amount of a pollutant entering the MS4. 
    Qualified credentialed professional means a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) as determined by the Soil and Water Conservation Society (SWCS) or the International Erosion Control Association (IECA). Other registered or certified professionals such as a professional engineer or a landscape architect, registered land surveyor, registered architect, registered geologist, registered forester, registered environmental manager as determined by the National Registry of Environmental Professionals (NREP), certified professional soil scientist (CPSS) as determined by the American Registry of Certified Professionals in Agronomy, Crops and Soils (ARCPACS), who can document the necessary education, training, and professional certification, registration, or credentials acceptable to the official and can demonstrate proven experience in the field of erosion and sediment control shall be considered a qualified credentialed professional. The qualified credentialed professional must be in good standing with the authority granting the registration. The qualified credentialed professional must be familiar, and have expertise, with current industry standards for erosion and sediment controls and must be able to inspect and ensure that nonstructural BMPs or other pollution control devices (silt fences, erosion control fabric, rock check devices, etc.) and erosion control efforts, such as grading, mulching, seeding and growth management, or management strategies have been properly implemented and regularly maintained according to good engineering practices and the requirements of this permit. A professional engineer (PE) registered in the State of Alabama must certify the design and construction of structural practices such as spill prevention control and counter measures (SPCC) plan containment structures, dam construction, etc. 
    Sediment means solid material settled from suspension in a liquid that has been transported and deposited from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion and has come to rest on the earth's surface either above or below a water surface, usually, inorganic or organic particles originating from weathering, chemical precipitation, or biological activity. 
    Silviculture means the care and cultivation of forest trees, including site preparation, planting, pruning, thinning and harvesting. 
    Site means any tract, lot or parcel of land or combination of contiguous tracts, lots or parcels of land which are in one ownership, and any combination of tracts, lots and parcels which are contiguous, are owned by two or more parties and are to be developed as a unit, subdivision or project. 
    Stabilization means the prevention of soil movement by any of various vegetative and/or structural means. 
    Stormwater means the excess water running off from the surface of a drainage area during and immediately after a period of rain. It is that portion of the rainfall and resulting surface flow that is in excess of that which can be absorbed through the infiltration capacity of the surface of the basin. 
    Stormwater management means the incorporation of a variety of activities and equipment into a plan to address concerns associated with stormwater for the purpose of preventing pollution, improving water quality, keeping pollutants out of runoff and the implementation of best management practices. 
    Stormwater management program (herein referred to as "the management program" or "the program") means a program which covers the duration of the permit. It shall include a comprehensive planning process which involves public participation and, where necessary, intergovernmental coordination, to reduce the discharge of pollutants, to the maximum extent practicable, using management practices control techniques and system design and engineering methods and such other provisions which are appropriate. 
    Stormwater permit means a permit which grants permission to the holder to discharge stormwater to the MS4 under the NPDES. 
    Stream means a course of running water usually flowing in a particular direction in a definite channel and discharging into some other course of running water or body of water. 
    Structural controls means measures incorporated into existing stormwater drainage systems or newly constructed systems to prevent or minimize the discharge of pollutants for the purpose of maintaining and/or improving water quantity and quality management; quantitative control by a system of vegetative and structural measures that control the increased volume and rate of surface runoff caused by manmade changes to the land; qualitative control by a system of vegetative, structural and other measures that reduce or eliminate pollutants that might otherwise be carried by surface runoff. 
    Turbidity means a condition in water or wastewater caused by the presence of suspended matter, resulting in the scattering and absorption of light rays. A measure of fine suspended matter in liquids. 
    Utility means a business or service which is engaged in regularly supplying the public with some commodity or service which is of public consequence and need, such as electricity, gas, water, telephone service and telegraph service. 
    Variance means the modification of the minimum stormwater management requirements in situations in which exceptional circumstances, applicable to the site with respect to which the variance is requested, exist so that strict adherence to the provisions of this article would result in unnecessary hardship and the granting of such modification would not result in a condition contrary to the intent of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 48-26; Ord. No. 3066, § 1.01, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 3360, § 48-26, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 50-22. - Administration. 
    The official is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. Whenever the term "official" is used in this article, it shall be the person responsible, on behalf of the city, to enforce the provisions of this article as a part of the city's stormwater management program. 
(Code 1995, § 48-27; Ord. No. 3066, § 2.01, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 3360, § 48-27, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 50-23. - Notices. 
    Whenever the city is required or permitted to: 
(1)  Give a notice to any party, such notice must be in writing; or 
(2)  Deliver a document to any party, such notice or document may be delivered by personal delivery, certified mail (return receipt requested), registered mail (return receipt requested) or a generally recognized overnight carrier, to the address of such party which is in the records of the city or is otherwise known to the city. 
(Code 1995, § 48-28; Ord. No. 3066, § 9.01, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 3360, § 48-28, 2-6-2008) 
Secs. 50-24-50-34. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPLICATION AND FEES 

Sec. 50-35. - Application. 
(a)  Before the commencement of any land disturbing activity that is not exempted from obtaining a permit under this article, the owner of the land on which such activity shall be conducted, or his duly authorized agent, must file with the official an application for the approval of the owner's BMP plan. The official must either approve or disapprove the BMP plan within 21 days of the day it is filed with the official. If the BMP plan is disapproved, the official must inform the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for its disapproval. If the applicant, on one or more occasions, revises the BMP plan or submits to the official additional documents or information in connection with the BMP plan, the official must make a written response to the applicant with respect to whether such revised BMP plan and/or additional documents and information have been approved or disapproved by the official. All such additional responses must be made by the official to the applicant within 21 days of the day such revised BMP plan or additional documents or information are submitted to the official. The land disturbing activity may not be commenced prior to the issuance of the permit by the official. The issuance of the permit shall not excuse the owner from the need to obtain other required state and local permits or licenses. 
(b)  The minimum standards for the issuance of a permit must meet the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Facilities that are covered under an ADEM NPDES permit for stormwater discharge associated with construction activities are exempt from the permitting requirements of this article. However, prior to the commencement of any land disturbing activity, the owner or developer of facilities that are covered under an ADEM NPDES permit shall submit to the official copies of the ADEM NPDES permit authorization issued by ADEM, any relevant notice of intent and a copy of the BMP plan. The holders of an ADEM NPDES permit shall be subject to the relevant portions of section 50-51 and divisions 4 and 5 of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 48-36; Ord. No. 3066, § 3.01, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 3360, § 48-36, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 50-36. - Permit application fee. 
    Each application for the issuance of a permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as established by ordinance or resolution of the city council, from time to time and that fee shall be available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code, for individual single-family residences and for all other types of land disturbing activities, to help defray the city's cost of processing and reviewing the application and the inspections associated with the application. The applicant must submit three sets of its BMP plan with its application and fee to the official. The amount of these permit fees shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1995, § 48-37; Ord. No. 3066, § 3.02, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 3068, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 3360, § 48-37, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 50-37. - Data required on application for a permit. 
(a)  All applications for a permit must include the following information: 
(1)  Name of the applicant; 
(2)  Telephone number, telecopier number, if any, and e-mail address, if any, of the applicant; 
(3)  Address where the applicant, or other person who can furnish information about the land disturbing activity (contact person), can be reached; 
(4)  Name, address, telephone number, telecopier number, if any, and e-mail address, if any, of the owner of the project, the owner of the property on which the project is to be located and the ground lessee of the property, if any, on which the land disturbing activity is to be conducted if the applicant is not the owner of the project and such property; 
(5)  Legal description and address, if any, of the property upon which the land disturbing activity is to be conducted; 
(6)  Names, addresses, telephone numbers, telecopier numbers, if any, and e-mail addresses, if any, of all contractors and subcontractors who shall implement any BMP plan; provided, however, that if the contractor and the subcontractors have not been selected when the application for a permit is filed, the applicant shall furnish such information to the official within five days of the day on which the contractor and/or subcontractors are selected; 
(7)  Name, address, telephone number, telecopier number, if any, and e-mail address, if any, of the qualified credentialed professional who has approved the BMP plan application (this is required for all land disturbing activities except those related to the construction of individual single-family residences); 
(8)  Each application for a permit must be accompanied by a map or a plot of the land on which the land disturbing activity will be conducted and any other information that is required under the provisions of division 3 of this article. 
(b)  The detail of the BMP plan must be commensurate with the size of the project, severity of the site condition and potential for off-site damage, as provided in division 3 of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 48-38; Ord. No. 3066, § 3.03, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 3360, § 48-38, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 50-38. - Maintenance of records. 
    Records of compliance with the provisions of the permit shall be maintained in the office of the owner or the applicant, shall be available to the contact person and shall be made available at any time for review by the official; provided that if such records are maintained without the state and, because of their size, cannot be transmitted to the official by telecopier, such records must be delivered to the official (at no expense to the city or the official) within 48 hours of the earliest of the receipt by the owner, applicant or contact person of a request by the official for such records. 
(Code 1995, § 48-39; Ord. No. 3066, § 3.04, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 3360, § 48-39, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 50-39. - Amended application; transfer of permit. 
(a)  A permit may be amended, without the payment of an additional fee, upon the filing with the official of an amended or restated permit application, containing all changes from the original application; provided, that the holder of the permit shows to the reasonable satisfaction of the official that there are no proposed changes which may affect the quantity and/or quality of stormwater runoff. If an amended or restated application is filed with the official with respect to land disturbing activities for which a permit has been issued, such existing permit shall continue in effect, and the holder of the permit may continue to operate under it unless and until an amended permit is issued in response to the amended or restated application (amended permit) at which time the original permit shall expire and all land disturbing activities must be conducted in accordance with the amended permit. 
(b)  A permit may be transferred, without the payment of an additional fee, upon the filing with the official of an application for transfer; provided, that the holder and proposed transferee of the permit show to the reasonable satisfaction of the official that, upon or following the transfer, there will be no proposed changes which may affect the quantity and/or quality of stormwater runoff. If there is a request for the transfer of a permit and there are to be one or more changes in the operation of the project which is the source of the land disturbing activity which may affect the quantity and/or quality of stormwater runoff the new owner or operator of such project must apply to the city for a new permit prior to his involvement with the operation of such project. 
(Code 1995, § 48-40; Ord. No. 3066, § 3.05, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 3360, § 48-40, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 50-40. - Signatory requirements. 
(a)  All applications and correspondence required by this article to be submitted to the official shall be signed as follows: 
(1)  If an application or correspondence is submitted by a corporation, it must be signed by the president of the corporation or by a vice-president of the corporation who is in charge of a principal business function of the corporation, or any other person who performs similar policy-making or decision-making functions for the corporation, or who has been authorized to sign such applications and/or correspondence by a resolution adopted by the board of directors of the corporation. Proof of the authority of the signatory shall be provided to the official, upon his request. 
(2)  If an application or correspondence is submitted by a limited liability company, it must be signed by a manager or other person who serves the same or similar function as the president of a corporation. 
(3)  If an application or correspondence is submitted by a partnership, it must be signed by a general partner of the partnership. 
(4)  If an application or correspondence is submitted by a sole proprietorship, it must be signed by the proprietor. 
(5)  If an application or correspondence is submitted by a municipality, the state or the federal government or by any municipal, state or federal agency, it must be signed by either the chief executive officer or a principal executive officer of any such government or by either the chief executive officer, a principal executive officer or a senior executive officer having responsibility for the over-all operations of a principal geographic unit of any such governmental agency. 
(b)  Any person signing any application or correspondence required by this article shall make the following certification: 
"I certify, under penalty of law, that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision and that I have personally examined and I am familiar with the information in this document and such attachments. Based on my inquiry of those individuals immediately responsible for obtaining the information, I believe the submitted information is true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and civil penalty." 
(Code 1995, § 48-41; Ord. No. 3066, § 3.06, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 3360, § 48-41, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 50-41. - Exclusion. 
(a)  No person may conduct any land disturbing activity without: 
(1)  Having obtained a permit from the official; or 
(2)  Having provided the official with a copy of an ADEM NPDES permit any relevant notice of intent and a copy of the BMP plan. 
(b)  Land disturbing activities shall include any land change which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediment to the MS4, including, but not limited to, the clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, except that the term shall not include the following: 
(1)  Any land change on property about which the owner of the property has submitted information to the official proving, to the satisfaction of the official, that such property does not drain to the MS4. Determination as to whether such property drains to the MS4 shall be made by the official. 
(2)  Agriculture. 
(3)  Silviculture. 
(4)  Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens, landscaping on individual residential lots (excluding landscaping performed by, or on behalf of a developer or builder, who builds a house on any such lot), home repairs, home maintenance work, minor additions to houses, the construction, maintenance or repair of accessory structures and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion. 
(5)  Minor land disturbing activities such as individual connections for utility services and sewer services for single- or two-family residences, minor grading for driveways, yard areas and sidewalks, excluding any grading done by, or on behalf of a developer or builder in connection with the construction of a house. 
(6)  Minor maintenance, minor repair, and the minor extension of any existing underground public utility lines, except sewer lines; provided that the utility company which owns such lines has received approval of a general BMP plan from the official for such maintenance, repair, and extension; and provided further that any utility company making a minor extension in connection with which the land disturbed consists of more than 1,000 linear feet must give the official written notice of such extension prior to the commencement of such minor extension. 
(7)  The construction, repair or rebuilding of railroad tracks. 
(8)  Minor subsurface exploratory excavations under the direction of soils engineers or engineering geologists. 
(9)  The opening of individual burial sites in property which has been approved for such use by all necessary governmental authorities. 
(10)  Digging of water wells or environmental monitoring wells. 
The activities referred to in subsections (b)(2) through (9) of this section may be undertaken without a permit; however, the persons conducting these excluded activities shall remain responsible for otherwise conducting such activities in accordance with the provisions of this article and any other applicable law, including the proper control of sedimentation and runoff to the MS4. This article shall apply to such land disturbing activities that drain to the MS4 if a stormwater pollution problem is shown to be caused by such activity following monitoring procedures and complaints. 
(Code 1995, § 48-42; Ord. No. 3066, §§ 4.01, 4.02, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 3360, § 48-42, 2-6-2008) 
Secs. 50-42-50-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BMP APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 50-51. - General requirements. 
    No land disturbing activity shall be conducted within the city until either a permit has been issued by the official allowing such activity pursuant to the provisions of this article or an authorization issued by ADEM under the ADEM NPDES permit, any relevant notice of intent and a copy of the BMP plan has been submitted to the official. The ADEM NPDES permit, notices of intent and BMP plans shall be kept on file by the official and shall be on the job site, or other reasonable location, for inspection by the official until the project has been completed and notice of termination of the relevant NPDES permit has been sent to ADEM. The ADEM NPDES permits shall be required in addition to any building permits or other local permits required for land disturbing activities or other activities on the site. The following are BMP approval requirements: 
(1)  Persons conducting land disturbing activities shall take all reasonable measures referred to, or provided for, in this article to protect all public and private property from damage caused by such activities and to reduce stormwater pollution to the maximum extent practicable. 
(2)  No land disturbing activities subject to this article shall be undertaken except in accordance with the following requirements: 
a.  The person proposing to conduct any land disturbing activity or an agent, contractor or other representative of such person must contact the official at least five business days before commencement of the land disturbing activity to advise the official of the commencement of such land disturbing activity, unless, for good cause shown, the official permits such person, contractor, agent or other representative to contact him nearer to the date of the commencement of such land disturbing activity. 
b.  Other than land clearing activities required to install the appropriate BMP in accordance with BMP plans, any downslope erosion and sediment control measures, on-site stream channel protection and upslope diversion of drainage required by the BMP plan shall be in place and functional before any clearing or earth-moving operations begin, and shall be constructed and maintained throughout the construction period. Temporary measures may be removed at the beginning of the workday, but shall be replaced at the end of the workday. 
c.  The angle for graded slopes and fills shall be no greater than the angle, which can be retained by vegetative cover or other adequate erosion control devices or structures. Any slope or fill which has been graded shall, within 14 days of the completion of such grading or the completion of any phase of grading, be planted or otherwise provided with ground cover, materials, devices or structures sufficient to restrain erosion. The BMPs shall remain in place in accordance with the BMP plan until the graded slope or fill is stabilized. 
d.  Adequate protective measures shall be provided for the containment of hazardous substances and any other materials which may pollute the MS4, including petroleum products, lubricants and paint. 
e.  All control measures shall be checked, and repaired as necessary, monthly in dry periods and within 24 hours after any rainfall at the site of 0.75 inch within a 24-hour period. During prolonged rainfalls, daily checking and, if necessary, repairing shall be done. The permittee shall maintain written records of such checks and repairs, which records shall be subject to the inspection of the official at any reasonable time. 
f.  The BMP plan shall show the size of disturbed area and a schedule of the projected starting and completion dates of the land disturbing activity. 
g.  A site plan, accompanied by a written description of BMPs which are shown on the site plan, and a schedule of implementation during land disturbing activities and construction shall be furnished to the official prior to the commencement of any land disturbing activities. 
h.  A description of and procedures for, proper storage, handling and disposal of construction materials stored on-site which could contribute to the pollutant loading to the MS4, shall be furnished to the official prior to the commencement of any land disturbing activities. 
(Code 1995, § 48-56; Ord. No. 3066, § 5.01, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 3360, § 48-56, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 50-52. - Design and performance standards. 
    The following are required for all land disturbing activities except those related to the construction of individual single-family residences: All applications for a permit must contain, or be accompanied by, the materials and information necessary to satisfy the requirements of section 50-51 and this section and must be accompanied by a BMP plan. The BMP plan shall be prepared by a qualified credentialed professional and shall include the following: 
(1)  The BMP plan shall be accompanied by a map or plot of the property upon which land disturbing activities are to be conducted, prepared by a registered land surveyor, showing the present contour lines of such property, and the present contour lines of at least the nearest 25 feet of the properties immediately adjacent to such property and the existing grades and elevations of all streets which abut such property. Such map or plot shall show all existing drainage facilities and all natural drainage on such property and on such adjacent property. 
(2)  All proposed contours, the proposed temporary and permanent disposition of surface water and the proposed drainage structures; provided, however, the BMP plans for utility projects, except sewer projects, shall not be required to show the proposed contours. 
(3)  The proposed contours in the map or plot shall be depicted in contour intervals of two or fewer feet; provided, however, the BMP plans for utility projects, except sewer projects, shall not be required to show the proposed contours. All maps, plots and plans submitted shall be on a sheet of paper at least 24 inches by 36 inches and drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet. Contour intervals of more than two feet and maps, plots or plans which are smaller than the required size may be approved by the official, upon written request and for good cause shown. 
(4)  The BMP plan shall contain a description of the existing site conditions, a description of adjacent topographical features, the information necessary to determine the erosion qualities of the soil on the site, potential problem areas of soil and erosion and sedimentation, soil stabilization specifications, stormwater management considerations, a projected time schedule for the commencement and completion of the land disturbing activity, specifications for BMP plan maintenance during the project and after the completion of the project, clearing and grading limits, and all other information needed to depict accurately the solutions to potential soil erosion and sedimentation problems to the MS4. The BMP plan shall include the series of BMPs and shall be reviewed by, and subject to the approval of the official prior to the issuance of the permit. 
(5)  Where appropriate, in the opinion of the qualified credentialed professional who prepares the BMP plan, to the maximum extent practicable, the BMP plan shall include measures to reduce erosion and other adverse impact to MS4 drainage which would result from an increase in the volume of water and the rate of runoff of water during the conduct of land disturbing activities. 
(6)  Whenever the official determines that a BMP plan does not comply with this article, he shall notify the applicant in writing of the ways in which the BMP plan does not comply with this article. 
(7)  To the maximum extent practicable, sediment in runoff water must be minimized by using appropriate BMPs. 
(8)  Structural controls shall be designed and maintained as required to minimize erosion and pollution to the maximum extent practicable. All surface water flowing toward the construction area shall, to the maximum extent practicable, either be passed through the site in a protected channel or diverted by using berms, channels or sediment traps, as necessary. Erosion and sediment control measures shall be designed, according to the size and slope of the disturbed areas or drainage areas, to minimize erosion and to control sediment, to the maximum extent practicable. Discharges from sediment basins and traps must be conducted in a manner consistent with good engineering practices. Sediment-laden or otherwise polluted water discharged to MS4 must be addressed in a manner consistent with good engineering practices and the requirements of this article. 
(9)  Control measures shall be maintained as an effective barrier to sedimentation and erosion in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(10)  There shall be no distinctly visible floating scum, oil or other matter contained in the stormwater discharge. The stormwater discharge to an MS4 must not cause an unnatural color (except dyes or other substances discharged to an MS4 for the purpose of environmental studies and which do not have a harmful effect on the bodies of water within the MS4) or odor in the community waters. The stormwater discharge to the MS4 must result in no materials in concentrations sufficient to be hazardous or otherwise detrimental to humans, livestock, wildlife, plant life or fish and aquatic life in the community waters. 
(11)  When the land disturbing activity is finished and stable vegetation or other permanent controls have been established on all remaining exposed soil, the owner of the land where the land disturbing activity was conducted, or his authorized agent, shall notify the official of these facts, and request a final inspection. The official shall then inspect the site within five working days after receipt of the notice, and may require additional measures to stabilize the soil and control erosion and sedimentation. If additional measures are required by the official, written notice of such additional measures shall be delivered to the owner, and the owner shall continue to be covered by the permit issued with respect to the land disturbing activity until a final and complete inspection is made and the official approves the project as having been satisfactorily completed and delivers to the owner, within ten days of the date of such approval, a certification of completion showing that the requirements of the permit have been fulfilled. At that time the site and/or the project constructed thereon may come under the operation of other ordinances of the city. 
(12)  The BMP plan must be accompanied by a certificate of deposit, a surety bond or a cash bond, with the city having the right to determine which type of security shall be furnished. A certificate of deposit, a surety bond or a cash bond (a certificate of deposit, a surety bond and a cash bond shall be herein collectively referred to as security) shall be furnished to the city in accordance with the following provisions: 
a.  The official shall require a certificate of deposit, a surety bond or a cash bond in such amount as specified herein to ensure that the work, if not completed or if not in accordance with the permitted plans and specifications, will be corrected to eliminate hazardous conditions, erosion and/or drainage problems. In lieu of a certificate of deposit or a surety bond required by the city, the owner may file a cash bond with the city in an amount equal to that which would be required in the certificate of deposit or the surety bond. 
b.  The security shall contain, or have attached to it as an exhibit, a legal description of the site. The security shall remain in effect for such reasonable period of time as may be required by the official. 
c.  The security for clearing operations only shall be in the amount of $1,000.00 per acre for each acre, or fraction of an acre, disturbed or affected by such operations. 
d.  The security for earthwork or clearing and earthwork operations shall be in the amount of $3,000.00 per acre for each acre, or fraction of an acre, disturbed or affected by such operations. 
e.  Security equal to double the amounts required in subsections (12)c and d of this section, shall be required where clearing or earthwork is performed in areas designated as floodways, floodplains or areas susceptible to landslides. 
f.  Each certificate of deposit must be issued by a bank which has its principal office in the state. 
g.  Each certificate of deposit must be issued by a bank which is reasonably satisfactory to the city and each surety bond must be issued by a surety company which is qualified to do business in the state and which is otherwise reasonably satisfactory to the city. 
(Code 1995, § 48-57; Ord. No. 3066, § 5.02, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 3360, § 48-57, 2-6-2008) 
Secs. 50-53-50-77. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MONITORING AND INSPECTION 

Sec. 50-78. - Official authorized to monitor quality. 
    The official may periodically monitor the quality of stormwater and the concentration of pollutants in stormwater discharges from land disturbing activities permitted to the MS4 pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1995, § 48-65; Ord. No. 3066, § 6.01, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 3360, § 48-66, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 50-79. - Detection of illicit connections, improper disposal and/or discharges. 
    The official shall take appropriate steps to detect and eliminate illicit connections and eliminate improper disposal and/or discharge to the MS4, including the required dry-weather and wet-weather programs to screen illicit connections and improper discharges and identify their sources from land disturbing activities. 
(Code 1995, § 48-67; Ord. No. 3066, § 6.02, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 3360, § 48-67, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 50-80. - Inspections. 
(a)  The official, bearing proper identification, may enter and inspect all land disturbing activities for regular periodic inspections, investigations, monitoring, observations, measurements, enforcement, sampling and testing to verify compliance with the provisions of this article and the specific BMP plans for such land disturbing activities. The official shall notify the owner of such property, his contact person or his representative on the construction site prior to inspection, and the inspections shall be conducted at reasonable times. The owner or operator of a construction site with respect to which an NPDES permit has been issued shall provide the official with the information required in section 50-35(c) prior to the commencement of the work on the construction site. The official shall inspect the construction site to confirm the implementation and the maintenance of BMP plans, otherwise, such site shall be inspected when the official believes, as a result of complaints or monitoring activity, that land disturbing activities on the site are causing a substantial pollutant loading which threatens the MS4. 
(b)  Upon the refusal by any property owner to allow the official to enter, or to continue an inspection on, a site on which land disturbing activities or construction work is being done, the official shall terminate the inspection or confine the inspection to areas to which no objection is raised. If an agent of the official was making, or attempting to make, such inspection, the agent shall promptly report to the official the refusal and the reasons for the refusal, if the reasons are known by the agent. The official may seek appropriate legal remedies to enable him to make or complete such inspection, including seeking appropriate legal remedies from any court having jurisdiction over the matter. If the court grants a remedy to the official, the property owner must reimburse the city all of the costs and expenses incurred by the city in obtaining such remedy, including court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees. 
(c)  If the official has reasonable cause to believe that discharges from the land disturbing activities to the MS4 may cause an imminent threat to human health or the environment, an inspection of the site may take place at any time and without notice to the owner of the property or a representative on site. The official shall present proper credentials upon request of the owner or his representative. 
(d)  At any time during the conduct of an inspection, or at such other times as the official may request information from an owner or his representative, the owner or representative may identify the area of its business, material or processes which contain a trade secret and an inspection of which might reveal such trade secret. If the official has no clear and convincing reason to question such assertion of the owner or his representative, the inspection report shall note that trade secret information has been omitted. To the extent practicable, the official shall protect all information which is designated as a trade secret by the owner or his representative. 
(Code 1995, § 48-68; Ord. No. 3066, § 6.03, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 3360, § 48-68, 2-6-2008) 
Secs. 50-81-50-103. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ENFORCEMENT AND ABATEMENT 

Sec. 50-104. - Unauthorized discharge a public nuisance. 
(a)  Any discharge of stormwater made in violation of this article or of any condition of a permit issued pursuant to this article is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be subject to correction and/or abatement in accordance with applicable law. 
(b)  The following direct or indirect discharges into the MS4 are allowable under the terms of this article unless determined by the official to be a source of contamination to the community water: landscape irrigation; uncontaminated water from foundation and footing drains; discharges from springs; lawn watering; and discharges from firefighting activities. 
(Code 1995, § 48-76; Ord. No. 3066, § 7.01, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 3360, § 48-76, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 50-105. - Accidental discharges. 
(a)  In the event of any discharge of a hazardous substance or a significant spill of a hazardous substance to the MS4 which could constitute a threat to human health or the environment, the owner or operator of the site shall give notice to the official and the local emergency management agency in the same manner and within the same time as is required by state regulations for notice to ADEM. 
(b)  The owner or operator of such property shall take all reasonable steps to minimize any adverse impact to the community waters caused by discharges to the MS4, including such improved or additional monitoring as may be necessary to determine the nature and impact of the discharge. Absent a compelling public interest to the contrary, it shall not be a defense for the owner or operator in an enforcement action that it would have been necessary to halt or reduce the business or activity of the site, or any project or facility thereon, to maintain water quality and minimize any adverse impact that the discharge may cause. 
(Code 1995, § 48-77; Ord. No. 3066, § 7.02, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 3360, § 48-77, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 50-106. - NPDES permits for stormwater discharge associated with construction activities. 
(a)  Compliance with the conditions, limitations and restrictions set forth in an ADEM NPDES permit shall be deemed compliance with the terms of this article, except as specifically noted in section 50-51, division 4 of this article or this division. 
(b)  No enforcement action shall be taken by the city for a violation of the terms of this article if any of the following has occurred: 
(1)  ADEM has issued a notice of violation with respect to the same alleged violation and is proceeding with an enforcement action with respect to such alleged violation; 
(2)  ADEM has issued an administrative order with respect to the same alleged violation and is proceeding with an enforcement action with respect to such violation; or 
(3)  ADEM has commenced, and is proceeding with, an enforcement action, or has completed any other type of administrative or civil action, with respect to such alleged violation. 
(c)  Any determination or resolution made by ADEM with respect to an alleged violation shall be final, and the alleged violation shall not be made the subject of any additional enforcement action by the city; provided, however, that an enforcement action may be pursued by the city for continued or continuing substantial violations, subject to the provisions of this subsection (b) and pursuant to the following: 
(1)  ADEM will provide the official with access to the ADEM NPDES permits issued with respect to each property within its jurisdiction, including inspections and notification of any enforcement actions taken by ADEM. 
(2)  The official will notify ADEM and the permit holder, in writing, when the official demonstrates that an NPDES permit holder is causing a substantial pollutant loading to the MS4. 
(3)  The official will rely on ADEM to regulate, and to take enforcement actions against, permittees until such time as a permittee is in continuing substantial violation of its NPDES permit and ADEM has failed to respond in a timely manner in accordance with Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-89C-1 et seq. If there is a continuing substantial violation of an ADEM NPDES permit an ADEM fails to respond as stated above, the permittee shall be subject to this article for that violation. 
(Code 1995, § 48-78; Ord. No. 3066, § 7.03, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 3360, § 48-78, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 50-107. - Immediate threats to public health or welfare. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision in this article to the contrary, in the event of an immediate threat to the public health or welfare, the official may take all appropriate measures to remove or alleviate such threat. 
(Code 1995, § 48-79; Ord. No. 3066, § 7.04, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 3360, § 48-79, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 50-108. - Notification; enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Notification of violation. Whenever the official finds that any person is in violation of any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the official or his agent may serve upon such person written notice of the violation. Within ten-calendar days of the date of such notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and future prevention thereof including specific required actions shall be submitted to the official. Submission of such plan shall in no way relieve such person in violation of this article of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(b)  Compliance order. When the official finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, this article, he may issue a compliance order to the violator, directing that, within a specified time period, adequate structures and devices be installed, or procedures implemented, and properly operated, or other action be taken, to remedy such violation. Compliance orders may also contain such other requirements as may be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address such violation, including the construction of appropriate structures, installation of devices and self-monitoring and management practices. 
(c)  Cease and desist order. When the official finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, this article or any order issued under this article, the official may issue an order to such person to cease and desist all such violations immediately, and direct such person in violation of this article to: 
(1)  Comply with this article forthwith; or 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be required to address properly a continuing or threatened violation of this article, including halting operations and terminating the discharge. 
(Code 1995, § 48-80; Ord. No. 3066, § 7.05, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 3360, § 48-80, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 50-109. - Unlawful acts; misdemeanor. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Violate any provision of this article; 
(2)  Violate the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this article; 
(3)  Fail or refuse to comply with any lawful notice to abate issued by the official which has not been appealed to the building appeals board within the time specified by such notice; or 
(4)  Violate any lawful order of the building appeals board. 
Such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; and each day of such violation, failure or refusal to comply with this article shall be deemed a separate offense and punishable accordingly. Any person found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $500.00 and/or up to 180 days in jail. 
(Code 1995, § 48-81; Ord. No. 3066, § 7.06, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 3360, § 48-81, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 50-110. - Judicial proceedings and relief. 
(a)  The official may initiate proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction against any person who has, or who, the official has reason to believe, is about to: 
(1)  Violate any provision of this article; 
(2)  Violate any provision of a permit; 
(3)  Fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order issued by the official which has not been timely appealed to the building appeals board; or 
(4)  Violates any lawful order of the building appeals board. 
(b)  The official, with the consent of the building appeals board, may also initiate civil proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction seeking monetary damages for any damages caused to public stormwater facilities by any person, and may seek injunctive or other equitable relief to enforce compliance with the revisions of this article or to force compliance with any lawful orders of the official or the building appeals board. 
(Code 1995, § 48-82; Ord. No. 3066, § 7.07, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 3360, § 48-82, 2-6-2008) 
Secs. 50-111-50-133. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - APPEALS AUTHORITY 

Sec. 50-134. - Appeal to the building appeals board of an order of the official. 
    Any person aggrieved by an order of the official may appeal said order or determination to the building appeals board and have such order reviewed by the building appeals board. A written notice of appeal shall be filed with the official and with the building appeals board, and such notice shall set forth with particularity the order complained of, and the relief sought by, the person filing the appeal. The appeal may be heard at a regular meeting of the building appeals board. The building appeals board may, in its discretion, suspend the operation of the order until the building appeals board has acted upon the appeal, which suspension must be made in writing and delivered to the official and the person who filed the appeal by personal delivery or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested. 
(Code 1995, § 48-96; Ord. No. 3066, § 8.01, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 3360, § 48-96, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 50-135. - Variances. 
(a)  The building appeals board may grant variances from the requirements of this article; provided that to do so would not result in the violation of the NPDES MS4 permit issued to the city by ADEM or any state or federal law or regulation; and provided, further, that exceptional circumstances, applicable to the site with respect to which the variance is requested, exist so that strict adherence to the provisions of this article would result in unnecessary hardship and the granting of such variance would not result in a condition contrary to the intent of this article. 
(b)  A party seeking a variance must submit a written petition for a variance, which sets forth the specific variance sought and the reasons therefor, with supporting data as to why the requested variance should be granted. The petition shall include all information necessary to evaluate the requested variance. The petition for a variance shall be filed with the official. 
(c)  The official shall conduct a review of the petition for a variance within ten working days after his receipt of such petition and may either support, or object to, the petition. The official shall prepare a written statement of support of, or a written statement of the reason for his objection to, such petition, and deliver a copy of such statement to the building appeals board and to the person requesting the variance. 
(d)  Once the official has issued such statement or such ten-day period for review has expired, the petition shall be subject to city action at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the building appeals board. 
(Code 1995, § 48-97; Ord. No. 3066, § 8.02, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 3360, § 48-97, 2-6-2008) 
Chapter 54 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal fire prevention powers, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-59. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Adoption of fire prevention and protection codes and amendments. 
(a)  The 2015 edition of the 101 Life Safety Code compiled by the NFPA is hereby adopted by reference pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-8 and is incorporated as is set out and fully herein. 
(b)  The 2015 edition of the International Fire Code with Appendices B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, and M, published by the ICC is hereby adopted by reference pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-8 and is incorporated as is set out and fully herein with the following modifications, amendments and additions to the below sections: 
(1)  1103.5.1 Delete section 1103.5.1 Group A-2 under Sprinkler Systems in its entirety. 
(Code 1995, § 50-1; Ord. No. 2549, § 1, 9-17-1991; Ord. No. 2663, §§ 1, 2, 11-7-1995; Ord. No. 3024, 6-2-1998; Ord. No. 3205, 11-5-2002; Ord. No. 3283, §§ 1, 4, 5-17-2005; Ord. No. 3431, §§ 1, 3, 3-23-2010; Ord. No. 3531, § 3, 4-7-2015) 
State Law reference- Fire departments generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-140 et seq.; provision as to fire chief, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-5. 
Sec. 54-2. - Installation of automatic external defibrillators (AED's). 
(a)  The installation of automatic external defibrillators (AED) in all new educational occupancies and all new assembly occupancies with occupant loads of 250 or more persons shall be required. Installation shall also be required when one occupancy is changed to an educational occupancy or an assembly occupancy where the occupant load is expanded to 250 or more persons. Installation of AED's in existing educational and assembly occupancies with occupant loads of 250 or more persons is encouraged, and when installed shall comply with requirements as set out hereafter. 
(b)  AED devices, where required, shall be installed in sufficient numbers and in locations so that an AED device shall be accessible, at a minimum, within three minutes in the event of an emergency, in accordance with American Heart Association recommendations. The city fire department or its designee shall review and approve the number and installation locations for AED devices, and shall inspect the establishment to confirm the AED installations as approved prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  The installation and maintenance of the AED device and periodic training on the use of the AED device shall be responsibility of the owner. 
(d)  All AED installations shall be subject to periodic inspections by the fire department or its designee. 
(Ord. No. 3284, §§ 1-4, 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 54-3. - Use of open flame for paint removal prohibited. 
    No torches or open-flamed devices of any nature shall be used as a means of or assistance of removal of paint. 
(Code 1995, § 50-3; Ord. No. 3024, 6-2-1998) 
Secs. 54-4-54-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE LANES AND SAFETY ZONES 

Sec. 54-25. - Officers authorized to designate. 
    The city fire chief, fire marshal, senior fire inspector, or such persons designated by any of them, are hereby authorized and directed to locate and designate fire lanes and safety zones to be used by emergency personnel and vehicles for gaining access to buildings or structures, new or existing, within the corporate limits or police jurisdiction of the city, where and under what circumstances, in their discretion, such fire lanes and safety zones are appropriate. 
(Code 1995, § 50-27; Ord. No. 2486, § 1, 8-1-1989) 
Sec. 54-26. - Placing of signs. 
    The fire lanes and safety zones referred to in section 54-25, as located and designated by the fire chief, fire marshal, senior fire inspector, or such persons designated by any of them, shall be designed by signage and markings of yellow curbs in a manner specified by such persons. The signage shall read as follows: 
No Parking 
Fire Lane 
City of Bessemer Code 
(Code 1995, § 50-28; Ord. No. 2486, § 2, 8-1-1989) 
Sec. 54-27. - Obstruction. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person other than emergency personnel to obstruct or cause to be obstructed in any manner any fire lane or safety zone designated pursuant to the terms of this article, or to park or locate, or cause to be parked or located, any motor vehicle, other vehicle, or other device, within any such fire lane or safety zone. 
(Code 1995, § 50-29; Ord. No. 2486, § 3, 8-1-1989) 
Sec. 54-28. - Responsibility of owners and tenants. 
    It shall be the responsibility and duty of any owner, tenant, or either of them, or their representatives of any building which is adjacent to any fire lane or safety zone designated pursuant to the terms of this article, upon being informed in writing that such fire lane or safety zone has been established, to erect and maintain signage and establish and maintain markings of yellow curbs, all as directed by the fire chief, fire marshal, senior fire inspector, or such persons designated by any of them, and to keep such fire lane or safety zone free of obstructions and available for use by emergency personnel and vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any owner, tenant, or either of them, or their respectives, to permit or suffer any obstruction of any fire lane or safety zone designated pursuant to the terms of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 50-30; Ord. No. 2486, § 4, 8-1-1989) 
Sec. 54-29. - Presumption against vehicle owner. 
    The presence of any motor vehicle, other vehicle, or other device, in any fire lane or safety zone designated pursuant to the terms of this article, in violation of the terms of this article, shall be deemed to be prima facie evidence that the registered owner of such device was operating the device at the time of the violation or that the registered owner parked or located the device in the fire lane or safety zone in violation of the terms of this article. The burden of proof shall be upon the registered owner to prove otherwise. 
(Code 1995, § 50-31; Ord. No. 2486, § 5, 8-1-1989) 
Secs. 54-30-54-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIREWORKS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of fireworks generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 8-17-210 et seq.; license and license taxes required, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-12-102 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 54-47. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fireworks means any explosives, composition or any substance or combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing an audible or visible effect by explosion, deflagration or detonation, and includes, but is not limited to blank cartridges (except when used for bona fide sporting, industrial, or commercial purposes), toy cannons in which explosives are used, flare balloons which require fire underneath to propel the balloon, firecrackers, sparklers, torpedoes, sky rockets, bottle rockets, Roman candles, bombs or other fireworks containing any explosive substance. The term "fireworks" does not include: emergency flares, any warning lights commonly known as red flares, marine distress signals of a type approved by the United States Coast Guard, toy paper pistol caps which contain 0.25 grains or less of explosive compound, model rockets, matches, trick matches, cigarette loads and other types of pop-off novelties. 
    Permit means the written authority of the fire chief, police chief and state fire marshal issued under Code of Ala. 1975, § 8-17-210 et seq. 
    Sale means an exchange of articles or fireworks for money, including barter, exchange, gift, or offer thereof, and each such transaction made by any person, whether as principal, proprietor, salesman, agent, association, co-partnership, or one or more individuals. 
(b)  The definitions set forth in Code of Ala. 1975, § 8-17-210 (Fireworks-Definitions), shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this chapter. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in Code of Ala. 1975, § 8-17-210, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in Code of Ala. 1975, § 8-17-210. 
(Ord. No. 3139, § 2, 3-20-2001) 
Secs. 54-48-54-67. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SALE AND STORAGE 

Sec. 54-68. - Unlawful activities. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, possess, sell, offer for sale, ship or cause to be shipped into or within the city, any fireworks, except as hereinafter provided. This provision applies to nonresidents as well as residents of the city, internet orders, television orders, mail orders, or telephone orders where consumers purchase any fireworks through any medium and receive the fireworks in the city by mail, parcel service, or other carrier are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 3139, § 3, 3-20-2001) 
Secs. 54-69-54-94. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PUBLIC DISPLAYS 

Sec. 54-95. - Permit required. 
(a)  Nothing in this division shall be construed as applying to the shipping, sale, possession, and use of special fireworks for public displays by holders of a state license issued for display fireworks who hold a display permit for a specific event which has been approved by the fire chief, the police chief, and the state fire marshal as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  Applications for a public display must be made on the form required by the state fire marshal in accordance with state law. The application shall show that the proposed display is to be so located and supervised that it shall not be hazardous to property and that it shall not endanger human lives. Said application must be approved by both the fire chief and the police chief and is nontransferable. Any application approved by the fire chief and the police chief shall be invalid until approved by the state fire marshal and a certified copy of the approved application is returned to the fire chief and the police chief. 
(c)  Upon presentation of a state license issued by the state fire marshal for display fireworks to the revenue department of the city, an annual license for the public display of fireworks may be obtained from the revenue department upon application and payment of the annual license fee to the city and the presentation of a copy of a liability insurance policy that shows minimum limits of $300,000.00/$1,000,000.00. The amount of the annual license fee shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. Notwithstanding, a holder of a license issued for display fireworks for the city shall not display any fireworks within the territorial limits of the city without first complying with subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 3139, § 4, 3-20-2001; Ord. No. 3158, § 4, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 54-96. - Contraband; abatement as a nuisance. 
(a)  Fireworks in the possessions of persons without a display permit and display license issued by the city are declared to be contraband and to constitute a nuisance that can only be abated by their confiscation and destruction. 
(b)  Such contraband may be seized, condemned and destroyed in the same way as that provided under state law for seizure, condemnation and destruction of contraband liquors and beverages. 
(Ord. No. 3139, §§ 5, 6, 3-20-2001) 
Secs. 54-97-54-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SMOKING[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Alabama Clean Indoor Air Act, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-15A-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 54-121. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person who willfully smokes in an area where someone is prohibited under this division from smoking shall be guilty of an offense and shall be subject to punishment according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. 
(Code 1995, § 50-106; Ord. No. 2536, § IV(1), 2-26-1991) 
Sec. 54-122. - Smoking in buses. 
    No person shall smoke while upon or within any motorbus, or other like vehicle being operated as a public carrier upon the streets of the city, or within the police jurisdiction. 
(Code 1973, § 15-58; Code 1995, § 50-107) 
Secs. 54-123-54-142. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY-OWNED BUILDINGS 

Sec. 54-143. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Employee means any person who is employed by the city. 
    Employer means the city. 
    Place of employment means any enclosed area under the control of the employer to which employees have access during the course of employment including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, employee restrooms, conference rooms and employee cafeterias. 
    Public place means any enclosed area that is used by the city as a place of employment, or that is a public meeting area in a building owned by the city, and includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  City hall; 
(2)  City utility building; 
(3)  City police department building; 
(4)  City fire stations; 
(5)  City municipal court; 
(6)  City garage and shops; 
(7)  City civic center; 
(8)  City public library; 
(9)  Roosevelt Park Club House; 
(10)  City auditorium; and 
(11)  Any other city-owned building operated by the city. 
(b)  The definitions set forth in Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-15A-3 (Alabama Clean Indoor Air Act-Definitions), shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this chapter. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-15A-3, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-15A-3. 
(Code 1995, § 50-121; Ord. No. 2536, § I, 2-26-1991; Ord. No. 2627, § I, 7-19-1994) 
Sec. 54-144. - Violation and penalty. 
(a)  A person violates this division and commits an offense if he knowingly or intentionally smokes in a public place. 
(b)  Any person who willfully smokes in an area prohibited under this division shall be guilty of an offense and shall be subject to punishment according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. 
(Code 1995, § 50-122; Ord. No. 2536, § II, 2-26-1991; Ord. No. 2627, §§ II, III, 7-19-1994) 
Chapter 58 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Assessments for costs of improvements to sewers, drainage, etc., Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-48-16. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 58-1-58-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3492, art. 8, adopted April 2, 2013, repealed former art. II, §§ 58-19-58-30, 58-49-58-53, 58-80-58-84, and arts. 1-6, enacted a new art. II as set out herein. The former art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 3419, arts. 1-6, adopted Nov. 3, 2009. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete derivation. 

DIVISION 1. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 

Sec. 58-19. - Statutory authorization. 
    The Legislature of the State of Alabama has in Code of Ala. 1975, tit. 11, ch. 19, §§ 1-24, ch. 45, §§ 1-11, ch. 52, §§ 1-84, and tit. 41, ch. 9, § 166, authorized local government units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Ord. No. 3492, art. 1, § A, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 58-20. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of City of Bessemer, Alabama, are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. No. 3492, art. 1, § B, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 58-21. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 3492, art. 1, § C, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 58-22. - Objectives. 
    The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas, 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To insure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 3492, art. 1, § D, 4-2-2013) 
Secs. 58-23-58-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 58-31. - Lands to which this article applies. 
    This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard, as defined herein, within the jurisdiction of City of Bessemer, Alabama. 
(Ord. No. 3492, art. 2, § A, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 58-32. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated September 3, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for Unincorporated Jefferson County are hereby adopted by reference. Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS (See division 6 Definitions). 
(Ord. No. 3492, art. 2, § B, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 58-33. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 3492, art. 2, § C, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 58-34. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 3492, art. 2, § D, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 58-35. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 3492, art. 2, § E, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 58-36. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 3492, art. 2, § F, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 58-37. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the City of Bessemer, Alabama, or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 3492, art. 2, § G, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 58-38. - Penalties for violation. 
    Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 180 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the court action. Every day in which such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Bessemer, Alabama, from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 3492, art. 2, § H, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 58-39. - Savings. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this article is for any reason held to be noncompliant with 44 Code of Federal Regulation [Parts] 59-78, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3492, art. 2, § I, 4-2-2013) 
Secs. 58-40-58-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 58-51. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
    The city engineer is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3492, art. 3, § A, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 58-52. - Permit procedures. 
    Application for a development permit in any area defined herein as a special flood hazard, shall be made to the city engineer on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
    Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the regulatory lowest floor level, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of subsections 58-62(2), 58-65(2); and 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development. 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the city engineer an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level using appropriate FEMA elevation or floodproofing certificate immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The city engineer shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to any work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 3492, art. 3, § B, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 58-53. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
    Duties of the city engineer as (floodplain administrator) shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied; and, assure that sites are reasonably safe from flooding. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 58-32, then the city engineer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of sections 58-61 through 58-65. 
(4)  Verify and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the regulatory floor level, including basement, of all new construction or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 58-52(2). 
(5)  Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with subsections 58-62(2) and 58-65(2). 
(6)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the city engineer shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection 58-52(1)c. and subsection 58-62(2) or 58-65(2). 
(7)  Notify adjacent communities and the Alabama Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), and the Alabama Department of Economic and Community Affairs/Office of Water Resources/NFIP State Coordinator's Office. 
(8)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA and state to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(9)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the city engineer shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(10)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the city engineer and the office of building and inspection services and shall be open for public inspection, pursuant to the procedure set forth by the city for inspection of public documents in Resolution No. 070-06, which was passed by the City Council of the City of Bessemer on January 17, 2006. 
(Ord. No. 3492, art. 3, § C, 4-2-2013) 
Secs. 58-54-58-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 58-61. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and, 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components, all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 3492, art. 4, § A, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 58-62. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard designated as A1-30, AE, AH, A (with estimated BFE), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 58-61(4), "elevated buildings." 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction or the substantial improvement of any nonresidential structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 58-53(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on: 
1.  Individual lots or parcels; 
2.  In new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
3.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
4.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  Where no base flood elevation exists, the manufactured home chassis and supporting equipment is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength and is elevated to a maximum of 60 inches (five feet). 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Refer: section 58-61); 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, fully licensed and ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions; or 
2.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction," including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections 58-62(3)a. and c., above. 
(Ord. No. 3492, art. 4, § B, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 58-63. - Floodways. 
(a)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 58-32, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  The community shall select and adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the area chosen for the regulatory floodway must be designed to carry the waters of the base flood, without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at any point; 
(2)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the adopted regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; 
(3)  A community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM and floodway revision fulfills the requirements for such revisions as established under the provisions of 44 CFR 65.12, and receives the approval of the administrator; 
(4)  Require, until a regulatory floodway is designated, that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community; and 
(5)  Only if subsection (2) or (3), above are satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of division 4. 
(Ord. No. 3492, art. 4, § C, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 58-64. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations (A-Zones). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 58-32, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 58-32, then the city engineer (floodplain administrator) shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 4. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2) and (3) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 25 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  All development in zone A must meet the requirements of section 58-61 and subsections 58-62(1) through (3). 
(4)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Also, in the absence of a base flood elevation, a manufactured home must also meet the elevation requirements of subsection 58-62(3)b.2. in that the structure must be elevated to a maximum of 60 inches (five feet). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 58-61(4), "elevated buildings." The city engineer (floodplain administrator) shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. No. 3492, art. 4, § D, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 58-65. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
    Areas of special flood hazard established in section 58-32, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 58-61(4), "elevated buildings." 
The city engineer shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level or two feet (if no map elevation is listed), above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsections 58-52(1)c. and (2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(4)  Standards for subdivisions. 
a.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
b.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
c.  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
d.  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser. 
(Ord. No. 3492, art. 4, § E, 4-2-2013) 
Secs. 58-66-58-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 58-71. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The board of zoning adjustments as established by the City of Bessemer shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the city engineer in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of zoning adjustments may appeal such decision to the Circuit Court of Jefferson County, Alabama, Bessemer Division, as provided in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-80 et seq. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this division are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the board of zoning adjustments shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause, 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The city engineer shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Alabama Department of Economic and Community Affairs/Office of Water Resources upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this division, the board of zoning adjustments may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3492, art. 5, 4-2-2013) 
Secs. 58-72-58-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 58-81. - Definitions generally. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
    Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered "new construction". 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the city engineer interpretation of any provision of this article. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
    Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 58-32. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, and storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
    Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before June 24, 1980 (a specific date). [i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that community's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)]. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before June 24, 1980. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been designated as zone A. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
    Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
    Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
    Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum. 
    National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced after June 24, 1980 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after June 24, 1980. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Remedy a violation means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
    Repetitive loss means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred. 
    Section 1316. No new flood insurance shall be provided for any property which the administrator finds has been declared by a duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public body, to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations or ordinances which are intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or occupancy in floodprone areas. 
    Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. Substantial damage also means flood related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "repetitive loss" or "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The market value of the building should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
    For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
    Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) § 44, Sections 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) and corresponding parts of this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 3492, art. 6, 4-2-2013) 
Chapter 62 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- General powers of city relative to public health, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-130 et seq.; public health, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Enforcement by health officer; interference; refusal to comply with chapter provisions. 
    No person shall willfully interfere with the enforcement by the health officer of any of the provisions of this chapter, or fail or refuse to take treatment as prescribed by the health officer or by the city physician, or fail or refuse to remain in any place of detention after being committed to such place by the health officer or the city physician, as provided for in this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 12-8; Code 1995, § 58-1) 
Sec. 62-2. - City physician-Appointment. 
    The office of city physician shall be filled by appointment by the mayor. The mayor shall, from time to time, determine the duties, qualifications and compensation of the city physician. 
(Code 1973, § 12-11; Code 1995, § 58-2) 
Sec. 62-3. - Same-Treatment of infected persons. 
    The city physician shall give treatment to all persons apprehended under this chapter and continue such treatments until the disease of such person is controlled to the extent that such person is no longer a source of danger to the public health. 
(Code 1973, § 12-10; Code 1995, § 58-3) 
Sec. 62-4. - Same-Delivery of drugs to by health officer. 
    The health officer is authorized and directed to deliver, for the use of the city physician, drugs for the treatment of all persons apprehended under this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 12-9; Code 1995, § 58-4) 
Sec. 62-5. - Distribution of unsanitary water. 
    No person shall sell, offer for sale, deliver or distribute for human consumption within the city limits any water which is unsanitary, impure, unwholesome or which has been exposed to contamination or which is not in conformity with the standards of purity and the regulations of the state board of health and the United States Public Health Service governing public water supply. 
(Code 1973, § 12-14; Code 1995, § 58-5) 
Sec. 62-6. - Prohibited sources of water. 
    No person shall construct, maintain, use or permit to be used, any spring, well, cistern or other excavation as a source of domestic water supply for any dwelling, building or premises located within 500 feet of a water supply main or pipe of any public utility water supply company. 
(Code 1973, § 12-15; Code 1995, § 58-6) 
Sec. 62-7. - Pollution of water supply. 
    No person shall in any way defile or contaminate or attempt to defile or contaminate the water in any reservoir, pipe, main, cistern, well, spring or stream connected with the water supply of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 12-16; Code 1995, § 58-7) 
Sec. 62-8. - Stagnant water. 
    No owner, proprietor or person in charge or control of any lot or parcel of land within the city limits shall create or permit upon such lot or parcel of land any pool or body of stagnant water or offensive damp place. 
(Code 1973, § 12-17; Code 1995, § 58-8) 
Sec. 62-9. - Sources of unsanitary conditions; notice; abatement. 
(a)  Whenever a complaint is made in writing to the health officer that there is, on any lot, piece of ground or in any house, pool, lake or stream on the property of or maintained by any person, any source of infection or unsanitary condition which is prejudicial to the public health or likely to become so or any material or thing that is grossly offensive or indecent, the health officer shall thoroughly investigate such complaint. 
(b)  If, upon investigation, the health officer is of the opinion that the complaint is well-founded, he shall at once notify the person responsible therefor that such person shall remove or abate, at his own expense, the source of infection, unsanitary condition or grossly offensive or indecent material or thing. 
(c)  If the person responsible for such source of infection or unsanitary condition or grossly offensive or indecent material or thing, refuses or neglects to comply with the notice given by the health officer, the health officer shall proceed, with as little delay as possible, to cause the source of infection or unsanitary condition or grossly offensive or indecent material or thing to be removed or abated, at the expense of the person responsible. 
(Code 1973, § 12-18; Code 1995, § 58-9) 
Sec. 62-10. - Conditions producing obnoxious odors or breeding of flies and mosquitoes. 
    No person shall permit, allow or cause any condition to remain on any premises in the city that gives off offensive or obnoxious odors or which encourages the breeding of flies or mosquitoes. 
(Code 1973, § 12-19; Code 1995, § 58-10) 
Sec. 62-11. - Generation of unwholesome odors. 
    The rendering, heating and steaming of any animal or vegetable product or substance, generating noisome or unwholesome odors or gaseous vapors, shall be conducted in steamtight kettles, tanks or boilers. Only such methods shall be adopted as will entirely condense, decompose or deodorize or destroy the odors, vapor or gaseous products. No person shall be allowed to burn upon his premises or upon any street within the city limits or other place, any animal or vegetable substance which will create unwholesome odors. 
(Code 1973, § 12-20; Code 1995, § 58-11) 
Sec. 62-12. - Spitting on floors or sidewalks in public places. 
    No person shall spit upon the floors of any public conveyance or public building or upon a sidewalk within the city limits. 
(Code 1973, § 15-59; Code 1995, § 58-12) 
Sec. 62-13. - Quarantine established according to state health regulations. 
    Quarantine of persons afflicted with and persons who have been exposed to, or who have been in contact with persons afflicted with, any notifiable disease under Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-11A-1 et seq., shall be established and maintained in accordance with the rules and regulations adopted by the state board of health for the control of the disease with which the person is afflicted. 
(Code 1973, § 12-4; Code 1995, § 58-13) 
Secs. 62-14-62-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMMUNICABLE DISEASES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-45. - Contagious or infectious diseases; report. 
(a)  Any person who is known to have any infectious or contagious disease or who has been exposed to any infectious or contagious disease and comes into the city limits, or who is in the city with any such disease, shall report at once to the health officer. 
(b)  When any person in the city is known to have or is suspected of having an infectious or contagious disease, all persons having knowledge or notice of such condition shall report the condition immediately to the health officer. 
(c)  All physicians, keepers of hotels and boardinghouses and all other persons in the city shall report in writing to the health officer, without delay, every case of smallpox, cholera or other contagious, malignant or unusual disease coming within their knowledge in the city, or in the vicinity thereof. The report shall be made within 12 hours after the facts are known. 
(Code 1973, § 12-1; Code 1995, § 58-36) 
Sec. 62-46. - Infected or contagious person-Concealment. 
    No person knowing another to have or to be suspected of having a contagious or infectious disease shall conceal or shelter or aid in concealing or sheltering such person, directly or indirectly. 
(Code 1973, § 12-2; Code 1995, § 58-37) 
Sec. 62-47. - Same-Removal. 
    No person shall, without permission from the health officer, carry or remove from any building to another or from any railroad depot to any house or through the streets any person who has been exposed to any contagious disease or remove any articles that have been exposed to such disease. 
(Code 1973, § 12-3; Code 1995, § 58-38) 
Secs. 62-48-62-67. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VENEREAL DISEASES 

Sec. 62-68. - Apprehension; examination of persons suspected of infection or exposure. 
    Whenever the health officer has reasonable grounds to believe that any person is infected with, or has been exposed to, a venereal disease, he is authorized to cause such person to be apprehended by any of his authorized representatives and detained and examined by the health officer, or some other reputable physician, to determine whether or not such person is infected with a venereal disease. The examination shall include the taking of specimens for laboratory tests for gonorrhea and syphilis. Such laboratory tests shall be performed in the laboratories of the health department. 
(Code 1973, § 12-5; Code 1995, § 58-51) 
Sec. 62-69. - Detention of suspected person pending determination. 
    The health officer is authorized to detain for a reasonable time, in some suitable place of detention within the city, designated by the health officer, any person examined as provided in this section, pending determination of the results of such examination, whenever, in the judgment of the health officer, such course is necessary to protect the public health. 
(Code 1973, § 12-6; Code 1995, § 58-52) 
Sec. 62-70. - Commitment of infected persons; duration. 
    The health officer may, whenever in his judgment such course is necessary to protect the public health, commit any person found to be infected with any venereal disease to some suitable place of detention within the city, designated by the health officer. Such person may be detained at such place for treatment for such disease until no longer a source of danger to the public health. 
(Code 1973, § 12-7; Code 1995, § 58-53) 
Secs. 62-71-62-101. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3481, §§ 1-16, adopted Aug. 14, 2012, repealed former art. III, §§ 62-102-62-111, and enacted new provisions as set out herein. The former art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 3351, §§ I-X, adopted Nov. 6, 2007. Ord. No. 3482, § 1, adopted Sept. 11, 2012, subsequently amended art. III, by providing an effective date of November 1, 2012. 

Sec. 62-102. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, whenever used in this article, shall be construed as defined in this section: 
    Bar and lounges means an establishment that is devoted primarily to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and where food sales represent 25 percent or less of the establishment's gross annual receipts. This definition excludes restaurant bars and includes but is not limited to taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and cabarets. 
    Business means a sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, or other business entity, either for-profit or not-for-profit, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold; professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional services are delivered; and private clubs. 
    City means the City of Bessemer, Alabama. 
    Common area means a hallway, corridor, lobby, aisle, water fountain area, restroom, stairwell, interior and/or exterior general public entryway or exit, refreshment area, or restroom. 
    E-cigarette means any electronic oral device, such as one composed of a heating element, battery, and/or electronic circuit, which provides a vapor of nicotine or any other substances, and the use or inhalation of which simulates smoking. The term shall include any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, or under any other product name or descriptor. 
    Employee means a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and a person who volunteers his or her services for a business. 
    Employer means a person, business, association, municipal corporation, or trust with one or more employees. 
    Enclosed area means all space between a floor and a ceiling that is bounded on at least two sides by walls, doorways, or windows, whether open or closed. A wall includes any retractable divider, garage door, or other physical barrier, whether temporary or permanent and whether or not containing openings of any kind. 
    Health care facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics, nursing homes, long-term care facilities, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, psychiatrists, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. This definition shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within health care facilities. 
    Place of employment means an area under the control of a public or private employer, including, but not limited to, common work areas, private offices, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, elevators, employee cafeterias, hallways, stairs, construction sites, temporary offices, and vehicles. A private residence is not a "place of employment" within the meaning of this article unless it is used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
    Private club means an organization, whether incorporated or not, which is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times, which is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and which only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. The affairs and management of the organization are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting. The organization has established bylaws and/or a constitution to govern its activities. The organization has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 U.S.C. Section 501. 
    Public place means an area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including but not limited to, banks, educational facilities, gaming facilities, health care facilities, hotels and motels, laundromats, public transportation vehicles and facilities, reception areas, restaurants and restaurant bars, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, sports arenas, theaters, and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a "public place" unless it is used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
    Restaurant means an eating establishment, including but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term "restaurant" shall include a bar area within the restaurant. 
    Restaurant bar means an establishment that is devoted primarily to providing food service but also serves alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests and where food sales represent 25 percent or more of the establishment's gross annual receipts. This definition does not include bars as defined herein. 
    Service line means an indoor or outdoor line in which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money, including but not limited to, ATM lines, concert lines, food vendor lines, movie ticket lines, and sporting event lines. 
    Shopping mall means an enclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to connect retail or professional establishments. 
    Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, or pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant product intended for inhalation, in any manner or in any form. "Smoking" also includes the use of an e-cigarette which creates a vapor, in any manner or in any form, or the use of any oral smoking device for the purpose of circumventing the prohibition of smoking in this article. 
    Sports arena means a place where people assemble to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports or other events, including sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, and bowling alleys. 
(Ord. No. 3481, § 1, 8-14-2012; Ord. No. 3490, § 1, 2-19-2013) 
Sec. 62-103. - Prohibition of smoking in City of Bessemer facilities and property. 
    Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the City of Bessemer. 
(Ord. No. 3481, § 2, 8-14-2012) 
Sec. 62-104. - Prohibition of smoking in enclosed public places. 
    Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places, with the exception of bars and lounges as defined in section 62-102, within the City of Bessemer, including but not limited to, the following places: 
(1)  Aquariums, galleries, libraries, and museums. 
(2)  Areas available to the general public in businesses and nonprofit entities patronized by the public, including but not limited to, banks, laundromats, professional offices, and retail service establishments. 
(3)  Restaurant bars. 
(4)  Bingo facilities. 
(5)  Child care and adult day care facilities. 
(6)  Convention facilities. 
(7)  Educational facilities, both public and private. 
(8)  Elevators. 
(9)  Gaming facilities. 
(10)  Health care facilities. 
(11)  Hotels and motels. 
(12)  Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other multiple-unit residential facilities. 
(13)  Polling places. 
(14)  Public transportation vehicles, including buses and taxicabs, under the authority of the city and ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transportation facilities, including bus, train, and airport facilities. 
(15)  Restaurants. 
(16)  Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, and other common-use areas. 
(17)  Retail stores. 
(18)  Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings, under the control of an agency, board, commission, committee or council of the city or a political subdivision of the state, to the extent the place is subject to the jurisdiction of the city. 
(19)  Service lines. 
(20)  Shopping malls. 
(21)  Sports arenas, including enclosed places in outdoor arenas. 
(22)  Theaters and other facilities used for exhibiting motion pictures, stage dramas, lectures, musical recitals, or other similar performances. 
(Ord. No. 3481, § 3, 8-14-2012; Ord. No. 3490, § 2, 2-19-2013) 
Sec. 62-105. - Prohibition of smoking in enclosed places of employment. 
(a)  Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas of places of employment without exception. This includes, without limitation, common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, vehicles, and all other enclosed facilities. 
(b)  This prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to all existing employees by the effective date of this article and to all new employees upon their hire. 
(Ord. No. 3481, § 4, 8-14-2012) 
Sec. 62-106. - Prohibition of smoking in private clubs. 
    Smoking shall be prohibited in all private clubs. 
(Ord. No. 3481, § 5, 8-14-2012) 
Sec. 62-107. - Prohibition of smoking in enclosed residential facilities. 
    Smoking shall be prohibited in the following enclosed residential facilities: 
(1)  All private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes. 
(2)  All hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests. 
(Ord. No. 3481, § 6, 8-14-2012) 
Sec. 62-108. - Prohibition of smoking in outdoor public places. 
    Smoking shall be prohibited in the following outdoor places: 
(1)  Within a reasonable distance of ten feet outside entrances, operable windows, and ventilation systems of enclosed areas where smoking is prohibited, so as to prevent tobacco smoke from entering those areas. 
(2)  In, and within 20 feet of, outdoor seating or serving areas of restaurants and restaurant bars. 
(3)  In all outdoor arenas, stadiums, and amphitheaters. Smoking shall also be prohibited in, and within 20 feet of, bleachers and grandstands for use by spectators at sporting and other public events. 
(4)  In, and within 20 feet of, all outdoor public transportation stations, platforms, and shelters under the authority of the city. 
(5)  In all outdoor service lines, including lines in which service is obtained by persons in vehicles, such as service that is provided by bank tellers, parking lot attendants, and toll takers. In lines in which service is obtained by persons in vehicles, smoking is prohibited by both pedestrians and persons in vehicles, but only within 20 feet of the point of service. 
(6)  In outdoor common areas of apartment buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other multiple-unit residential facilities, except in designated smoking areas, not to exceed 25 percent of the total outdoor common area, which must be located at least ten feet outside entrances, operable windows, and ventilation systems of enclosed areas where smoking is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 3481, § 7, 8-14-2012; Ord. No. 3490, § 3, 2-19-2013) 
Sec. 62-109. - Where smoking not regulated. 
(a)  Private residences, unless used as a childcare, adult daycare or health care facility, shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this article; provided however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to permit smoking where smoking is otherwise prohibited or restricted by any other law or rule. 
(b)  Bar and lounges (as defined in section 62-102), shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this article; provided however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to permit smoking where smoking is otherwise prohibited or restricted. 
(Ord. No. 3481, § 8, 8-14-2012; Ord. No. 3490, § 4, 2-19-2013) 
Sec. 62-110. - Declaration of establishment or outdoor area as nonsmoking. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility, or outdoor area may declare that entire establishment, facility, or outdoor area as a nonsmoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which a sign conforming to the requirements of subsection 62-111(1) is posted. 
(Ord. No. 3481, § 9, 8-14-2012) 
Sec. 62-111. - Posting of signs and removal of ashtrays. 
    The owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of a public place or place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article shall: 
(1)  Clearly and conspicuously post "NO SMOKING" signs or the international "NO SMOKING" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) in that place. 
(2)  Clearly and conspicuously post at every entrance to that place a sign stating that smoking is prohibited. 
(3)  Clearly and conspicuously post on every vehicle that constitutes a place of employment under this article at least one sign, visible from the exterior of the vehicle, stating that smoking is prohibited. 
(4)  Remove all ashtrays from any area where smoking is prohibited by this article, except for ashtrays displayed for sale and not for use on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 3481, § 10, 8-14-2012) 
Sec. 62-112. - Nonretaliation; nonwaiver of rights. 
(a)  No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment, customer, or resident of a multiple-unit residential facility because that employee, applicant, customer, or resident exercises any rights afforded by this article or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this article. Notwithstanding section 62-114, violation of this subsection shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation. 
(b)  An employee who works in a setting where an employer allows smoking does not waive or otherwise surrender any legal rights the employee may have against the employer or any other party. 
(Ord. No. 3481, § 11, 8-14-2012) 
Sec. 62-113. - Enforcement. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by any duly sworn police officer of the city, any appropriate representative of the fire department of the city, the fire marshall, the city inspections officers, the county health officer or an authorized designee. 
(b)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this article may initiate enforcement with the police department, fire department, inspections department, or Jefferson County Department of Health ("health department"). 
(c)  The fire department, inspections department, health department or their designees shall, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, inspect for compliance with this article. 
(d)  An owner, manager, operator, or employee of an area regulated by this article shall direct a person who is smoking in violation of this article to extinguish the product being smoked. If the person does not stop smoking, the owner, manager, operator, or employee shall refuse service and shall immediately ask the person to leave the premises. If the person in violation refuses to leave the premises, the owner, manager, operator, or employee shall contact a law enforcement agency. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an employee or private citizen may bring legal action to enforce this article. 
(f)  In addition to the remedies provided by the provisions of this section, the police department, fire department, inspections department or any person aggrieved by the failure of the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of a public place or a place of employment to comply with the provisions of this article may apply for injunctive relief to enforce those provisions in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 3481, § 12, 8-14-2012) 
Sec. 62-114. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not exceeding $50.00. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection 62-112(a), a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment and who fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by: A fine not to exceed five $500.00, and no sentence of imprisonment or hard labor shall exceed six months. 
(c)  In addition to the fines established by this section, violation of this article by a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment may result in the suspension or revocation of any permit or license issued to he person for the premises on which the violation occurred. 
(d)  Violation of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by the City or Jefferson County Department of Health by restraining order, preliminary and permanent injunction, or other means provided for bylaw, and the city may take action to recover the costs of the nuisance abatement. 
(e)  Each day on which a violation of this article occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation. 
(Ord. No. 3481, § 13, 8-14-2012) 
Sec. 62-115. - Summons and complaint. 
    Pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-9.1 as amended, which authorizes municipalities to issue summons and complaints in lieu of arrest warrants for violation of certain municipal ordinances: 
(1)  Any law enforcement officer or any appropriate representative of the fire department of the city may issue a summons and complaint to any person charged with violation of this article and release such person from custody upon his or her written promise to appear in court at the designated time and place as evidenced by his or her signature on the summons and complaint; 
(2)  The form of the approved summons and complaint shall be the uniform nontraffic citation and complaint form, or its successors. 
(Ord. No. 3481, § 14, 8-14-2012) 
Sec. 62-116. - Governmental agency cooperation. 
    The City of Bessemer may annually request other governmental and educational agencies having facilities within the city to establish local operating procedures in cooperation and compliance with this article. This includes urging all federal, state, county, and school district agencies to update their existing smoking control regulations to be consistent with the current health findings regarding secondhand smoke. 
(Ord. No. 3481, § 15, 8-14-2012) 
Sec. 62-117. - Other applicable laws. 
    This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 3481, § 16, 8-14-2012) 
Chapter 66 - HISTORICAL PRESERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Historic Preservation Commissions and Architectural Review Boards, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-68-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
    Exterior architectural feature means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including, but not limited to, the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of a window, door, sign and other appurtenant architectural fixture, feature, detail or element relative to the foregoing. 
    Exterior environmental feature means an aspect of the landscape or the development of a site which affects the historical character of the property. 
    Historic district means a geographically definable area designated by the city council as a historic district. 
    Historic property means an individual building, structure, site, object or work of art including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the city council as a historic property. 
    Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, landscape feature or work of art within a historic district, such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location or advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any building or other structure within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements or other appurtenant features. 
(Code 1995, § 62-1; Ord. No. 2541, § II, 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-2. - Purpose and intent of chapter. 
(a)  In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the city historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people. 
(b)  In order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business. 
(c)  In order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law. 
(d)  In order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same. 
(e)  The city council hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, landscape features and works of art having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 62-2; Ord. No. 2541, § I, 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-3. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Violations of any provision of this chapter shall be punished in the same manner as provided for in section 1-8. 
(Code 1995, § 62-3; Ord. No. 2541, § IX, 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-4. - Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city building and zoning codes, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of his property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Code 1995, § 62-4) 
Sec. 66-5. - Requirements for adopting an ordinance for the designation of historic districts and historic properties. 
(a)  Application. Designations may be proposed by the city council, the commission, or: 
(1)  For historic districts, a historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation. 
(2)  For historic properties, a historical society, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the commission for designation. 
(b)  Required components of a designation ordinance. Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: 
(1)  List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property; 
(2)  Set forth the names of the owners of the designated properties; 
(3)  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
(4)  Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the city. 
(c)  Required public hearings. The commission shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the principal newspaper of the local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the city tax roll and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this chapter. 
(d)  Recommendations on proposed designations. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the commission with 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the city council. 
(e)  City council action on commission recommendation. Following receipt of the commission's recommendation, the city council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary, or reject the ordinance. 
(f)  Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation. Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the city council, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the commission, which notice shall apprise the owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the city tax roll and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this chapter. 
(g)  Notification of other agencies regarding designation. The commission shall notify all city agencies of the ordinance for designation. 
(h)  Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending. If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. 
(Code 1995, § 62-5; Ord. No. 2541, § VIII(A), 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-6. - Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
    Property owners of historic properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect: 
(1)  The commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, the deterioration of exterior architectural features, or the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
(2)  If the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have 90 days in which to initiate this remedy. 
(3)  If the conditions are not met in 90 days, the owner shall be punished as provided in section 66-3 and, at the direction of the city council, the commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the commission. 
(Code 1995, § 62-6; Ord. No. 2541, § VIII(B), 5-21-1991) 
Secs. 66-7-66-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 66-31. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be the City of Bessemer Historic Preservation Commission and, in this chapter, known as the commission. 
(Code 1995, § 62-31) 
Sec. 66-32. - Members. 
(a)  Number; appointments; qualifications. The commission shall consist of seven members nominated by the mayor and appointed by the city council. All members shall be residents of the city and shall be persons who have demonstrated training or experience in history, architecture, planning, archaeology or law, or who shall be residents of a historic district. If persons with the proper expertise cannot be found, nominees should be approved by the state historical commission. 
(b)  Terms; compensation. Members shall serve three-year terms. Members shall not receive compensation, although they may be reimbursed for expenses incurred on behalf of the commission. Such expenses will be reimbursed only when the cost of such expenses are provided for and approved in the commission's budget or, if anticipated to be paid from the city's general fund, only when prior authorization obtained in accordance with city policy. 
(c)  Removal; vacancies. Members of the commission may be removed for cause by the city council. Vacancies on the commission shall be filled by persons nominated by the mayor and appointed by the city council. Such appointments shall be for the unexpired term of the member replaced. 
(d)  Officers; rules of procedure; quorum. Members of the commission shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman and such other officer as the members deem necessary. The commission shall adopt rules of procedure and bylaws to govern its operations and shall communicate those rules of procedure and bylaws to the city council. The rules of procedure and bylaws of the commission shall specify what number of members of the commission constitutes a quorum. 
(e)  Adoption of rules and standards. The commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this article. 
(Code 1995, § 62-32; Ord. No. 2541, § III(A), (B), 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-33. - Meetings; minutes; public participation. 
(a)  All meetings of the commission must be publicly announced and be open to the public. Commission meetings must occur at regular intervals. Public notice must be provided prior to any special meetings. 
(b)  Minutes of all decisions and actions of the commission including the reasons for making these decisions must be kept on file and available for public inspection. 
(c)  All decisions of the commission shall be made in a public forum, and applicants must be given written notification of the commission's decision. 
(d)  The rules of procedure adopted by the commission must be available for public inspection. 
(e)  During the process of reviewing properties for nomination to the national register, the commission must provide opportunity for public comments. 
(Code 1995, § 62-33; Ord. No. 2541, § III(C), 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-34. - Powers. 
    The commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the city having the potential for designation as historic property; 
(2)  Recommend to the city council specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects or works of art to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
(3)  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this article; 
(4)  Recommend to the city council that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure, objects or work of art as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
(5)  Restore and preserve any historic properties acquired by the city or acquired by the commission; 
(6)  Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements; 
(7)  Develop and conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the city and on general historic preservation activities; 
(8)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation including employment of historic preservation experts the city council or the commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
(9)  Seek out local, state, federal and private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the city council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
(10)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the city preservation program; 
(11)  Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the commission; 
(12)  Receive donations, grants, funds or gifts of historic property; 
(13)  Purchase, sell, contract to purchase, contract to sell, own, encumber, lease, mortgage and insure real and personal property in carrying out the purposes and responsibilities of the commission. The commission shall not obligate the city without prior consent; 
(14)  Review and make comments to the state historical commission concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; 
(15)  Investigate, survey and assist the state historical commission in processing nominations of properties to the National Register of Historic Places; 
(16)  Investigate, survey and assist the state historical commission in processing applications for certification of historic properties for tax credits for preservation expenditures; 
(17)  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the city council, enter into agreements with the same to perform historic preservation related functions. 
(Code 1995, § 62-34; Ord. No. 2541, § III(D), 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-35. - Seeking technical advice. 
    The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
(Code 1995, § 62-35; Ord. No. 2541, § V(S), 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-36. - Annual reports of activities. 
    The commission shall prepare and file with the city council and with the state historical commission, an annual report of its activities as required by the city council and the state historical commission. The annual report shall cover the period from October 1 to September 30 and shall be submitted in October of each year. The report shall include such items as the number of cases reviewed, historic district and property designations made, revised resumes of commission members/staff, appointments to the commission, attendance records and all minutes relating to the review of national register nominations. The report shall document attendance at the orientation/training session as specified in sections 66-39 and 66-40. 
(Code 1995, § 62-36; Ord. No. 2541, § III(E), 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-37. - Conflict of interest. 
    At any time the commission reviews a project in which a member of the commission has ownership or other vested interest, that member will be forbidden from presenting, voting or discussing the project, other than answering a direct question. 
(Code 1995, § 62-37; Ord. No. 2541, § III(F), 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-38. - Records of meetings. 
    A public record shall be kept of the commission's resolutions, proceedings and actions. 
(Code 1995, § 62-38; Ord. No. 2541, § III(G), 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-39. - Responsibilities of members. 
    Each commission member and anyone serving the commission in a technical/professional staff capacity is required to attend at least two informational or educational meetings per year pertaining to historic preservation. Such meetings may include those sponsored by the state historical commission, board of advisors, the National Trust for Historic Preservation or a local preservation organization. One of the two should be a regional or statewide meeting. 
(Code 1995, § 62-39; Ord. No. 2541, § III(H), 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-40. - Liaison with the state historic preservation office, state historical commission. 
    Should the city council elect to become a certified local government, the city council shall designate a paid member to the city's staff or a person working under contract as a source of technical/administrative/professional assistance to be responsible for the operations of the commission in keeping with the requirements of certification for participation in the certified local government program. At least one member of the commission and/or the person serving as the commission's technical staff, and/or a representative appointed by the mayor who has an ongoing relationship with the commission, will attend the state certified local government orientation/training session sponsored by the state historical commission each year. 
(Code 1995, § 62-40; Ord. No. 2541, § III(I), 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-41. - Recommendation and designation of historic districts and properties. 
(a)  Preliminary research by commission. Preliminary research by the commission shall include the following: 
(1)  Mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources. The commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the city. 
(2)  Power to recommend districts and buildings to the city council for designation. The commission shall present to the city council recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
(3)  Documentation of proposed designation. Prior to the commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the city council for designation, the commission shall prepare a report consisting of: 
a.  A physical description; 
b.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
c.  A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e., historic, nonhistoric, intrusive) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; 
d.  A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; and 
e.  Representative photographs. 
(b)  Designation of a historic property. Criteria for selection of historic properties is as follows: A historic property is a building, structure, site, object, work of art; including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the city for one of the following reasons: 
(1)  Properties associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history; 
(2)  Properties associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; 
(3)  Properties that embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or 
(4)  Properties that have yielded or may be likely to yield information important in prehistory or history. 
(c)  Boundary description. Boundaries shall be shown on the official zoning map of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 62-41; Ord. No. 2541, § IV, 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-42. - Maintenance of historic properties. 
    The commission may adopt expedited review procedures for approval of routine maintenance to historic properties or to buildings or structures in historic districts. Routine maintenance to historic properties includes ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay or damage, or to sustain the existing form that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance. Expedited review procedures shall waive the requirements for submission of an application for a certificate of appropriateness and for consideration at a public meeting. 
(Code 1995, § 62-42; Ord. No. 2541, § VI, 5-21-1991) 
Secs. 66-43-66-72. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to create architectural review board generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-68-13. 

Sec. 66-73. - Creation. 
    The city council may elect to create an architectural review board, called "the board" in this article, to perform the duties and responsibilities of the commission in accepting, considering and approving or rejecting applications for certificates of appropriateness, as set out in article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 62-66; Ord. No. 2541, § VII(A), 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-74. - Members. 
(a)  Number; qualifications; appointment; terms. If such board is created, it shall be composed of not less than five members who shall have demonstrated training or experience in the fields of history, architecture, architectural history, urban planning, archaeology or law. Members of the board need not be residents of the city. If qualified individuals cannot be found, the local government shall consult with the state historical commission. No member of the city council or the mayor shall serve as members of the board. Members of the board shall be nominated by the mayor and appointed by the city council. Except for the original members of the board, members of the board shall serve three-year terms and shall be appointed in such manner as to serve overlapping terms. Two of the original members of the board shall be appointed to serve one-year terms, and the remainder of the original members of the board shall be appointed to serve three-year terms. Members of the board may be reappointed. 
(b)  Removal. Members of the board may be removed for cause by the city council. 
(c)  Vacancies. Vacancies on the board shall be filled by persons nominated by the mayor and appointed by the city council. Such appointments shall be for the unexpired term of the member replaced. 
(d)  Officers; rules of procedure; quorum. Members of the board shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman and such other officers as the members deem necessary. The board shall adopt rules of procedure and shall communicate those rules of procedure to the city council and mayor. The rules of procedure of the board shall specify what number of members of the board shall constitute a quorum. 
(e)  Compensation; reimbursement. Members of the board shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for reasonable expenses incurred on behalf of the board, in accordance with the rules and regulations for the reimbursement of expenses adopted by the board. 
(f)  Employment of personnel. The board may employ such professional, technical, office and other personnel, as may be necessary to carry out the purposes and responsibilities of the board. 
(g)  Meetings. Meetings of the board shall be public meetings and shall be held at designated times and places as are specified in the commission's resolution creating the board. 
(h)  Creation of regional boards. If, in the opinion of the city council, the work load of the board is, or is contemplated to be, excessive, the city council may create more than one board, and designate the historic properties and historic districts with which each board will be concerned. Each historic property and each historic district designated by the city council shall be subject to the control of only one board. Each board created shall have all of the powers and authority set forth in this article with respect to the historic properties and historic districts with which it is concerned. 
(Code 1995, § 62-67; Ord. No. 2541, § VII(B), 5-21-1991) 
Secs. 66-75-66-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CERTIFICATES OF APPROPRIATENESS 

Sec. 66-92. - Approval of alterations, demolitions or new construction in historic districts or involving historic properties. 
    After the designation by ordinance of a historic property of a historic district, no historic property may be demolished, no building or structure in a historic district may be erected or demolished, and no material change in the exterior appearance of such historic property, or of a structure, site, object or work of art within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. 
(Code 1995, § 62-91; Ord. No. 2541, §§ V, V(A), 5-21-1991; Ord. No. 2568, § 2, 5-19-1992) 
Sec. 66-93. - Approval of new construction within designated districts. 
    The commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness to new structures constructed within designated historic districts if these structures conform in design, scale, building materials, setback and landscaping to the character of the district specified in the design criteria developed by the commission. 
(Code 1995, § 62-92; Ord. No. 2541, § V(B), 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-94. - Approval of signs within designated districts. 
    Signs shall be considered as structures, and no sign on a historic property or in a historic district shall be changed, erected or demolished unless and until a certificate of appropriateness is approved by the commission. 
(Code 1995, § 62-93; Ord. No. 2541, § V(C), 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-95. - Approval of alterations, demolitions of public property within historic districts or public property designated historic property. 
    The requirement of a certificate of appropriateness shall apply to public property which has been designated as a historic property or which is contained in a historic district, and shall apply to all actions by public authorities which involve historic properties and properties within historic districts. 
(Code 1995, § 62-94; Ord. No. 2541, § V(D), 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-96. - Color. 
    Changes in exterior color shall require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(Code 1995, § 62-95; Ord. No. 2541, § V(E), 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-97. - Approval of painting originally unpainted surfaces. 
    The painting of originally unpainted surfaces shall require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(Code 1995, § 62-96; Ord. No. 2541, § V(F), 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-98. - Interior alterations. 
    In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
(Code 1995, § 62-97; Ord. No. 2541, § V(G), 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-99. - Failure to maintain a historic property. 
    Demolition by neglect and the failure to maintain a historic property or a structure in a historic district shall constitute a change for which a certificate of appropriateness is necessary. 
(Code 1995, § 62-98; Ord. No. 2541, § V(H), 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-100. - Guidelines and criteria for certificates. 
    The commission shall adopt rules and regulations setting forth the procedure for submission and consideration of applications for certificates of appropriateness. The commission shall also adopt general design standards which shall apply in considering the granting and denial of certificates of appropriateness. Design standards shall be in compliance with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Historic Preservation Projects including the Secretary's Standards for Rehabilitation. 
(Code 1995, § 62-99; Ord. No. 2541, § V(I), 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-101. - Submission of plans. 
    An application for certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs, plans or other documentation as may be required by the commission. Applications involving demolition or relocation shall be accompanied by post-demolition or relocation plans for the site. 
(Code 1995, § 62-100; Ord. No. 2541, § V(J), 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-102. - Acceptable reaction to applications. 
(a)  The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material changes in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the historical and architectural value and significance, architectural style, general design arrangement, texture and material of the architectural features involved and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style and pertinent features of the other structures in the immediate neighborhood. 
(b)  The commission shall deny a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material changes in appearance would have substantial adverse effects on the aesthetic, historic or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. The commission shall not grant certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation without reviewing at the same time the post-demolition or post-relocation plans for the site. 
(Code 1995, § 62-101; Ord. No. 2541, § V(K), 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-103. - Public meetings and hearings on applications; notices and right to be heard. 
    Applications for certificates of appropriateness shall be considered by the commission at public meetings. At least seven days prior to review of a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform the owners of any property likely to be affected by reason of the application, and shall give the applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard. In cases where the commission deems it necessary, it may hold a public hearing concerning the application. 
(Code 1995, § 62-102; Ord. No. 2541, § V(L), 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-104. - Deadline for approval or rejection of application. 
(a)  The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property, or of a historic structure, site, object or work of art located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. 
(b)  Failure of the commission to act within the 45-day period of consideration shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(Code 1995, § 62-103; Ord. No. 2541, § V(M), 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-105. - Necessary actions to be taken upon rejection of application. 
(a)  If the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it feels proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(b)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building inspection officer or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such cases, no building permit shall be issued. 
(Code 1995, § 62-104; Ord. No. 2541, § V(N), 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-106. - Appeals. 
    Any person having a request for a certificate of appropriateness denied by the commission, or architectural review board as provided in article III of this chapter, may appeal such denial to the circuit court. 
(Code 1995, § 62-105; Ord. No. 2541, § V(O), 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-107. - Recording of applications. 
    The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness and of all the commission's proceedings in connection with such applications. 
(Code 1995, § 62-106; Ord. No. 2541, § V(P), 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-108. - Requirements of conformance with certificate. 
(a)  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. If work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the commission shall issue a cease and desist order and work shall cease. 
(b)  The city council or the commission shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this article or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(Code 1995, § 62-107; Ord. No. 2541, § V(Q), 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-109. - Void if construction not commenced. 
    A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months from the date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and are renewable. 
(Code 1995, § 62-108; Ord. No. 2541, § V(R), 5-21-1991) 
Sec. 66-110. - Adoption of general design guidelines. 
    The general design guidelines, which are incorporated in this section by reference, are hereby adopted for application by the historic preservation commission in considering the granting and denial of certificates of appropriateness. 
(Code 1995, § 62-109; Ord. No. 2568, § 3, 5-19-1992) 
Secs. 66-111-66-133. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HISTORIC DISTRICT 

Sec. 66-134. - Designation. 
(a)  Criteria for selection of historic districts. A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, landscape features and works of art or a combination thereof: 
(1)  That are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history; 
(2)  That are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; 
(3)  That embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or 
(4)  That have yielded or may be likely to yield information important in prehistory or history. 
(b)  Boundaries of historic district. Boundaries of a historic district shall be shown on the official zoning map of the city, and any depiction and/or description of said boundaries appearing on the zoning map are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set out. 
(c)  Evaluation of properties with historic districts. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
(1)  Historic (contributes to the district); 
(2)  Nonhistoric (does not contribute but does not detract from the district); and 
(3)  Intrusive (detracts from the district). 
(Code 1995, §§ 62-131, 62-132; Ord. No. 2541, § IV(B), 5-21-1991; Ord. No. 2568, §§ 1, 4, 5-19-1992) 
Chapter 70 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to create the office of and prescribe duties for police chief, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-5; municipal authority to establish a police force, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-55. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Police chief authorized to classify and dispose of forfeited, abandoned, or unclaimed weapons. 
    The chief of police is hereby authorized to classify the weapons now held as forfeited, abandoned or unclaimed as follows: 
(1)  Category I. The weapons in category I shall be retained by the police department to be used as evidence in any legal proceedings, pending or contemplated, and upon the weapons not being needed for said purposes, the chief of police shall place the weapons into categories II, III, or IV. 
(2)  Category II. Category II shall consist of weapons that are subject to condemnation or forfeiture under the laws of the state and the laws of the city. 
(3)  Category III. Category III shall be a classification of weapons to be used by the police department and in the enforcement of the laws of the state and the city, it being understood that the chief of police shall maintain a record of the location of said weapons as long as the same are utilized by the city, and upon such time as the city discontinues the use of said weapons in the police functions of the city the same shall be reclassified in category II or IV. 
(4)  Category IV. Category IV shall consist of weapons that are held as forfeited, abandoned or unclaimed, or when the same are unneeded for use as evidence under category I or by the city under category III and are not subject to condemnation under category II, the weapons in this category shall be inventoried by the chief of police and the same shall be destroyed or otherwise rendered inoperative at the discretion and under the supervision of the chief of police. 
(Code 1995, § 70-1; Ord. No. 3020, 3-3-1998) 
Secs. 70-2-70-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY JAIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to erect, maintain, etc., jails generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-7. 

Sec. 70-21. - Established for violators of city laws and ordinances. 
    The city jail now established at the corner of First Avenue and 15th Street is established as the city jail. All persons sentenced to imprisonment for a violation of any city law or ordinance, and all persons sentenced to hard labor upon the streets of the city for an offense against the law and ordinances of the city, when not at work, and all persons arrested and failing to give bond for their appearance shall be confined in such prison. Male and female prisoners shall not be confined in the same room or cell. 
(Code 1973, § 2-62(a); Code 1995, § 70-26) 
Sec. 70-22. - County jail to handle overflow from city. 
    In case at any time there is insufficient room in the city prison for the imprisonment of persons sentenced for violations of the city's laws and ordinances, the excess may be confined in the county jail until the city can make provision for them. 
(Code 1973, § 2-62(b); Code 1995, § 70-27) 
Sec. 70-23. - Officer in charge. 
    The chief of police shall be in the charge of the city jail who shall keep and conduct the prison in accordance with rules and regulations prescribed by the department of public safety. 
(Code 1973, § 2-62(c); Code 1995, § 70-28) 
Sec. 70-24. - Charges for use by prisoners not of city; disposition. 
(a)  For all prisoners placed in the city prison, other than prisoners of the city, a charge shall be made. A further charge, per day, or a part thereof, shall be made for feeding and taking care of such prisoners. The city reserves the right to accept or reject any and all such prisoners. The amount of the charges shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(b)  The chief of police shall collect such fees and charges as authorized by this section. The monies shall go into the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 2-63; Code 1995, § 70-29) 
Secs. 70-25-70-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - IMPOUNDED, ABANDONED, OR STOLEN PROPERTY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Uniform Disposition of Unclaimed Property Act of 2004, Code of Ala. 1975, § 35-12-70 et seq.; authority regarding stolen and abandoned personal property, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-116. 

Sec. 70-52. - Public auction; eligibility for auction time. 
    In accordance with state law, every six months the chief of police shall sell, at public auction to the highest bidder for cash, all property which has been taken up and stored as abandoned or stolen within the city limits and/or within the police jurisdiction which, at that time, has been taken up and stored for three months or more. 
(Code 1973, § 2-64; Code 1995, § 70-51) 
Sec. 70-53. - Notice of public auction. 
    The sale provided for in section 70-52 shall be made after the time prescribed in section 70-52 and notice has been given by publication of notice of such sale once a week for two successive weeks in the Bessemer Advertiser. The first publication shall be at least 20 days before the date of sale. 
(Code 1973, § 2-65; Code 1995, § 70-52) 
Sec. 70-54. - Redemption of impounded property. 
    The owners of any property taken up and stored may redeem the property at any time prior to the sale by paying the reasonable expenses of taking the property in charge, its maintenance, storage and a pro rata cost of the publication. 
(Code 1973, § 2-66; Code 1995, § 70-53) 
Sec. 70-55. - Sale of articles; record. 
    Every article shall be sold separately. A notation in the storage record book shall be made of the receipt for each article sold. 
(Code 1973, § 2-67; Code 1995, § 70-54) 
Sec. 70-56. - Rejection of bids; continuances. 
    The person making the sale shall have the right to reject any and all bids if the amount bid be unreasonably low. He shall have the right to continue the sale from time to time if no bidders are present. 
(Code 1973, § 2-68; Code 1995, § 70-55) 
Sec. 70-57. - Disposition of auction proceeds. 
    The chief of police, immediately after concluding the sale, shall turn all of the monies received from the sale over to the clerk and treasurer. The clerk and treasurer, after paying all the expenses incurred in taking up, storage, maintenance and sale of the property, shall place the balance in the general funds of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 2-69; Code 1995, § 70-56) 
Chapter 74 - LIBRARY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to establish free public libraries generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-90-1 et seq. 

Sec. 74-1. - Return of books; overdue notice. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person over 19 years of age, who has borrowed or withdrawn any book or other material from the Bessemer Public Library, or any parent, guardian, or other person having custody of a minor child, who has requested in writing that the Bessemer Public Library permit such minor child to borrow or withdraw from the library any book or other material and agrees in writing to be responsible for the care and proper return thereof to the library, to not return or cause to be returned such book or other material within 60 days of the due date to the Bessemer Public Library, together with all overdue assessments or late charges, in compliance with rules of the library with respect thereto, within 21 days after written notice from the library that the book or other material is overdue. The notice shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested, with the return card showing the receipt or refusal by the addressee. Such notice shall contain a copy of this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 74-2; Ord. No. 1900, § 1, 7-22-1975) 
Sec. 74-2. - Signature on membership application card constitutes evidence. 
    In any prosecution for any violation of this chapter, any membership application card on file with the Bessemer Public Library shall be prima facie evidence of the genuineness of any signature appearing thereon. 
(Code 1995, § 74-3; Ord. No. 1900, § 2, 7-22-1975) 
Chapter 78 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State Criminal Code generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Application of state statutes; penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any person committing an offense within the corporate limits of the city, which is declared by laws of the state now existing or hereafter enacted to be a misdemeanor, shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(b)  Any person committing an offense within the corporate limits of the city or within the police jurisdiction thereof, which is declared by laws of the state now existing or hereafter enacted to be a violation, shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(c)  Any person committing within the corporate limits of the city, or within the police jurisdiction thereof, an offense as defined by Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-1-2 of the Alabama Criminal Code, which offense is not declared by laws of the state now existing or hereafter enacted to be a felony, misdemeanor or violation, shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(d)  Any person found to be in violation of subsections (a) through (c) of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $1.00 nor more than $500.00 and/or may be imprisoned or sentenced to hard labor for the city for a period not exceeding six months, at the discretion of the court trying the case, unless otherwise provided in this section. Any corporation found to be in violation of subsections (a) through (c) of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $1.00 nor more than $500.00 at the discretion of the court trying the case. Any person found to be in violation of Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-191, as amended, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $5,000.00 and/or may be imprisoned or sentenced to hard labor for not more than one year. 
(Code 1995, § 78-1; Ord. No. 2074, § 4, 11-18-1979; Ord. No. 2215, §§ 1-4, 8-30-1983) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt state offenses by reference, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-2. 
Sec. 78-2. - Nuisances. 
(a)  No person shall create or cause or, being the owner or in control, permit any nuisance on or about any lot, place or premises or on or about any street or other public place, or commit any act or create or cause or, being the owner or in control, permit the existence of anything calculated to endanger the safety of property, or which is prejudicial to the health or comfort or offensive to the senses of ordinary citizens. 
(b)  No person shall create or maintain any nuisance within the city limits. 
(Code 1973, § 15-47; Code 1995, § 78-2) 
Sec. 78-3. - Places of business; maintenance; noise. 
    No person shall in the operation of his business maintain or have an unclean, unsanitary or offensive place or premises, or allow unnecessary noises or boisterous conduct therein or thereabout. 
(Code 1973, § 15-62; Code 1995, § 78-3) 
Sec. 78-4. - Behavior in places of public exhibition or entertainment; penalty for violation. 
(a)  Throwing of rubbish. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or cause to be thrown any bottle, cushion, paper, magazine, food, beverage or other article in or from the stands or seats in any athletic field, stadium, auditorium, hall, theatre or coliseum. 
(b)  Ticket stub required for occupying seat. It shall be unlawful for any person occupying a seat at any athletic field, stadium, auditorium, hall, theatre or coliseum at or during any event, contest, performance or exhibition for which admission is charged to refuse to vacate such seat after having been requested to move by an usher or policeman unless such person has in his possession and exhibits to the usher or policeman a ticket or stub entitling him to occupy that seat. 
(c)  Sitting; standing in aisles. It shall be unlawful for any person to sit or stand in any aisle in any athletic field, stadium, auditorium, hall, theatre or coliseum during any event, contest, performance or exhibition. 
(d)  Unauthorized entry into areas not open to public. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter any back stage dressing room, press box, or other area not open to the general public in any athletic field, stadium, auditorium, hall, theatre or coliseum at or during any event, contest, performance or exhibition without having been granted permission by authorized personnel. 
(Code 1995, § 78-4; Ord. No. 2294, §§ 1-5, 1-14-1986) 
Sec. 78-5. - Covering wells; cisterns; mine shafts. 
    Any person on whose premises or lands are located abandoned or unused wells, cisterns, mining shafts or other dangerous excavations shall cover or fill them up. If he wishes to retain them for possible future use, he shall place and maintain a substantial enclosure around such wells, cisterns, mining shafts or other dangerous excavations in order that no persons or livestock may be injured thereby. 
(Code 1973, § 15-61; Code 1995, § 78-5) 
Secs. 78-6-78-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 

Sec. 78-29. - Damaging city property; rewards. 
    The city clerk and treasurer, upon the direction of the mayor, is authorized to pay out of the general funds of the city, from time to time, rewards to persons furnishing the city or any official thereof information leading directly to the arrest and conviction of any person for a violation of the provisions of this section. The amount of the reward payable in any one instance shall not exceed $25.00. 
(Code 1973, § 15-54; Code 1995, § 78-31) 
Sec. 78-30. - Possession of burglary tools. 
    No person shall have in his possession any implement or instrument designed and intended by him to aid in the commission of burglary or larceny in the city, or elsewhere. 
(Code 1973, § 15-100; Code 1995, § 78-32) 
Secs. 78-31-78-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES INVOLVING THEFT (RESERVED) 

Secs. 78-50-78-71. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES INVOLVING FORGERY AND FRAUDULENT PRACTICES 

Sec. 78-72. - Changing name with intent to defraud. 
    No person shall change or alter his name with the intent to defraud, avoid payment of any debt, or to conceal his identity. 
(Code 1973, § 15-37; Code 1995, § 78-82) 
Sec. 78-73. - Disposal of mortgaged property. 
    No person shall sell, convey or otherwise dispose of any personal property upon which he has given a written mortgage, lien or other deed of trust, and which is then unsatisfied, in whole or in part, without first notifying the lawful holder thereof prior to such sale, conveyance or disposition. 
(Code 1973, § 15-44; Code 1995, § 78-83) 
Sec. 78-74. - Selling property purchased on conditional sale. 
    No purchaser of personal property under a written or printed contract of conditional sale, the consideration in whole or in part remaining unpaid, shall, without notice to the vendor, sell, give away or otherwise dispose of or conceal such property, so that the vendor cannot, by due process of law, recover the property under the terms of the contract. 
(Code 1973, § 15-46; Code 1995, § 78-85) 
Secs. 78-75-78-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER AND SAFETY 

Sec. 78-92. - Public drunkenness. 
    No person shall appear upon the streets or other public ways or places of the city, or in the public view, though on private property, in a drunken or intoxicated condition. 
(Code 1973, § 15-102; Code 1995, § 78-106) 
Sec. 78-93. - Loud; disturbing; unnecessary; enumeration. 
(a)  No person shall make or cause to be made any unreasonably loud, disturbing or unnecessary noise within the city limits. No person shall permit any such noise to be made in or upon any house or premises owned or possessed by him or under his management or control or by a motor vehicle. 
(b)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, raucous, disturbing or unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except as a danger signal when and as required by laws or ordinances of the city or by the state highway code, the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonable, loud or harsh sound and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary or unreasonable period of time. The provisions of this section regulating the sounding of a horn or signal device on vehicles shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles, such as ambulances, fire department equipment and police department vehicles, while the drivers of such vehicles are operating the vehicles in an emergency in the necessary performance of public duties, and when the sounding of such horn or signal device is made as a warning or danger signal. 
(2)  The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any ordinary person in the vicinity. 
(3)  The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notices of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of danger. 
(4)  The discharging into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or motorboat engine except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent the emission of loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(5)  The shouting or crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(6)  The explosion of firecrackers, skyrockets, Roman candles, pinwheels or any other form of fireworks. 
(7)  The use of any drum, pan, pail, bell, horn, trumpet, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention or intended to attract attention to any performance, show, sale or display of merchandise, or for any other advertising purposes. 
(8)  The use of calliopes, mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers, whether used upon a vehicle or not, for advertising or other purposes. 
(Code 1973, § 15-135; Code 1995, § 78-109) 
Sec. 78-94. - Use of sound amplifying equipment; permit. 
(a)  Nothing contained in sections 78-93 and 78-98 shall be construed as prohibiting a candidate for political office from using sound amplifying equipment or loudspeakers during daylight hours, for the making of a political speech, conducting a political rally or notifying people of such rally. Such candidate may employ or authorize others to use such equipment in his name. Any person may use sound amplifying equipment for the purpose of notifying people of the fact that it is election day in order to encourage voting. 
(b)  Prior to the use of such equipment a permit showing the time and nature of such activity shall be obtained from the chief of police. 
(Code 1973, § 15-136; Code 1995, § 78-111) 
Sec. 78-95. - Curfew of minors. 
(a)  No minor shall loiter, wander about or play in or on any public street, alley, park or other public place or any place of amusement or vacant lot between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any minor: 
(1)  Accompanied by his parent or guardian or any other adult person having the care and custody of such minor; 
(2)  Where such minor is on an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor; 
(3)  When the minor is returning directly home from a school activity, entertainment, recreational activity, or dance; 
(4)  When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the above-referenced places during the prescribed period of time; 
(5)  When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of first amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly, or free exercise of religion; 
(6)  When the minor is in a motor vehicle of parental consent for normal travel. All cases of interstate travel through Norcross are excepted from the curfew; 
(7)  When the minor is an emancipated minor as defined in Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 26-21-2, 26-23A-3. 
(Code 1973, § 15-142; Code 1995, § 78-114) 
Sec. 78-96. - Responsibility of parents of minor. 
    No adult person having the care and custody of a minor shall knowingly permit such minor to wander, loiter, wander about, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places or buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places in violation of section 78-95. 
(Code 1973, § 15-143; Code 1995, § 78-115) 
Sec. 78-97. - Abandoned iceboxes; refrigerators; other airtight containers. 
    No person shall leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight door or lock which may not be released for opening from the inside of the icebox, refrigerator or container, or which has an airtight snap-lock or other device thereon without first removing the snap-lock or doors from the icebox, refrigerator or container. 
(Code 1973, § 15-144; Code 1995, § 78-116) 
Sec. 78-98. - Production of noise. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The city council finds and declares that: 
(1)  Inadequately controlled noise through the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument, sound amplifier, or other device which produces, reproduces, or amplifies sound in buildings, structures, premises or motor vehicles within the jurisdictional limits of the city presents a growing danger to the health and welfare of the residents of the city; 
(2)  The making and creation of disturbing, excessive, or offensive noises from the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument, sound amplifier, or other device which produces, reproduces, or amplifies sound in buildings, structures, premises or motor vehicles within the jurisdictional limits of the city is a condition which has persisted, and the level and frequency of occurrences of such noises continues to increase; 
(3)  The making and creation of such excessive noises which are prolonged or unusual in their time, place, and use, affect and are a detriment to the public health, comfort, convenience, welfare, and prosperity of the residents of the city; 
(4)  Every person is entitled to an environment in which the noise is not detrimental to his life, health, or enjoyment of property; and 
(5)  The necessity, in the public interest, for the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted is declared to be a matter of legislative determination and public policy, and it is further declared that the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in pursuance of and for the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, prosperity, peace, and quiet of the city and its inhabitants. 
(b)  General prohibition. It shall be unlawful to operate, play, or permit the operation of any radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument, sound amplifier, or other device which produces, reproduces or amplifies sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person who are in the room, chamber, on the premises, or in the motor vehicle in which such machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners; thereto, is hereby prohibited in the city or its police jurisdiction. 
(c)  Prima facie violation of this provision. 
(1)  Prima facie violation. 
a.  The operation, playing, or permitting the operation of any radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument, sound amplifier, or other device which produces, reproduces or amplifies sound in such a manner as to be audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure, or premises in which such device is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
b.  The operation, playing, or permitting the operation of any radio, musical instrument, sound amplifier, or other device which produces, reproduces or amplifies sound in such a manner as to be audible at a distance of ten feet from any car, truck, or other motor vehicle in which such device is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
c.  The operation, playing, or permitting the operation of any radio, musical instrument, sound amplifier, or other device which produces, reproduces or amplifies sound in such a manner as to be audible at a distance of five feet from the location where such device is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(2)  Enforcement of prima facie violations. Any person who is authorized to enforce the provisions of this section and who encounters evidence of a prima facie violation of this section is empowered to confiscate and impound as evidence, any or all of the components amplifying or transmitting the sound. 
(d)  Violations and enforcement. 
(1)  Violations; additional remedies; injunctions. As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any activity, device, instrument, or vehicle in violation of any provision of this article, which disturbs the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring residents or persons in the area or endangers the comfort or health of persons or residents in the area shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance, and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Manner of enforcement. Violations of this article shall be prosecuted in the same manner as other misdemeanor violations of this Code; however, nothing in this article shall prevent efforts to obtain voluntary compliance by way of warning, notice or educational means. 
(e)  Exemptions from section. 
(1)  Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency. 
(2)  Any other noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration permitted by law and for which a lease or permit therefore has been granted by the city. 
(f)  Applications for a special permit. 
(1)  Applications for a permit for relief from this section on the basis of undue hardship may be made to the mayor or his duly authorized representative. Any permit granted by the mayor hereunder shall set forth in detail the approved method of achieving compliance and shall specify a reasonable time that the permit shall be effective. 
(2)  If in the judgment of the mayor the time for compliance cannot be reasonably determined, a permit to cause the noise may not be issued for a period to exceed three days. In determining the reasonableness of the terms of any proposed permit, said mayor shall consider the magnitude of the nuisance caused by the offensive noise, the uses of the property within the area of impingement by the noise, and the general public interest and welfare. 
(3)  The mayor may prescribe any conditions or requirements he deems necessary to minimize adverse effects upon the continuity or the surrounding neighborhood. 
(4)  A nominal fee shall be charged to each applicant for the processing of permits. Fee schedules shall be approved by council resolution. 
(Code 1995, § 78-118; Ord. No. 3057, §§ 101-601, 3-16-1999) 
Secs. 78-99-78-124. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ADMINISTRATOR 

Sec. 78-125. - Entering restricted area in vicinity of jail or prison. 
(a)  The chief of police may, if he deems it advisable, prescribe a reasonable distance in the vicinity of any jail or other place where prisoners are held within which any person shall not come without the permission of the officer in charge of such jail or place. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly and wilfully, without lawful excuse, come within the limits prescribed under subsection (a) of this section without the required permission, and refuse to retire after being informed to do so by a police officer. 
(Code 1973, § 15-150; Code 1995, § 78-141) 
Sec. 78-126. - Demonstrations in public buildings. 
    No person shall take part in or otherwise participate in any demonstration within any public building. 
(Code 1973, § 15-151; Code 1995, § 78-142) 
Sec. 78-127. - Police line or checkpoint-Authority to establish; maintain. 
(a)  The chief of police is authorized to establish a police line or checkpoint at any location in the city where the circumstances in his judgment require such action for the purpose of maintaining law and order within the area to the rear of the line or checkpoint. 
(b)  Some of the circumstances giving rise to action under subsection (a) of this section, but not limited to such enumeration, shall be: 
(1)  Civil emergencies such as explosions, fires, or epidemics. 
(2)  Civil disturbances which require such measures for the containment of the disturbance. 
(3)  All activities of a similar or like nature to subsections (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section. 
(c)  The chief of police may maintain the line or checkpoint as long as in his judgment these measures are necessary to maintain law and order in the affected areas. 
(Code 1973, § 15-152; Code 1995, § 78-143) 
Sec. 78-128. - Same-Entry into restricted area. 
    Police officers, firefighters or other law enforcement officers at any police line or checkpoint shall be authorized to prohibit any person from entering the area for which such line or checkpoint is being maintained, except residents of such area, persons engaged in the operation of businesses in such area, customers of such businesses and persons servicing such businesses, and such other person as the chief of police or the superior officer on duty at such line or checkpoint determines has business in such area of a nature not likely to impede the maintenance of law and order therein. 
(Code 1973, § 15-153; Code 1995, § 78-144) 
Sec. 78-129. - Same-Conduct. 
(a)  No person shall enter the area to the rear of any police line or checkpoint in disregard of the order of any police officer, firefighter or other law enforcement officer at the line or checkpoint. 
(b)  No person who is permitted to enter any such area as a customer of any business therein or to service any business therein shall fail to proceed directly to the business and to leave such area without delay upon the completion of the activity for which he was permitted to enter such area. 
(c)  No person shall congregate in the vicinity of the line or checkpoint and refuse to disperse and leave after being ordered to do so by any police officer, firefighter or other law enforcement officer at the line or checkpoint. 
(d)  No person shall remain at or loiter at or in the vicinity of any such line or checkpoint after having been requested to depart by any police officer, firefighter or other law enforcement officer at such line or refuse to leave the area for which any such line or checkpoint is being maintained, after having been requested to do so by any police officer maintaining law and order or attempting to maintain law and order therein. 
(Code 1973, § 15-154; Code 1995, § 78-145) 
Sec. 78-130. - Same-Enforcement. 
    The power and authority delegated to the chief of police, any police officer, firefighter or other law enforcement officer under the provisions of this article shall be cumulative and in addition to all other power and authority which the chief of police, police officer, firefighter or other law enforcement officer may have under any other rule, regulation, ordinance or law. 
(Code 1973, § 15-155; Code 1995, § 78-146) 
Secs. 78-131-78-158. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND MORALS 

Sec. 78-159. - Use of force or threats. 
    No person shall use force, threats, intimidation or other unlawful means to prevent any other person from engaging in any lawful occupation or business. 
(Code 1973, § 15-72; Code 1995, § 78-172) 
Sec. 78-160. - Illegal possession of property or instrumentality. 
    No person shall, without a just cause or legal excuse but with the intent to supplant, nullify or impair the owner's, operator's or manager's control of any lawful business or enterprise, or without just cause or legal excuse, take, retain, attempt or threaten to take or retain possession or control of any property of another or any instrumentality used in any lawful business or enterprise of another. 
(Code 1973, § 15-75; Code 1995, § 78-175) 
Sec. 78-161. - Illegal drug house. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this article the term "illegal drug house" means any property, including premises, wherein controlled substances, as defined by the 1991 Alabama Uniform Controlled Substances Act codified in Code of Ala. 1975, tit. 20, ch. 2, as amended, and any schedule incorporated thereafter, are unlawfully possessed, used, bought, sold, delivered, stored or distributed. 
(b)  Visiting. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to visit or resort to an illegal drug house with the intent to unlawfully possess, use, buy, sell, deliver, store or distribute controlled substances. 
(2)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such intent is manifested are: 
a.  Such person having been convicted of possessing, selling, or distributing a controlled substance, within the last two years, under state law, the fact of such conviction being known to the arresting officer at the time of such arrest. 
b.  Such person was then engaged in an unlawful drug-related activity, including but not limited to acting as a lookout, furtively transferring small objects or packages, attempting to conceal a controlled substance, taking flight or manifestly attempting to conceal himself upon the entrance or arrival of a law enforcement officer. 
c.  Such person is in possession of drug paraphernalia, as defined in Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-12-260, as amended. 
d.  Controlled substances are found in close proximity to such individual. 
(3)  Any combination of these circumstances shall establish prima facie evidence of such unlawful intent, but in no event shall any person be convicted of violating this section for visiting his own residence unless a court of competent jurisdiction previously declared the residence a drug-related public nuisance due to unlawful drug activity and such judicial finding had not been set aside or declared remedied prior to said visits. Any person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as prescribed by this section. 
(Code 1995, § 78-177; Ord. No. 2690, § I, 2-18-1997) 
Secs. 78-162-78-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES IN PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Alabama Anti-Obscenity Enforcement Act, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-12-200.1 et seq.; public lewdness, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-12-130; indecent exposure, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-6-68. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-191. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abnormal sexual act means anything done or performed by any person to attain sexual gratification in an unnatural manner or at variance with or contrary to nature, which shall include, but not be limited to, homosexuality, sadomasochism, lesbianism, masturbation, or any form of sodomy. 
    Advertisement means any commercial promotional material initiated by or in behalf of an exhibitor designed to bring any public entertainment to the public attention or to increase the attendance of the public at such public entertainment, whether by newspaper, billboard, motion picture, television, radio, or other media within or originating within the city. 
    Exhibit means to project or perform any public entertainment at any public place to which an admission charge is made or where the public is invited free of charge. 
    Extramarital sexual relations means sexual conduct by a married person with a person other than such married person's spouse. 
    Nudity means the showing or exhibiting of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, or the showing of the female breasts with less than a full opaque covering of any portion thereof below the upper portion of the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
    Public entertainment means and includes all or any of the following types and places of entertainment open to the public generally: traveling shows, carnivals, circuses, motion pictures, theatrical or variety performance, plays, concerts, exhibitions of any nature, theaters, tent shows, nightclubs or any other place where live entertainment is given. 
    Public entertainment not suitable for minors means: 
(1)  Any public entertainment which describes, depicts, represents or portrays either nudity, sexual promiscuity, sexual conduct, extramarital sexual relations, or abnormal sexual acts when such public entertainment: 
a.  Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest of minors; 
b.  Is patently offensive to the prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable to be shown to minors; and 
c.  Is without redeeming social importance or value for minors. 
(2)  Any public entertainment which, in whole or in part, describes, depicts, represents or portrays brutality, violence, criminality or sadism, and when such public entertainment: 
a.  Is patently offensive to the prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is harmful to minors; and 
b.  Is without redeeming social importance or value for minors. 
(3)  Any public entertainment which, in whole or in part, uses obscene language, and when such public entertainment: 
a.  Is patently offensive to the prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable to be shown to, or heard by, minors; and 
b.  Is without redeeming social importance or value for minors. 
(4)  Any public entertainment which in whole or in part, would lead the average viewer to no other logical conclusion that the acts enumerated in subsections (1), (2) and (3) of this definition are being performed. 
    Public entertainment not suitable for public viewing means any obscene motion picture or public entertainment that: 
(1)  Actually describes, depicts, represents or portrays abnormal sexual acts or other sexual conduct when such public entertainment: 
a.  Appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interests as a whole; 
b.  Is patently offensive to the prevailing community standards as a whole; and 
c.  Is utterly without redeeming social value. 
(2)  Describes, depicts, represents or portrays brutality, violence, criminality or sadism when such public entertainment: 
a.  Glorifies such actions; 
b.  Is patently offensive to the community standards as a whole; and 
c.  Is utterly without social redeeming value. 
    Sexual conduct means sexual intercourse and/or lewd lascivious physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or, if such person is a female, her breasts. 
(Code 1973, § 4-12; Code 1995, § 78-212) 
Sec. 78-192. - Interpretation of article. 
    It is hereby expressly provided that no provision of this article may be construed to be in conflict with state law and all provisions shall be interpreted to be in conformance therewith. 
(Code 1995, § 78-211) 
Secs. 78-193-78-222. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CLASSIFICATION BOARD 

Sec. 78-223. - Created; composition; officers; quorum. 
(a)  There is hereby created a classification board. 
(b)  The board shall be composed of seven members. The membership shall elect from among its members a chairman and vice-chairman. 
(c)  The city clerk and treasurer shall act as the secretary of the classification board. The clerk need not be a member of the board. 
(d)  A quorum of the board shall consist of four members. 
(e)  A majority of the entire board shall be required for any action by the board. 
(Code 1973, § 4-13; Code 1995, § 78-226) 
Sec. 78-224. - Membership; qualifications; term; vacancies; compensation. 
(a)  Members of the classification board shall be: 
(1)  Residents of the city; 
(2)  Chosen so far as reasonably practicable in such a manner as to represent a cross section of the community. 
(b)  The members' terms of office shall coincide with the term of office of the appointing board. 
(c)  If a vacancy occurs on the classification board, the city council shall appoint a new member to fill the vacancy. 
(d)  Members of the classification board shall serve without pay. 
(Code 1973, § 4-14; Code 1995, § 78-227) 
Sec. 78-225. - Powers and duties. 
    The board of classification shall, upon receipt of the application for classification, either: 
(1)  Approve the classification as requested; 
(2)  Classify it as not suitable for minors; or 
(3)  Classify it as not suitable for public viewing. 
(Code 1973, § 4-15; Code 1995, § 78-228) 
Sec. 78-226. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  The classification board shall adopt such rules and regulations as it deems necessary to govern its proceedings and deliberations. 
(b)  Such rules and regulations shall be subject to approval by the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 4-16; Code 1995, § 78-229) 
Secs. 78-227-78-245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CLASSIFICATION PROCEDURES 

Sec. 78-246. - Application; contents; exhibitor to file. 
(a)  Before any initial exhibition of a public entertainment, the exhibitor shall file an application with the board for the classification of the public entertainment to be exhibited. The application shall be submitted 15 days in advance of this exhibition, and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The classification requested; 
(2)  The exhibitor's name and address; 
(3)  The name and address of the theater or other place in which the public entertainment is to be exhibited; 
(4)  The title of the public entertainment, if any; 
(5)  The date the public entertainment is to be first shown; 
(6)  A summary of the plot of the performance, if any; 
(7)  A list of names of the main actors appearing in the show; and 
(8)  Such other reasonable information as the classification board may require. 
(b)  Before any initial exhibition of a motion picture, the exhibitor shall be required to file an application for classification. 
(Code 1973, § 4-17; Code 1995, § 78-241) 
Sec. 78-247. - Procedure. 
(a)  The classification board shall examine the applications filed under section 78-246. If the board fails to hold a hearing and take action on an application within seven days after such application is filed or additional information requested by the board, the proposed classification shall be considered approved. 
(b)  Any action by the board, as required in this section, shall include the following: 
(1)  If the board approves the application submitted by the exhibitor, it shall be marked "approved" and filed as the board's own classification order. 
(2)  If upon examination of the application submitted by the exhibitor a majority of the board finds the information, as furnished by such exhibitor, inadequate or insufficient, and the board is not satisfied that it can make a proper determination based on such inadequate or insufficient information, the board may direct the exhibitor to furnish additional information deemed necessary by the board. After such additional information has been filed, the board may approve the application, or, if a majority of the board is not satisfied that the proposed classification is proper, it shall order the exhibitor to project or perform the film or public entertainment before any four or more members of the board. 
(3)  If upon examination of the application a majority of the board is not satisfied that the proposed classification is proper, the board shall order the exhibitor to project or perform the film or public entertainment before any four or more members of the board at a suitably equipped place and at the earliest time practicable with due regard to the availability of the necessary facilities and personnel which are to be provided by the exhibitor. Such exhibition shall be at such exhibitor's expense, and the exhibitor, or his designated representative, may at such time make such statement to the board in support of his proposed classification and present such testimony as he may desire. Within two days from the date of this hearing, the board shall make and file its classification of the film or public entertainment in question. 
(4)  If the board approves a proposed classification of a motion picture or other public entertainment without viewing it, classifying it primarily on the basis of the information furnished by the exhibitor, and a subsequent investigation or viewing of such film or public entertainment indicates that the information furnished was misleading and has led to a possible erroneous classification, the board may direct the exhibitor to project or perform the film or public entertainment before any four or more members of the board. Within two days from the date of this hearing, the board shall make and file its classification or reclassification of the film or public entertainment in question. If the film or public entertainment is reclassified, the exhibitor shall have seven days in which to alter his advertising and audience policy to comply with the classification. 
(Code 1973, § 4-18; Code 1995, § 78-242) 
Sec. 78-248. - Reclassification. 
(a)  Any exhibitor may file an application for a change in classification of any film or public entertainment previously classified. No exhibitor shall be allowed to file more than one application for change of classification of the same film or public entertainment. Such application shall contain a sworn statement of the grounds upon which the application for reclassification is based. The board shall hold a hearing and take action on such application within seven days from the date of its filing. If the board fails to do so, the proposed reclassification shall be considered approved. 
(b)  If the board is not satisfied that the film or public entertainment should be reclassified, it may direct the exhibitor to project or perform the film or public entertainment before any four or more members of the board, at a suitably equipped place and at the earliest time practicable with due regard to the availability of the film and the necessary facilities and personnel which are to be provided by the exhibitor. Such projection of the film shall be at the expense of the exhibitor. The exhibitor, including all exhibitors who may be exhibiting or preparing to exhibit the film or public entertainment or designated representatives of such exhibitor, may at such time make such statement to the board and present such testimony in support of his application for reclassification as he may desire, and the board shall within two days thereafter make and file its order approving or denying the application for reclassification. 
(Code 1973, § 4-19; Code 1995, § 78-243) 
Sec. 78-249. - Effects on subsequent exhibitors. 
    A classification shall be binding upon any subsequent exhibitor unless a change of classification is obtained. 
(Code 1973, § 4-20; Code 1995, § 78-244) 
Sec. 78-250. - Notification. 
(a)  Upon the filing by the board of any classification order or any board order or official board action, the secretary of the board shall immediately issue and mail a notice of such order or such action to the exhibitor involved, and to any other exhibitor or other interested party who shall request such notice and who has in writing designated a local agent to receive such notice. 
(b)  If the board enters a classification order as not suitable for minors or not suitable for public viewing contrary to the requested classification, the classification order filed by the board shall state the following: 
(1)  The classification of the board for such film or public entertainment; 
(2)  The portion of the classification standard that represents the basis for the film's classification; 
(3)  Any findings used by the board as a basis for its classification; and 
(4)  Any other information which the board considers helpful to the exhibitor with respect to the reasons the particular film or public entertainment was classified not suitable for minors or not suitable for public viewing. 
(Code 1973, § 4-21; Code 1995, § 78-245) 
Sec. 78-251. - Judicial review. 
(a)  Within five days after the filing of any classification order by the board, the exhibitor may file an exception to the board's classification. If the exhibitor states his intention or gives any indication of his intent to exhibit the film or public entertainment in question in violation of the board's order, the board shall immediately make application to a court of competent jurisdiction, for a temporary and/or permanent injunction to enjoin the defendant-exhibitor, being the exhibitor who contests the classification, from advertising or exhibiting the film or public entertainment in question contrary to the board's classification. 
(b)  There shall be a judicial determination as to whether the film or public entertainment in question is not suitable for minors or not suitable for public viewing. The board shall have the burden of proving the film or public entertainment is one that is not suitable for minors or not suitable for public viewing, and shall request the court to make and file findings of fact and conclusions of law regarding the trial. 
(c)  The filing of an exception by the exhibitor shall not suspend nor set aside the board's order. 
(Code 1973, § 4-22; Code 1995, § 78-246) 
Secs. 78-252-78-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MINORS 

Sec. 78-281. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Knowingly means having general knowledge of or reason to know, or belief or grounds for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of: 
(1)  The character and content of any material described in this article which is reasonably susceptible of examination by the defendant; and 
(2)  The age of the minor, provided that an honest mistake shall constitute an excuse from liability under this division if the defendant made a reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such minor. 
    Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
(Code 1973, § 4-23; Code 1995, § 78-256) 
Sec. 78-282. - Prohibited acts by exhibitors. 
    No person shall knowingly: 
(1)  Exhibit any motion picture or public entertainment classified not suitable for minors if any current advertisement of such public entertainment by such exhibitor fails to state clearly the classification of such public entertainment; 
(2)  Exhibit any public entertainment classified not suitable for minors without keeping such classification posted prominently in front of the theater or other place in which such public entertainment is being exhibited; 
(3)  Sell or give to any minor a ticket to any public entertainment classified not suitable for minors, which ticket is used by such minor to gain admittance to or view such public entertainment; 
(4)  Permit any minor to view the exhibition of any public entertainment classified not suitable for minors; 
(5)  Exhibit any public entertainment classified not suitable for minors or any scenes from any film or other public entertainment, or from an unclassified film or public entertainment, whether moving or still, in the same theater or other public place and on the same program with a film or other public entertainment classified suitable for minors, provided that any advertising preview containing scenes from an unclassified public entertainment or a film or other public entertainment classified not suitable for minors may be shown at any time if the scenes have been separately classified as suitable for minors; 
(6)  Make any false or misleading statement in any application for classification, application for change of classification, or any other proceedings before the board. 
(Code 1973, § 4-24; Code 1995, § 78-257) 
Sec. 78-283. - Offenses by minors. 
    No minor shall: 
(1)  Give his age falsely as 18 years of age or over, for the purpose of gaining admittance to an exhibition of any public entertainment classified not suitable for minors. 
(2)  Enter or remain in the viewing room of any theater where a film or public entertainment classified not suitable for minors is being exhibited. 
(3)  State falsely that the adult accompanying him is his parent, legally appointed guardian or spouse for the purpose of gaining admittance to the exhibition of any public entertainment classified as not suitable for minors. 
(Code 1973, § 4-25; Code 1995, § 78-258) 
Sec. 78-284. - Injunctions against exhibitors. 
    Whenever the board has probable cause to believe that any exhibitor has committed any of the acts in section 78-282, the board shall have the duty to make application to a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction restraining the commission of such acts. 
(Code 1973, § 4-26; Code 1995, § 78-259) 
Sec. 78-285. - Exception to division. 
    The provisions of this division shall not apply to any minor attending any film or public entertainment classified not suitable for minors when such minor is accompanied by his parent or legally appointed guardian, adult husband or wife, throughout the viewing of the film or public entertainment. 
(Code 1973, § 4-27; Code 1995, § 78-260) 
Secs. 78-286-78-303. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ADULT STANDARDS 

Sec. 78-304. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Obscene means any: 
(1)  Brutality, violence or sadism; or 
(2)  Abnormal sexual acts as defined in section 78-191 when the: 
a.  Dominant theme appeals to prurient interest; 
b.  Is utterly without social redeeming value; and 
c.  Is patently offensive to the prevailing standards of the community as a whole. 
(Code 1973, § 4-28; Code 1995, § 78-271) 
Sec. 78-305. - Obscene motion pictures or public entertainments. 
    No person shall show for profit, charge admission to or otherwise exhibit in any place where the public is invited any obscene motion picture or other public entertainment classified not suitable for public viewing. 
(Code 1973, § 4-29; Code 1995, § 78-272) 
Sec. 78-306. - Obscene advertising. 
    No person shall advertise any motion picture, show or performance or other public entertainment by any means which show or depict any obscene picture, posture, representation, thing or any other like matter. 
(Code 1973, § 4-30; Code 1995, § 78-273) 
Secs. 78-307-78-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - DANGEROUS WEAPONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of pistols preempted by the state, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-1.1. 

Sec. 78-331. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dangerous weapon means any Bowie knife, dirk, blackjack, razor, airgun, slingshot, brass knuckles, loaded shotgun, loaded rifle, or other firearms or weapons of a similar nature. 
(Code 1973, § 15-156; Code 1995, § 78-296) 
Sec. 78-332. - Carrying concealed weapons. 
    No person shall carry in an automobile that he is driving or over which he exercises control and possession, any dangerous weapon, either within the city limits or its police jurisdiction. 
(Code 1973, § 15-157; Code 1995, § 78-297) 
Sec. 78-333. - Report of knife or gunshot wound by physician. 
    Every physician treating any knife or gunshot wound within the city limits shall report immediately to the chief of police such fact together with the name and address of the person so treated. 
(Code 1973, § 15-160; Code 1995, § 78-298) 
Sec. 78-334. - Throwing or discharging weapons; exception. 
(a)  No person shall throw any stone or missile at, into or against any dwelling, schoolhouse, public building or other building within the city limits. 
(b)  No person shall discharge within the city limits any dangerous weapons, except in the reasonable defense of his person or property, or at a licensed rifle or pistol range or at a gun club or skeet range. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to peace officers or members of the armed forces of the state or the United States, who discharge firearms in the performance of their duties as such officers. 
(Code 1973, § 15-163; Code 1995, § 78-299) 
Secs. 78-335-78-356. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - BOW HUNTING 

Sec. 78-357. - Area designated. 
    Any individual who holds a valid state hunting license may obtain a bow hunting permit to bow hunt for game on the following real estate owned by the city situated in the county, and more particularly described as follows, to-wit: 
The south half of the southwest quarter and the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 23 and the north half of the north half of Section 26, all in Township 19 South, Range 5 West, Jefferson County, Alabama. 
(Code 1995, § 78-325; Ord. No. 2637, § I, 10-25-1994) 
Sec. 78-358. - Permit fee; validity. 
    The cost of a bow hunting permit shall be a fee as established by ordinance or resolution of the city council, from time to time and shall be valid for the hunting season in which it is issued. There shall be a hunting permit for each hunting season. 
(Code 1995, § 78-326; Ord. No. 2637, § II, 10-15-1994) 
Sec. 78-359. - Revenue director to issue permits and collect fees. 
    The revenue director of the city is hereby authorized and directed to issue said permits and collect said permit fee. 
(Code 1995, § 78-327; Ord. No. 2637, § V, 10-15-1994) 
Sec. 78-360. - Transfer. 
    No permit can be transferred and assigned. 
(Code 1995, § 78-328; Ord. No. 2637, § VI, 10-15-1994) 
Sec. 78-361. - Compliance with regulations; revocation of permit. 
    Each person granted a permit to bow hunt on the hereinabove described property shall comply with all hunting rules and regulations set forth by the game and fish commission for the state and all rules and regulations of such commission shall be strictly enforced. Violation of any such rule and/or regulation shall be grounds for revocation of the permit. 
(Code 1995, § 78-329; Ord. No. 2637, § III, 10-15-1994) 
Sec. 78-362. - Responsibility to report violations. 
    Each person holding a permit shall be responsible to report any violation of any rule and/or regulation of the game commission or of the conservation laws of the state. 
(Code 1995, § 78-330; Ord. No. 2637, § IV, 10-15-1994) 
Chapter 82 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- General authority relative to parks and recreational facilities, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-210 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 82-1-82-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 82-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bicycle means any two- or three-wheeled vehicle whether motor-powered or self-propelled. The term "bicycle," unless otherwise specified, includes motor bike or motor scooter. It is not intended by the addition of this definition to remove "bicycle," "motor bike," or "motor scooter" from the definition of the term "vehicle." 
    Director means the director of the city parks and recreation department, the person in charge of recreation areas serving the city, or other appropriate person designated by the mayor to enforce the regulations herein contained. 
    Park means any public park, public playground, public recreational center or any other area in the jurisdiction of this article devoted to active or passive public recreation. In addition, the term "park" shall include, but not be limited to, any property belonging to the City of Bessemer not otherwise designated or dedicated as a public park but owned by the city and utilized or required to be utilized, whether on a fulltime or parttime basis, for any of the park purposes. 
    Vehicle means any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-powered, animal-drawn, or self-propelled. The term "vehicle" shall include any trailer in tow regardless of the size or description; provided, however, baby carriages or vehicles in the service of the park and recreation administrative or supervisor authority are not included within this definition. 
(Ord. No. 3296, § 1, 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 82-20. - Scope. 
    The ordinance from which this article is derived shall be effective within the public parks of the city within the corporate limits of the city, within the police jurisdiction of the city, and within those areas owned by the city. 
(Ord. No. 3296, § 2, 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 82-21. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall be enforced by any police officer of the city, by the director of the parks and recreation department, and by duly authorized park attendants; provided that none of the foregoing, except police officers, shall have the power of arrest. 
(b)  The director of parks and recreation department, police officers and park attendants shall have authority to direct any person to leave the park who is violating any applicable law, rule or regulation. Any person who fails or refuses to promptly leave the park after having been so directed shall be guilty of an offense against the city and punished in accordance section 82-29 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 3296, § 3, 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 82-22. - Parks operating policy. 
(a)  Hours. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to the public every day of the year during designated hours. Except as otherwise provided, all parks in the city shall be open during the period from one-half hour before sunrise and one-half hour after sunset, unless such person is at the time a participant or spectator of an activity officially scheduled by the parks and recreation department. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided or permitted, it shall be unlawful for any person to be upon the grounds of any public park under the supervision of the director of parks and recreation during the period from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise. 
(2)  This section shall be effective as to each park in the city from and after such time as appropriate signs are erected in such park informing the public of the provisions of this section. 
(3)  The opening and closing hours for each individual park shall be posted therein for public information. It shall be unlawful for any person to use the park at a time contrary to the posted hours for use of such park. 
(b)  Closed areas. Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by the director at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals, as the director shall find reasonably necessary. It shall be unlawful to use any park or any area thereof which has been posted by the director as closed. 
(c)  Lost and found articles. All lost and found articles located in the park shall be turned in to the director of parks and recreation or employees of the parks and recreation department who shall report the same to the director. The director shall safeguard such articles and shall make every reasonable effort to find the owner thereof, and the park attendant shall make every reasonable effort to locate articles reported as lost and to return such articles to the owner. 
(d)  Permits. A permit shall be obtained from the director before participating in the following park activities: 
(1)  Any activity requiring or seeking exclusive use of the park or any park facility. 
(2)  Any use of the park or park facilities by a group of persons which will exceed nine in number. 
(3)  Any activity or use of the park or park facilities which amounts to a special event or special activity, not normal to every-day park use and activity. 
(e)  Application. A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an application with the director of parks and recreation. The application shall state: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The name and address of the persons sponsoring the activity; 
(3)  The day and hour for which the permit is desired; 
(4)  The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired; 
(5)  An estimate of the anticipated attendance; 
(6)  Whether or not there will be a charge for admission for the event or activity, acceptance of donations or a thing of value to attend the event or activity, or solicitation of donations or a thing of value as part of or in connection with the event or activity; 
(7)  Any other information which the director shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued hereunder. 
(f)  Standards for issuance. The director shall issue a permit hereunder when such director finds: 
(1)  The proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park; 
(2)  The proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation; 
(3)  The proposed activity or use will not lead to or incite violence, crime, or disorderly conduct; 
(4)  The proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or burdensome expense to the parks and recreation department or the city; or 
(5)  The facilities desired are adequate and have not been reserved for other use at the date and hour required. 
(g)  Admission charges. A permit for any event or activity, regardless of the number of persons, in which the permittee proposes to charge an admission to the event or activity, or to accept donations or a thing of value to attend the event or activity, or to solicit donations or a thing of value as part of or in connection with the event or activity must also be approved by the city council, whose decision shall be final. 
(h)  Appeal. Within seven days after receipt of an application, the director shall either grant or refuse a permit, apprising the applicant in writing of such director's reasons for refusing a permit. In the event such permit is refused, any person aggrieved by such refusal shall have the right to appeal in writing within seven days to the city council and the decision of the city council shall be final. 
(i)  Effect of permit. A permittee shall agree to be bound by all park rules and regulations. 
(j)  Liability of permittee. The persons to whom a permit is issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whomsoever by reason of the negligence of the persons to whom such permit shall have been issued. 
(k)  Revocation. The director shall have the authority to revoke the permit on a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance, or upon good cause being shown therefor. 
(Ord. No. 3296, § 4, 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 82-23. - Damage, etc., or injury to improvements, vegetation and wildlife. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in any park: 
(1)  Improvements. To wilfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or remove, any building, bridge, table, bench, fireplace, railing, paving or paving material, water lines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts, or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property, or appurtenances, whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(2)  Restrooms and washrooms. To litter, dirty or soil restrooms and washrooms, or to fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. No person over the age of five years shall use the restrooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex. 
(3)  Removal of natural resources. To dig or remove any beach sand, whether or not submerged, or any soil, rock, stone, tree, shrub or plant, cut down timber or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting, or other means or agency. 
(4)  Erection of structures. To construct or erect any building or structure, of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, run or string any public utility into, upon, or across such lands, except on written permit issued by the proper authorities. 
(5)  Injury to and removal of vegetation. To damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove, any tree or plant, or injure the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds, of any such tree or plant. To attach any rope, wire, or other contrivance to any tree or plant. To dig in, or otherwise disturb, grass areas, or in any other way to commit acts which cause injury to, or impair, the natural beauty or usefulness of any area. 
(6)  Climbing, etc., trees. To climb, stand or sit upon buildings, monuments, vases, fountains, railings, fences, or upon any other property not provided for or customarily used for such purposes. 
(7)  Injuring, etc., animals. To hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles, at any animal, reptile or bird; to remove or have in possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs or nest or young of any reptile or bird; provided, however, snakes which are poisonous when found on park property may be killed on sight. 
(8)  Feeding of animals. To give or offer, or attempt to give or offer, to any animal or bird any tobacco, alcohol, or other poisonous or noxious substances. 
(Ord. No. 3296, § 5, 2-14-2006) 
State Law reference- Criminal damage to property, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-7-20 et seq. 
Sec. 82-24. - Sanitation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, while in the park: 
(1)  Pollution of waters. To throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed, in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, or other body of water, in or adjacent to any park, or any tributary, stream, stormwater drain, or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said park waters. 
(2)  Refuse and trash. To dump, deposit, throw, or leave, any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, debris, or refuse or other trash, into any park area. It shall be the duty of every person to place all such trash, rubbish, waste, refuse, or garbage, in the proper receptacles where they are provided; where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Ord. No. 3296, § 6, 2-14-2006) 
State Law reference- Criminal littering, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-7-29. 
Sec. 82-25. - Traffic. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in a park: 
(1)  To fail to comply with all applicable provisions of state laws and municipal ordinances in regard to equipment and operation of vehicles. 
(2)  To fail to obey the parks and recreation director, police officers and park attendants, in directing traffic or specifying parking areas, in the parks, and on the highways, streets, or roads, immediately adjacent thereto. Such traffic officers and park rangers are hereby authorized to direct and control the flow of traffic and the parking of vehicles in the parks and on the highways, streets, or roads immediately adjacent thereto, in accordance with the provisions of these regulations, to ensure safety in the use of the park area. 
(3)  To fail to observe all traffic signs in the park or adjacent thereto, indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping or parking, and all other such signs posted for proper control of vehicles and to safeguard life and property. 
(4)  To drive a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding 15 miles per hour, except upon such roads as may be designated by posted signs for speed in excess of said rate. 
(5)  To drive any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads, or parking areas, or such other areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the director, or designated as temporary roadways by the director. 
(6)  To park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking area, or to fail to enter, exit, or use such parking area in accordance with posted directions, or in accordance with the instructions of any park ranger, employee, or attendant, who may be present to direct such traffic. 
(7)  To park on the travelled portion of the road or driveway within the park or adjacent thereto at any time, unless directed by a park official so to park. 
(8)  To leave any vehicle anywhere in the park with one or more wheels chained, or in any manner fixed or arranged so that such vehicle cannot readily be moved by hand. Provided this section shall not apply to the locking or securing of vehicles at places designated for the parking of such vehicles. 
(9)  To abandon any disabled vehicle in the park area or to fail to immediately notify an attendant or park ranger of an emergency in the nature of a breakdown, requiring the assistance of a tow truck, mechanic, or other persons. 
(10)  To double park any vehicle on any road or parkway unless directed by a park official. 
(11)  To operate any vehicle in the park without a muffler or baffle adequate to deaden the sound of the engine in such vehicle. 
(12)  To ride a bicycle on other than a paved or surfaced vehicular road or path, or to ride on any area not designated for bicycle use. Provided, however, a bicyclist shall be permitted to roll a bicycle (not including motor bikes or motor scooters) by hand over grassy areas or wooden trails. 
(13)  To ride a bicycle other than on the right side of the roadway or designated bike route; to ride other than single file when two or more are operating as a group. 
(14)  To operate a bicycle without reasonable regard for the safety of others; to fail to signal all turns, to fail to pass on the right of any vehicle they are overtaking; or to fail to pass to the right of any meeting or oncoming vehicle. 
(15)  For more than two persons to ride on a bicycle in a park. 
(16)  To leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack when such rack is provided and there is space available. 
(17)  To leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving, or set against trees, or in any place or position where other persons may trip over or be injured by such bicycle. 
(Ord. No. 3296, § 7, 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 82-26. - Recreational activities. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in a park: 
(1)  Bathing and swimming in designated places. To bathe, swim, or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park, except in such waters and in such places as are provided therefor, or to swim, bathe, wade or congregate in any such areas contrary to the directions of posted signs placed by the authority of the director, or contrary to the verbal instructions of any park ranger or other attendant at the time in charge of such area. 
(2)  Indecent exposure. To appear in a public park in a bathing suit or garment which indecently exposes the person of the wearer, or which costume does not conform to customary accepted standards. 
(3)  Bath houses. To dress or undress in any public area, or in any vehicle, toilet or other place, except in such bath houses or structures as may be provided for that purpose. 
(4)  Launching or removing boats. To launch a boat or to remove a boat from the water at any place or point within the public recreation area, other than those places or points designated for the purpose of launching or removing boats from the lake area. 
(5)  Operation of boats. To enter into or depart from the waters immediately adjacent to the public recreation area at a speed greater than trolling speed, or to enter into or depart from said area by any route other than those designated for entering and leaving such area. 
(6)  Fishing. To fish in any waters immediately adjacent to the public recreation area, unless such waters have been designated by the director for fishing. 
(7)  Weapons and hunting. To use, carry or possess firearms of any description or air rifles, spring guns, bows and arrows, slings, or other forms of weapons, unless expressly permitted by the director, or to hunt, trap, or pursue wildlife at any time in the park area. It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot into the park areas from areas beyond the boundaries thereof. 
(8)  Picnics in designated areas. To picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for that purpose. Attendants shall have the authority to regulate the activities in such area when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use of the area for the comfort and convenience of all. Persons using the area shall comply with any directions given by the director and attendants to achieve this end. 
(9)  Availability of picnic facilities. All individual fireplaces, tables and benches, in the park area are provided under the rule of first come, first served in the use of such facilities. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate such rule. 
(10)  Nonexclusive use of picnic area. Unless a permit is obtained for the exclusive use of any of the park facilities by any group, the use of any portion of the picnic area, or the buildings or structures therein, to the exclusion of other persons, shall be unlawful and no person shall use such area and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded. 
(11)  Duty of picnicker to put out fire and clean up. To leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished, or to leave the area without placing trash, boxes, papers, cans, bottle, garbage, and other refuse, in disposal receptacles if provided, or to fail to carry such debris away if no such receptacles are available. 
(12)  Camping. All campsite vehicles must be registered for a campsite. All camping must be done in the areas designated by the director as camping areas. 
(13)  Games. To take part in the playing of any games involving throwing or propelling balls, stones, arrows, or model airplanes, except in areas set apart for such form of recreation. The director may prescribe the location and type of games to be enjoyed in the area, and it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in such games contrary to the directions of the park attendant, park ranger, or other person in charge of such area. 
(14)  Horseback riding. To ride a horse except on a designated bridle trail or ring, or to ride a horse without proper restraint and without due care. 
(Ord. No. 3296, § 8, 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 82-27. - Illegal acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in a public park to: 
(1)  Drinking, etc., alcoholic beverage. To drink alcoholic beverages in the park, or to possess alcoholic beverages in the park for the purpose of drinking the same therein. 
(2)  Intoxication. To be or remain in any area of the public park while under the influence of intoxicating beverages. 
(3)  Fireworks and explosives. To possess, to set off, or otherwise cause to explode, or discharge or burn, any firecrackers, torpedoes, rockets, or other explosives, of inflammable material, or discharge or throw them into such area from highways or adjacent areas. Firework displays or shows may be held only when authorized by a permit from the director and by a permit from the chief of the fire department. 
(4)  Dogs. To bring a dog into the park area, unless such dog is restrained at all times on an adequate leash, not greater than ten feet in length. 
(5)  Reserved facilities. To occupy any seat, bench, or to enter into or loiter or remain, in any pavilion, park structure, or area or section thereof, which may be reserved by the city and so marked. 
(6)  Dress. To appear at any place in other than proper clothing. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "proper clothing" means that clothing which is not offensive to, and which is generally acceptable to the public. 
(7)  Alms. To solicit alms or contributions for any purpose whether private, public, or charitable, without permission from the director. 
(8)  Fires. To build or attempt to build a fire, except in such area and under such regulations as may be designated by the director. 
(9)  Closed areas. To enter an area posted as closed or as closed to the public, or to use any area contrary to and in violation of posted notices. 
(10)  Games of chance. To gamble or to participate in any game of chance in the park area. 
(11)  Loitering and boisterousness. To sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats or benches, or other areas, or to engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting, or indecent language, which is offensive to other persons present in the area and which tends to a breach of the public peace. 
(12)  Permits. To fail to produce and exhibit any permit from the director for inspection when requested so to do by any park official or police officer. 
(13)  Interference with permittees. To disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying an area or participating in an activity under the authority of a valid permit. 
(Ord. No. 3296, § 9, 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 82-28. - Merchandising, advertising, and signs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the park: 
(1)  Vending and peddling. To expose or offer for sale any article or thing, or to station or place any stand, cart, or vehicle, for the transportation, sale, or display of such article or thing offered for sale; provided, this section shall not apply to a regularly licensed concessionaire, acting by and under the authority of a permit for such activity. 
(2)  Advertising. To announce, advertise, or call to the public attention in any way, any article or service for sale or hire, or to engage in political advertising by posted sign or loudspeaker, except under duly authorized permit for such activity. 
(3)  Signs. To paste, glue, tack, or otherwise post, any sign, placard, advertisement, or inscription whatever, or to erect or cause to be erected, any sign whatever, on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park. 
(Ord. No. 3296, § 10, 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 82-29. - Authority to ban persons from public parks; readmittance. 
    The director or his designee is authorized to ban persons from public parks who have been arrested or cited in a public park for a criminal offense or who have been directed to leave a public park. Such bans by the director or his designee shall be for a minimum of one year. After one year, the banned person may apply in writing to the director to be readmitted to the park. The director shall respond to a request for readmittance within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 3296, § 11, 2-14-2006) 
Secs. 82-30-82-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CAMP BESSEMER 

Sec. 82-47. - Administration. 
    Camp Bessemer shall be structured as follows: 
(1)  Program coordinator. The program coordinator for Camp Bessemer shall oversee, manage and have general supervision and responsibility for the Camp Bessemer summer program in the city. The program coordinator shall have experience in managing, organizing, promoting and devising recreational, educational enrichment programs for ages six through 13 and overseeing a summer jobs placement program for young adults, 14 years of age and over. 
a.  The program coordinator shall make biweekly reports of any and all funds expended and disbursed by Camp Bessemer. The report shall be provided to the mayor with a copy to the council president. The reports shall state the amount and purpose of each expenditure. Each sum expended by the Camp Bessemer program shall be made pursuant to a duly made appropriation by the city council. Each person making an expenditure not so duly appropriated shall be personally liable for such expenditure. 
b.  The program coordinator shall be compensated at a rate that shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. 
c.  Failure to make the report of expenditures required by subsection (1)a of this section when due or within five working days after demand by the council shall, by a vote of the council, result in the termination of the unexpended portion of the sum appropriate in subsection (1)b of this section. 
(2)  Day camps. There shall be three day camps operated by Camp Bessemer to accommodate the recreational, and educational enrichment programs for ages six through 13 years and any young adult not employed in the jobs placement and training program. The program coordinator shall be responsible for initiating and overseeing the recreational and educational enrichment programs. 
a.  The day camps shall be made available at three sites: First Baptist Carver Life Center; A.G. Gaston Boys and Girls Club; and Kate Waller Community Center. 
b.  Each day camp site shall have one director and four aides. The directors shall be paid at a rate that shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and the aide shall be paid at the prevailing minimum hourly wage. 
(3)  Job placement and training. A number of local employers have indicated a willingness to have one or more students assigned to their companies for the purpose of actual work and training. The employers will supervise the students and the city will pay such students at the prevailing minimum hourly wage. 
a.  The program coordinator shall be responsible for coordinating with interested local employers and assigning suitable students for employment/training to such employers. 
b.  The program coordinator shall compile a list of assignment of all students referred for employment/training and file the same with the mayor and the city council through the president of the city council not later than June 16 of each year. No student may be paid by the city unless the list of assignment is filed with the mayor and the council. 
(Ord. No. 3303, § 1, 5-17-2006) 
Sec. 82-48. - End-of-program report. 
    The program coordinator shall issue an end-of-program report following the close of Camp Bessemer. The end-of-program report shall account for all sums expended by Camp Bessemer and shall include: 
(1)  Each expenditure made; 
(2)  The date of said expenditure; 
(3)  The council authorization for such expenditure; and 
(4)  The purpose of each said expenditure. 
The program coordinator will be personally liable for any unauthorized expenditure. 
(Ord. No. 3303, § 2, 5-17-2006) 
Sec. 82-49. - Employment applications. 
    Applications for employment and participation in the program shall be handled by the mayor or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 3303, § 3, 5-17-2006) 
Sec. 82-50. - Budget request. 
    The mayor of the city shall submit to the city council for adoption a detailed budget for operation of Camp Bessemer consistent with this article prior to the beginning of this program, and each year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 3303, § 4, 5-17-2006) 
Chapter 86 - SECONDHAND GOODS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 86-1-86-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - JUNK[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Highway Beautification Act - Junkyard Control, Code of Ala. 1975, § 23-1-240 et seq. 

Sec. 86-19. - Dealers-Purchases from minors. 
    No junk dealer or other person shall purchase or procure from any minor within the city limits any brass or iron of any quality, lead or any kind of scrap or tools of any substance without first obtaining permission in writing from the parent or guardian of such minor. 
(Code 1973, § 7-65; Code 1995, § 82-26) 
Sec. 86-20. - Same-Record of purchases required; inspection. 
    Every person carrying on the junk business or dealing in junk shall provide and keep a book and enter therein each purchase or acquisition of junk of each kind or character acquired or purchased, together with the name, age, address and description of the person from whom the respective purchases were made. Such record shall show the driver's license number or the social security number of the seller. The record shall also note the time and date of the respective purchase. Such books shall be kept for six months subsequent to any purchase, open to inspection during business hours by any person who may make a request to examine the records. 
(Code 1995, § 82-27; Ord. No. 1901, § 1, 8-12-1975) 
Secs. 86-21-86-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PAWNBROKERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Alabama Pawnshop Act, Code of Ala. 1975, § 5-19A-1 et seq. 

Sec. 86-44. - Definitions. 
    The definitions set forth in the Alabama Pawnshop Act, Code of Ala. 1975, § 5-19A-2, shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this article. All words, terms and phrases used herein shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in the "Alabama Pawnshop Act," and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in the Alabama Pawnshop Act. 
(Code 1973, § 7-100; Code 1995, § 82-51) 
Sec. 86-45. - Entering information on pawn ticket. 
    At the time of making the pawn or purchase transaction, the pawnbroker shall enter on the pawn ticket a record of the following information which shall be typed or written in ink and in the English language: 
(1)  A clear and accurate description of the property, including the model and serial number, if indicated on the property. 
(2)  The name, residence address, and date of birth of the pledgor or seller. 
(3)  Date of the pawn or purchase transaction. 
(4)  Type of identification and the identification number accepted from pledgor or seller. 
(5)  Description of the pledgor, including approximate height, sex, and race. 
(6)  Amount of cash advanced. 
(7)  The maturity date of the pawn transaction and the amount due. 
(8)  The monthly rate and pawn charges. 
(Code 1973, § 7-101; Code 1995, § 82-52) 
Sec. 86-46. - Contents of pawn tickets. 
    The following information shall be printed on all pawn tickets: 
(1)  The statement, "Any personal property pledged to a pawnbroker within this state is subject to sale or disposal when there has been no payment made on the account for a period of 30 days past maturity date of the original contract, and no further notice is necessary." 
(2)  The statement, "The pledgor of this item attests that it is not stolen, it has no liens or encumbrances against it, and the pledgor has the right to sell or pawn the item." 
(3)  The statement, "The item pawned is redeemable only by the bearer of this ticket." 
(4)  A blank line for the pledgor's signature. 
(Code 1973, § 7-101; Code 1995, § 82-53) 
Sec. 86-47. - Statement of ownership; records of transactions; maintenance of goods on premises. 
(a)  The pledgor or seller shall sign a statement verifying that the pledgor or seller is the rightful owner of the goods or is entitled to sell or pledge the goods and shall receive an exact copy of the pawn ticket which shall be signed or initialed by the pawnbroker or any employee of the pawnbroker. 
(b)  The pawnbroker shall maintain a record of all transactions of pledged or purchased goods on the premises. A pawnbroker shall make available to the police a record of the transactions. These records shall be a correct copy of the entries made of the pawn or purchase transaction, except as to the amount of cash advanced or paid for the goods and the monthly pawnshop charge. 
(c)  All goods purchased by the pawnbroker except for automobiles, trucks, and similar vehicles shall be maintained on the premises by the pawnbroker for at least 15 business days before the goods may be offered for resale. Automobiles, trucks, and similar vehicles shall be maintained on the premises for 21 calendar days. 
(Code 1973, § 7-101; Code 1995, § 82-54) 
Sec. 86-48. - Prohibition of certain acts. 
    A pawnbroker or any clerk, agent, or employee of a pawnbroker, shall not do any of the following: 
(1)  Fail to make an entry of any material matter in the record book. 
(2)  Make any false entry therein. 
(3)  Falsify, obliterate, destroy, or remove from the place of business records, books, or accounts relating to the licensee's pawn transactions. 
(4)  Refuse to allow the police or other designated city official to inspect the pawn records or any pawn goods during the ordinary hours of business or other acceptable time to both parties. 
(5)  Fail to maintain a record of each pawn transaction for at least four years. 
(6)  Accept a pledge or purchase property from a person under the age of 19 years. 
(7)  Make any agreement requiring the personal liability of a pledgor or seller or waiving any of the provisions of this section or providing for a maturity date less than 30 days after the date of the pawn transaction. 
(8)  Fail to return or replace pledged goods to a pledgor or seller upon payment of the full amount due the pawnbroker unless the pledged goods have been taken into custody by a court or by a law enforcement officer or agency. 
(9)  Sell, lease, or agree to sell or lease pledged or purchased goods back to the pledgor or back to the seller in the same or related transaction. 
(10)  Sell or otherwise charge for insurance in connection with a pawn transaction. 
(Code 1973, §§ 7-101, 7-102, 7-104, 7-105; Code 1995, § 82-55) 
Sec. 86-49. - No confiscation of property on seven-day hold; conditions by which property may be placed on hold. 
(a)  No pledged or purchased goods may be confiscated if the property pledged to or purchased by a pawnbroker may be put on a seven-day hold by the police chief, but the pledged or purchased property may not be placed on hold unless: 
(1)  A police report is made in a timely manner. 
(2)  A warrant is sworn out for the person who pledged or sold the goods to the pawnbroker or for alias if the person is unknown. 
(3)  A warrant or writ is issued for the merchandise to be confiscated along with a request for restitution, pursuant to law. 
(b)  This section shall not affect the right of any person who has an ownership interest or prior lien in the pledged or purchased goods. 
(Code 1995, § 82-56) 
Secs. 86-50-86-71. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AUTOMOBILE SALVAGE AND WRECKING YARDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Salvage yards generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-12-410 et seq. 

Sec. 86-72. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Salvage yard means any yard, premises, lot or tract of land in or upon which nonoperating motor vehicles are stored or upon which motor vehicles are wrecked or dismantled for the purpose of wrecking. 
(Code 1973, § 7-36; Code 1995, § 82-76) 
Sec. 86-73. - Fences required; specifications. 
(a)  Any salvage yard establishment shall be carried on, maintained or conducted in an enclosed building or upon a lot fenced on all sides. 
(b)  The side which abuts any street or avenue within the city which is open shall be chainlink or the equivalent and shall be at least six feet and no more than ten feet in height. Fences along other than streets and avenues shall be of a metal or woven metal wire of at least ten-gage line wire and 121/2 gage filler or stay. There shall be placed in the fence fronting any street or avenue slats or blinds so as to screen the premises from the view from the street or avenue. 
(c)  All fences shall be maintained in a neat, substantial, safe condition. 
(Code 1973, § 7-37; Code 1995, § 82-77) 
Sec. 86-74. - Regulation of salvage yard. 
(a)  The material located in or upon any salvage yard premises shall be so arranged so that reasonable inspection or access on all parts of the premises can be had at any time by the proper fire, health, police and building authorities. 
(b)  Water shall not be permitted to accumulate in any of the car bodies until it becomes vile, stagnant or infested with mosquitoes. 
(c)  Weeds and rank vegetation shall not be permitted on the premises. 
(d)  The entire salvage yard shall be kept free from vermin, rodents, reptiles and animals of all kind other than properly licensed pets. 
(Code 1973, § 7-38; Code 1995, § 82-78) 
Sec. 86-75. - Burning. 
    The intentional burning of any automobile bodies or parts is prohibited. 
(Code 1973, § 7-39; Code 1995, § 82-79) 
Chapter 90 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Solid Waste Disposal Act, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-27-1 et seq.; local solid waste management programs required, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-27-47. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 90-1. - Definitions. 
    The definitions set forth in Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-27-2 (Solid Wastes Disposal Act-Definitions), shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this chapter. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-27-2, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-27-2. 
(Code 1973, § 19-1; Code 1995, § 86-1) 
Sec. 90-2. - Dumping-On streets and thoroughfares. 
    No person shall dump, deposit, place, throw or leave refuse, paper, litter, rubbish, debris, filthy or odoriferous objects, substances or other trash upon a street or public thoroughfare of the city or the right-of-way therefor, or within 20 yards of a street or other public thoroughfare in the city. 
(Code 1973, § 19-8; Code 1995, § 86-2; Ord. No. 1910, § 1, 9-2-1975) 
State Law reference- Criminal littering, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-7-29. 
Sec. 90-3. - Same-Vehicle driver. 
    If an offense described above is committed from a motor vehicle, the driver of the vehicle shall be presumed to be the offender. 
(Code 1995, § 86-3; Ord. No. 1910, § 2, 9-2-1975) 
Sec. 90-4. - Provisions of sections 90-2 and 90-3 cumulative. 
    The provisions of sections 90-2 and 90-3 shall be cumulative to existing ordinances as statutes relating to the throwing, placing or otherwise depositing of debris, rubbish, trash or other items or substances of a prohibited nature upon the public highways of the state and the streets of the city and shall in no way repeal nor affect any of such laws. 
(Code 1995, § 86-4; Ord. No. 1910, § 3, 9-2-1975) 
Sec. 90-5. - Sanitary sewer maintenance fee. 
(a)  There shall be a sewer maintenance fee charged to all users of the city sanitary sewer system. 
(b)  The sanitary sewer maintenance fee shall be determined according to each 100 cubic feet of water used by the municipal sewer user. The amount of the fee shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(c)  The sanitary sewer maintenance fee shall be collected by the city water service and shall be billed on the water bill issued for water usage. The city water service shall collect the fee from the sanitary sewer user. 
(d)  All bills for sewer service charges shall be incorporated in the water bill, shall be rendered monthly, shall be due when rendered and shall be paid within 18 days after the original date of billing. A ten percent late charge shall be assessed on all bills paid later than 18 days after being rendered. If the amount of such sewer service charge shall not be paid within 30 days from the rendition of such bill, and if permitted by general law, the city shall discontinue furnishing water to such premises and shall disconnect the same from the water distribution system and shall proceed forthwith to recover the amount of such sewer service charge, together with all applicable penalties, in such lawful manner as it may deem advisable. 
(e)  The proceeds collected from the sanitary sewer service fee shall be deposited in a special fund designated as the city sanitary sewer maintenance fund. A copy of all deposits shall be forwarded to the city clerk of the city. 
(f)  The proceeds of the sanitary sewer maintenance fee shall be used for repairs, maintenance, rehabilitation and extension of sewer lines to the city sanitary sewer system. The funds will also be used to make payments to the state revolving fund for the proceeds used for sewer repairs and maintenance at the 12th Street sewer project. The funds shall also be used for the extension of sanitary sewer extension lines for the purpose of assisting in the extension of sanitary sewer lines within the city and for the purpose of installing sewer lines within the city as laterals to be connected with the county sewer trunk lines and the repair and maintenance of the sewer lines which include cost of engineering, evaluations, rehabilitations and other charges associated with said purposes. The proceeds of the fund can be used for the payment of indebtedness, including bonds, incurred for sanitary sewer purposes for the city. 
(g)  The city sanitary sewer maintenance fund can be drawn on by the mayor and city clerk. 
(h)  All contracts for the maintenance, repair, rehabilitation and extension of sewer lines shall be approved by the governing body of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 86-5; Ord. No. 2665, §§ 1-7, 12-19-1995) 
Secs. 90-6-90-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 90-29. - Franchise-Required. 
    Any person operating a garbage pickup or trash removal service and operating on the streets and alleys of the city shall obtain a franchise from the city council prior to the commencement of business. 
(Code 1973, § 7-135; Code 1995, § 86-31) 
Sec. 90-30. - Same-Information required in application. 
    In order to obtain the franchise the person applying shall furnish to the city council: 
(1)  A list of the equipment it proposes to use in such service sufficient to perform the necessary services, which shall be a containerized system. 
(2)  The franchisee shall agree to abide by all of the rules and regulations promulgated by the street department in the operation of its garbage disposal facility. 
(Code 1973, § 7-136; Code 1995, § 86-32) 
Sec. 90-31. - Same-Liability insurance required. 
    The applicant for a franchise shall obtain and furnish to the city an all perils liability insurance policy insuring itself from any claims arising from the operation of its trucks or vehicles or from the incidental operation of its business, in an amount of not less than $1,000,000.00. 
(Code 1973, § 7-137; Code 1995, § 86-33) 
Sec. 90-32. - Garbage disposal. 
(a)  Any owner or person in charge or control of any dwelling, hotel, restaurant, delicatessen or store where food for human consumption is prepared or kept for sale, or any other place where garbage originates, shall keep and maintain at or in such premises a sufficient number of garbage cans or special garbage and rubbish containers to receive the garbage originating upon such premises. 
(b)  No person shall cause or permit the disposal of garbage originating upon such premises other than by depositing the garbage in such garbage cans or special garbage and rubbish containers for removal to a city garbage and rubbish disposal area under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 19-2; Code 1995, § 86-34) 
Sec. 90-33. - Rubbish disposal; garbage prohibited. 
(a)  Any person in charge or control of a dwelling, hotel, restaurant, delicatessen, store or other place where ashes, cinders or rubbish originate or are created to keep and maintain in or upon such premises a sufficient number of rubbish cans for the reception of ashes, cinders, rubbish, and other nonburnable waste substances originating or created upon such premises. 
(b)  No person shall deposit or permit to be deposited any garbage in a rubbish can provided for ashes, cinders, gravel, rock, sand, earth, mineral, rubbish or other nonburnable substances. 
(Code 1973, § 19-5; Code 1995, § 86-35) 
Sec. 90-34. - Disposal of decomposable or decaying material. 
(a)  No person shall keep, maintain, store or deposit on or about any place or premises within the city limits any decomposable, decaying or putrefactive material, either animal or vegetable in nature or origin, except in a substantial, watertight and flyproof container, either made for or appropriate to be used for such purposes, and to prevent access of flies to the material or the reproduction or propagation of flies on or about the material. 
(b)  No person shall cause or permit the soiling of the ground by such material on or about such place or premises so as to cause, permit or favor the propagation or reproduction of flies. 
(c)  The presence or existence in such container or on or about such place or premises of live fly larvae shall be prima facie evidence of the propagation or reproduction of flies and of a violation of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 19-9; Code 1995, § 86-36) 
Sec. 90-35. - Disposal in authorized areas. 
    No person shall dispose of garbage or refuse anywhere other than in authorized disposal areas. 
(Code 1973, § 19-12; Code 1995, § 86-37) 
Sec. 90-36. - Accumulation of rubbish. 
    No occupants of any building or premises shall store, accumulate or allow to accumulate any empty boxes, barrels or other rubbish of like nature upon their premises. 
(Code 1973, § 19-14; Code 1995, § 86-38) 
Sec. 90-37. - Collection of boxes or crates; method. 
    No person operating any place of business in the city or any employee, servant or agent of any such person, shall place or deposit in any street, sidewalk or alley any pasteboard or wooden boxes, crates or cartons for the purpose of being collected by the trash collection employees or for any other purpose, unless they are first broken down and securely fastened into bales or bundles not exceeding 100 pounds in weight or four feet in any dimension. 
(Code 1973, § 19-15; Code 1995, § 86-39) 
Secs. 90-38-90-62. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONTAINERS 

Sec. 90-63. - Lids secured. 
    The lids or covers of garbage cans or special garbage and rubbish containers shall be kept tightly fitted thereon at all times other than when garbage or rubbish is being deposited in such container. All garbage cans or special garbage and rubbish containers shall be so kept and maintained as to prevent the access of flies therein and the soiling of the ground, floor or structure upon which they stand. 
(Code 1973, § 19-3; Code 1995, § 86-51) 
Sec. 90-64. - Rubbish prohibited. 
    No person shall deposit or permit to be deposited in any garbage can provided and intended for garbage any ashes, cinders, gravel, rock, sand, earth, mineral, rubbish or other nonburnable substance of any description. 
(Code 1973, § 19-4; Code 1995, § 86-52) 
Sec. 90-65. - Restricted on streets to certain hours. 
(a)  No person in charge or control of any dwelling, hotel, restaurant, delicatessen or store where garbage, rubbish or any other materials are placed in a garbage can, rubbish can or special garbage or rubbish container shall permit any such cans or containers to be placed out for collection on the streets or sidewalks before 5:00 p.m. on the day before regular city garbage or trash collection service is to be rendered. 
(b)  Cans or containers shall be removed from the sidewalks, between the hours from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
(Code 1973, § 19-6; Code 1995, § 86-53) 
Sec. 90-66. - Dumping of containers. 
    No person shall dump any garbage cans, rubbish cans, special garbage and rubbish containers or other boxes or receptacles upon any public streets or sidewalks within the city limits. 
(Code 1973, § 19-7; Code 1995, § 86-54) 
Sec. 90-67. - Opening or disturbing; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall open any garbage can, rubbish can or other container provided for in this article in which garbage or trash has been deposited for collection, or search in any such can or container for garbage or trash, or remove from any such cans any garbage, trash, or other thing. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the owner of such can or container or to any person employed by the city for the purpose of collecting garbage or trash. 
(Code 1973, § 19-10; Code 1995, § 86-55) 
Sec. 90-68. - City trash receptacles; use limited. 
    No person operating any place of business in the city or any employee, servant or agent of any such person shall place or deposit garbage, trash, paper, rubbish or other waste material in any trash basket or waste receptacle maintained by the city upon a public street or sidewalk, when such garbage, trash, paper, rubbish or waste material accumulated in or came from such place of business. 
(Code 1973, § 19-13; Code 1995, § 86-56) 
Sec. 90-69. - Number. 
(a)  No person shall keep or maintain upon any premises or in any public way where permitted adjacent thereto, in excess of four garbage or rubbish cans for each dwelling unit upon the premises at any one time, containing garbage, rubbish or trash to be collected or picked up by the city. 
(b)  Where any premises as described in subsection (a) of this section contain in excess of two dwelling units, there shall at no time be kept or maintained in excess of ten garbage and rubbish cans on or upon such premises or in any public way, where permitted, adjacent thereto. 
(c)  There shall not be maintained upon any premises devoted to business, commercial or industrial use or in any public way, where permitted, adjacent thereto in excess of four garbage or rubbish cans at any one time, containing garbage, rubbish or trash to be collected or picked up by the city. 
(Code 1973, § 19-16; Code 1995, § 86-57) 
Sec. 90-70. - Special containers required for over ten dwelling units. 
(a)  Where any owner, lessee or agent acting for such owner or lessee or for any other person, or any person acting for himself or another rents to others, leases or subleases to others, manages or otherwise provides for occupancy, dwelling units in any structure containing in excess of ten dwelling units or on any premises upon which is situated in excess of ten dwelling units, the owner, lessee or agent for the other person shall provide for such structure or premises a special garbage and rubbish container, and provide for servicing thereof, unless all garbage and rubbish regularly originating from such premises and to be picked up by the city may be placed in ten garbage and rubbish cans or less. 
(b)  No owner, lessee, agent or other person shall fail to provide the special garbage and rubbish container and service as required in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 19-17; Code 1995, § 86-58) 
Sec. 90-71. - Special containers required for over four cans in a business, commercial or industrial establishment. 
(a)  Any person conducting or operating a business, commercial or industrial establishment or operation upon any premises in the city and requiring in excess of four garbage or rubbish cans, as permitted under section 90-69 shall provide for such premises a special garbage and rubbish container and provide for serving thereof. 
(b)  No person shall fail to provide such special garbage and rubbish container and service as required in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 19-18; Code 1995, § 86-59) 
Sec. 90-72. - Accumulation in special containers. 
    No owner, lessee or agent as described in sections 90-70 and 90-71 shall allow or permit any garbage or rubbish to accumulate in any special garbage and rubbish container serving dwelling units owned, managed or controlled by such owner, lessee or agent unless he has provided for the collection of garbage from such container. 
(Code 1973, § 19-19; Code 1995, § 86-60) 
Sec. 90-73. - Maintenance of special container area; notice. 
(a)  Any owner, lessee, or agent acting for such owner or lessee or for any other person, or any person acting for himself or others who rents to others, leases or subleases to others, manages or otherwise provides for occupancy dwelling units in any structure containing in excess of four dwelling units shall keep or cause to be kept free of garbage and rubbish the area immediately surrounding the garbage cans, rubbish cans or special garbage and rubbish containers serving such dwelling units. 
(b)  If the area at any time becomes so littered, unclean or unsanitary and such person is advised in writing by or on behalf of the superintendent of streets and sanitation or any other person who is the administrative head of the division of the county health officer, such person shall within 24 hours place or cause to be placed such area in a clean, sanitary and unlittered condition. No such person shall fail to clean or cause to be cleaned any such area in the time set out in this section. 
(Code 1973, § 19-20; Code 1995, § 86-61) 
Secs. 90-74-90-104. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LANDFILL 

Sec. 90-105. - Use of site. 
    No person who resides outside of the city or does not have a license to do business in the city shall be permitted to use the landfill site for the dumping of trash. Only residents of the city or businesses licensed by the city may use the landfill site under the conditions set forth in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 19-34; Code 1995, § 86-81) 
Sec. 90-106. - Dumping hours. 
    Any resident of the city may dump their personal trash or debris at the city landfill site between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m., Monday through Friday and at no other times and only at such places as are designated by the employee in charge of the site. 
(Code 1973, § 19-35; Code 1995, § 86-82) 
Sec. 90-107. - Fee. 
(a)  The fee for delivering inert material to the Bessemer Landfill shall be determined on a per cubic yard basis. The amount of the fee shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(b)  There shall be a minimum charge for all inert material delivered to the Bessemer Landfill. The amount of the minimum charge shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 86-83; Ord. No. 2670, §§ I, II, 3-26-1996; Ord. No. 2671, §§ I-III, 4-2-1996; Ord. No. 3130, § 1, 11-21-2000) 
Chapter 94 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- The Municipal Public Improvement Act, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-48-1 et seq.; municipal streets, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-49-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 94-1. - Billposting. 
    No person shall post, tack or attach any handbills or signs of wood, paper, cloth, etc., on telephone poles, power poles or any building or anywhere other than signboards, within the city limits or the police jurisdiction thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 15-48; Code 1995, § 90-1) 
Sec. 94-2. - Defects in streets and sidewalks-Repair required. 
    No person shall allow a defect, crack, obstruction or other hazard to the travelling public to remain in or on the street or sidewalk in front of, along or abutting on premises occupied by such person after the expiration of ten days from service of a notice of such defect, crack, obstruction or other hazard by the street superintendent. 
(Code 1973, § 21-83; Code 1995, § 90-2) 
Sec. 94-3. - Same-Liability of property owner; notice. 
    No owner of any property shall allow a defect, crack or obstruction or other hazard to the travelling public to remain in or on the street or sidewalk in front of, along or abutting the property owned by such person after the expiration of ten days from the receipt by such person of a notice from the street superintendent. 
(Code 1973, § 21-84; Code 1995, § 90-3) 
Sec. 94-4. - Same-Notice to owner of costs. 
    The city clerk and treasurer shall, upon receipt of the information required to be transmitted by the street superintendent, advise the property owner by registered mail of the amount due for repairing the defect. The owner shall be advised to pay the cost within 30 days at the office of the city clerk and treasurer, or the matter will be placed in the hands of the city attorney for legal action. 
(Code 1973, § 21-81; Code 1995, § 90-4) 
Sec. 94-5. - Mixing cements on pavement. 
    No person shall mix or place on the bare surface of the pavement of any street, sidewalk or other public property, any hydraulic cement, Portland cement, bituminous cement or other substance which may permanently deface, stain or damage the pavement. 
(Code 1973, § 15-67; Code 1995, § 90-5) 
Sec. 94-6. - Throwing substances on streets. 
(a)  Dirt and mud. No owner, driver, manager or operator of any cart, wagon, car, truck or other vehicle which tracks dirt, mud or other similar substance from private property upon or onto any paved street in the city shall fail to remove all such dirt, mud or other substance from such paved street within six hours after the substance has been tracked thereon. 
(b)  Removal of dirt and mud. No person engaged in grading or making an excavation or fill on any private or public property in the city shall fail to remove from the paved street near or adjacent to such work all dirt, mud or other substances which is tracked from the work area on such private or public property upon or onto such paved street by any cart, wagon, car, truck or other vehicle, within six hours after the substance has been tracked thereon. 
(c)  Oil. No person shall knowingly deposit oil upon any of the paved streets within the city limits. 
(d)  Obstructions. No person shall obstruct any public street or any portion thereof except by parking vehicles thereon as provided by law. 
(e)  Glass; tacks; similar items. No person shall knowingly place, throw or deposit any glass, tacks or like substance upon any of the public streets or sidewalks within the city limits. 
(f)  Peelings; other refuse. No person shall throw, drop or leave any peelings, parings, rinds, sweepings, trash, garbage or other refuse matter upon the streets or sidewalks within the city limits. 
(Code 1973, §§ 15-66, 21-32-21-34; Code 1995, § 90-6) 
State Law reference- Putting glass or other injurious substance on highway, road, street or public right-of-way prohibited, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-60. 
Sec. 94-7. - Throwing substances from buildings. 
    No person shall throw anything upon any public street or sidewalk from the upper stories of any building. 
(Code 1973, § 21-35; Code 1995, § 90-7) 
Sec. 94-8. - Removing or defacing street markings or street name signs. 
    No person shall remove any post, stake or other mark indicating the lines of grade of any street or pull down, remove or deface any board, sign or place indicating the name of any street. 
(Code 1973, § 21-37; Code 1995, § 90-8) 
Sec. 94-9. - Writing on pavement or curbstone. 
    No person shall write, paint or print any letters, figures, signs, devices, pictures or marks on any of the pavements, sidewalks or curbstones within the city limits. 
(Code 1973, § 21-38; Code 1995, § 90-9) 
Sec. 94-10. - Flying kites on streets. 
    No person shall fly a kite in the streets within the city limits. 
(Code 1973, § 21-39; Code 1995, § 90-10) 
Sec. 94-11. - White canes or walking sticks; use by blind only; full stop required. 
(a)  For the purpose of guarding against accidents in traffic on the public streets, no person, except persons wholly or partially blind, shall carry or use on the public streets within the city limits any canes or walking sticks which are white in color or white with a red end or bottom. Such canes or walking sticks may be used on the streets and other public places of the city by persons wholly or partially blind, as a means of protecting them and for the purpose of identifying them by drivers of vehicles and other pedestrians with whom they come in contact on such streets and public places. 
(b)  Any driver of a vehicle or pedestrian who is not wholly or partially blind who approaches or comes in contact with a person wholly or partially blind, carrying a cane or walking stick white in color, or white with a red end, shall immediately come to a full stop and take any precautions before proceeding as may be necessary to avoid accident or injury to the person carrying a white cane or walking stick. 
(Code 1973, § 21-46; Code 1995, § 90-11) 
Sec. 94-12. - Pedestrians to keep right on sidewalks. 
    Pedestrians shall keep to the right on all public sidewalks and shall not obstruct the sidewalks by stopping except at or near either edge of the walk, and not in the middle of the sidewalk. 
(Code 1973, § 21-63; Code 1995, § 90-12) 
Sec. 94-13. - Encumbering gutter, drain or sewer. 
    No person shall encumber or throw any filth or rubbish into any gutter, drain or sewer, along the public streets or sidewalks within the city limits. 
(Code 1973, § 21-47; Code 1995, § 90-13) 
Sec. 94-14. - Parking of vehicles for sale; penalty for violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for anyone engaged in the sale of automobiles, both new and used, to park the vehicles on the sidewalks and city rights-of-way within the city limits. 
(b)  Violation of this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor and subject the party so convicted of the offense to punishment according to the general penalties described by section 1-8. 
(Code 1995, § 90-14; Ord. No. 2411, §§ 1, 2, 10-13-1987) 
Sec. 94-15. - [Honorary street sign program.] 
(a)  [Creation.] There is hereby created the "Honorary Street Sign Program in the City of Bessemer, Alabama," under the terms and conditions set forth herein below. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings: 
(1)  Significant person shall mean a person, whether now living or deceased, who has made a substantial and well documented positive contribution affecting the lives of people residing in the City of Bessemer. 
(2)  Significant place or community marker shall mean a place, an edifice, historic event or thing of similar import which has made a substantial and well documented positive contribution affecting the lives of people residing in the City of Bessemer. 
(3)  Well documented shall mean that the contributions made the basis of the request for an honorary street sign which have been reduced to writing and/or evidenced by acceptable written documentation and other wise capable of being verified from reliable sources and accounts. 
(c)  Application process. A person desiring to have a street named in honor of a person, place or community marker shall file an application with the city clerk of the City of Bessemer in a form prescribed by the mayor. Such application shall contain, but may not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone numbers of the applicant(s); 
(2)  The name of the person, place or community marker to be recognized on an honorary sign; 
(3)  A detailed written history or biographical of the significant person, significant place or community marker; 
(4)  A detailed writing of the contributions clearly demonstrating and well documenting the service to or place in the community deserving of honorary recognition; and 
(5)  A copy of each document relied upon by the applicant(s) which shows the contribution or points of historical significance to the community deserving of honorary status. 
(d)  Application fee. In order to defray the cost of processing the application, including staff time required to research and verify the matters contained in the application; and producing and installing honorary signs, there is hereby assessed a nonrefundable fee in the amount of $150.00. 
(e)  Approval of honorary sign. The city council, with recommendations from the mayor and sign committee, in its sole discretion, shall determine whether the request for an honorary sign is meritorious and deserving. 
(f)  Description of honorary sign. The honorary sign shall have a white reflective background, trimmed in blue with blue lettering and shall measure 30 inches in width and 18 inches in height. Each honorary sign shall have the words "Honorary Sign" across the top of the sign in a similar style. The signage shall use a minimum of .030 aluminum backing and be mounted using galvanized poles. This panel style should correspond with the regulations for memorial signage as provided in MUTCD (Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices). The mayor shall approve the final description and may amend the style as needed to accommodate the honorary name provided. 
(g)  Location of honorary sign. The location of the honorary signs shall be determined by the mayor. 
(h)  Removal of sign. The City Council of the City of Bessemer may, at any time and within its sole discretion, remove any honorary sign when it deems to be in its best interest so to do. 
(Ord. No. 3514, 1-21-2014) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3514, adopted Jan. 21, 2014, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence codification as § 94-15 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 94-16-94-31. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SUPERINTENDENT OF DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS 

Sec. 94-32. - Responsibilities. 
    There is created the position of superintendent of department of public works, who, under the direction of the mayor, shall be responsible for;aoh1; Chapter 94\STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
(Code 1973, § 21-1; Code 1995, § 90-36) 
Sec. 94-33. - Qualifications. 
    The superintendent of department of public works at the time of his appointment shall have not less than five years' experience in street and road construction and maintenance or other heavy construction work. 
(Code 1973, § 21-2; Code 1995, § 90-37) 
Sec. 94-34. - Duties. 
    The superintendent of department of public works shall manage all operations concerning the streets and ways of the city. Under the direction of the mayor, he shall: 
(1)  Prepare a public improvement plan each year for the improvement of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, storm and sanitary sewers and other construction and obtain the engineering specifications, profiles, grades and estimates of cost for the proper drafting of ordinances for public improvements, so arranged as to provide maximum work at minimum cost. 
(2)  Prepare an equipment plan showing the use made of equipment and providing for replacement and purchase of new equipment in order to provide that work is accomplished at the lowest practicable cost. 
(3)  Supervise all construction of public improvements authorized by the city council. 
(4)  Plan for the cleanliness and repair of all streets, alleys and sidewalks and to schedule equipment and personnel for efficient operations. 
(5)  Supervise all routine operations in the street department and provide means of meeting any emergencies that may occur within the city affecting the safe use of the streets and sidewalks. 
(6)  Supervise the operation of all storm and sanitary sewers and to provide for enforcement of all laws pertaining to such sewers. 
(7)  In consultation with the chief of the police department, obtain maximum safety of the streets, ways and sidewalks in the construction, maintenance, inspection and removal of obstacles and defects. 
(8)  In cooperation with the parks and recreation director, develop beautification of the streets and ways of the city. 
(9)  Recommend to the commissioner for public improvements all matters relating to the employment, transfer, promotion and discharge of personnel within the street department. 
(Code 1973, § 21-3; Code 1995, § 90-38) 
Secs. 94-35-94-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 94-57. - Permit required; application. 
(a)  No person shall excavate, cut into, take up or undermine any street without first having obtained a written permit from the engineering department. A separate permit shall be obtained for any excavation work done on each block of street. 
(b)  The engineering department shall issue permits to any person who files an application and complies with the provisions of section 94-58. 
(Code 1973, § 21-9; Code 1995, § 90-61) 
Sec. 94-58. - Cutting or disturbing pavement; approval and bond required; backfill. 
    It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to cut, dig, destroy or otherwise disturb the pavement of any public street or alley within the city without complying with the following: 
(1)  Any person wishing to cut, damage, or disturb any public street or alley within the city shall, prior to beginning the work, do the following: 
a.  Receive written approval from the engineering department; 
b.  Post a bond in the amount of $5,000.00 insuring compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(2)  When the work on the streets or alleys of the city is complete, the person doing the work shall backfill in such manner as to comply with the requirements of the public works department. 
(Code 1995, § 90-62; Ord. No. 2203, § 1, 3-29-1983) 
Sec. 94-59. - Replacement material specified. 
    All excavations shall be replaced with chert, slag or such material as may be approved by the public improvement department. All paving shall be replaced with a 1: 2: 3 mixture concrete of Portland cement, penetration pavement or tar cap of such material as may be required by the street superintendent. 
(Code 1973, § 21-13; Code 1995, § 90-63) 
Sec. 94-60. - Rates for replacement of excavation or pavement materials by city. 
(a)  Any person failing or refusing to replace an excavation or paving within five days after notice from the street superintendent shall be charged a rate per square yard by the city for making such replacements. The amount of the rate shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a rate schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(b)  All other work shall be done at the cost of labor and material, plus ten percent for supervision. 
(Code 1973, § 21-14; Code 1995, § 90-64) 
Sec. 94-61. - Guarding excavations; barricades and lights. 
(a)  No person shall permit any excavation in any street or sidewalk to remain open, uncovered or unguarded to the danger of others. 
(b)  The excavation shall be guarded by barricades and warning lights. The warning lights shall be maintained from one-half hour after sunset until one-half hour before sunrise. 
(Code 1973, § 21-15; Code 1995, § 90-65) 
Sec. 94-62. - Repair of defective work; notice. 
    Any person engaged in doing the work described in section 94-57 whose work does not conform to the rules and regulations set out in section 94-59 or whose work is constructed with inferior materials and workmanship shall, on notice from the street superintendent, make changes at once in order to remedy same. If the work has not been changed after five days' notice from the street superintendent, the work shall be replaced by the street superintendent and his assistants and charged to the person as provided in section 94-60. 
(Code 1973, § 21-10; Code 1995, § 90-66) 
Secs. 94-63-94-82. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SEWER, MAIN OR CONDUIT CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR 

Sec. 94-83. - Permit required; exception. 
    No person, other than an authorized officer, employee or agent of the city, or in case of an emergency as prescribed in section 94-84, shall make any opening, cut or excavation in or under the surface of any street, alley, sidewalk or public way of the city without having first obtained a permit as provided in this division. 
(Code 1973, § 21-48; Code 1995, § 90-76) 
Sec. 94-84. - Emergency excavation; permit exception. 
(a)  If any sewer, main, conduit or other utility installation in or under any street, alley, sidewalk or public way shall burst, break or otherwise be in such condition as seriously to endanger persons or property, the owner of such sewer, main, conduit or other installation shall immediately repair such trouble and immediately take all necessary steps to make the location safe and secure. The owner shall not, however, begin making any permanent repairs to such street, alley or sidewalk until he has secured a permit as provided in this division. 
(b)  The permit shall be secured within 18 hours or the next business day after such break or serious trouble shall have developed and the necessary repairs to the street, alley or sidewalk shall be made as directed by the city engineer and shall be completed as soon as practicable after receipt of the permit. 
(Code 1973, § 21-49; Code 1995, § 90-77) 
Sec. 94-85. - Deposit required; permit fee; restoration costs. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of section 94-86, any person desiring to make any opening, cut or excavation in or under the surface of any paved, curbed or otherwise improved street, alley or sidewalk, for any rightful and necessary purpose, shall first pay to the city clerk and treasurer such sum as may be reasonably necessary, as determined by the city engineer or by his authorized deputy, to defray the cost to the city of properly restoring the street, alley or sidewalk to as good condition as it was before making such opening, cut or excavation and of maintaining the same in such condition, normal wear and tear excepted, for a period of five years. 
(b)  The city engineer shall thereupon issue to such person a permit authorizing such work. A fee shall be paid for the permit. The amount of the fee shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(c)  No such restoration cost shall be required before making any opening, cut or excavation in any unpaved, uncurbed or unimproved street or alley, but a permit as provided in this division shall first be obtained. 
(Code 1973, § 21-50; Code 1995, § 90-78) 
Sec. 94-86. - Paving of streets required by ordinance; notices. 
(a)  Whenever the city council shall pass any ordinance providing for the paving or repaving of any alley or any portion of the vehicular way of any street, a written notice shall be mailed to each public utility maintaining any sewers, mains, conduits or other utility installations in or under the alley or roadway, and to each abutting property owner to whom a copy of the improvement ordinance is mailed as required by law, notifying all the persons that: 
(1)  No permit will be issued for openings, cuts or excavations in the paving to be constructed under the ordinance for a period of one year without the approval of the street superintendent after the date of completion of such paving. 
(2)  Each such public utility is required by law to install all underground sewers, mains, conduits or other utility installations and to make all necessary repairs thereto within 30 days from the date the public improvement ordinance has been confirmed. 
(3)  Each such abutting property owner, within 30 days from the date the public improvement ordinance has been confirmed, is required either to install all necessary service lines connecting with any mains, sewers, conduits, or other utility installations or to stub out or extend the connections to the property lines, failing which the right to make any such installations shall be forfeited for a period of one year after the date of completion of such new paving. 
(b)  Copies of the notices shall be mailed to the occupants of all houses and buildings located on premises abutting streets and alleys which are proposed to be improved by the ordinance. Copies of the notices shall be transmitted to the manager of the city water service. 
(Code 1973, § 21-51; Code 1995, § 90-79) 
Sec. 94-87. - Excavation permit restricted. 
    During the period of one year after the date of completion of any new paving or other permanent improvement to the surface of any street or alley constructed or reconstructed pursuant to any improvement ordinance, or city, state or county decision, no permit shall be issued to open, cut or excavate in or under the surface of such street or alley, except where in the opinion of the city engineer or of his duly authorized deputy, an emergency such as that described in section 94-84 may exist of such nature as to make the issuance of such permit absolutely necessary. 
(Code 1973, § 21-55; Code 1995, § 90-80) 
Sec. 94-88. - Applicability of technical codes. 
    Any and all provisions of the electrical code, gas code and plumbing code of the city relating to excavations in streets and alleys shall be subject to the restrictive provisions of section 94-87 in every case where new paving is involved, and shall also be subject to the provisions of section 94-85, relating to the payment of the costs of fully restoring and maintaining streets, alleys and sidewalks. 
(Code 1973, § 21-56; Code 1995, § 90-81) 
Secs. 94-89-94-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 94-120. - Construction; supervision. 
    All sidewalks constructed within the city limits shall be constructed under the direction and supervision of the street superintendent, and in accordance with the specifications and grades of the city for sidewalks as on file in the office of the engineering department. 
(Code 1973, § 21-57; Code 1995, § 90-101) 
Sec. 94-121. - Construction permit-Exception. 
(a)  Before any sidewalk is constructed upon any street within the city limits, the owner or agent of the property in front of which the sidewalk is to be constructed shall secure from the engineering department a permit to construct the sidewalk. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall be held to apply to work done under contract with the city. 
(Code 1973, § 21-58; Code 1995, § 90-102) 
Sec. 94-122. - Same-Application; contents. 
    The application for the sidewalk construction permit required by section 92-121 shall state: 
(1)  The street upon which the construction is planned; 
(2)  Describe the property in front of or along which the construction is planned; 
(3)  The party by whom the construction will be performed; 
(4)  The material of which the sidewalk is to be constructed; and 
(5)  The width and length of the sidewalk. 
(Code 1973, § 21-59; Code 1995, § 90-103) 
Sec. 94-123. - Same-Refusal to issue permit; appeal. 
    If, in the opinion of the engineer the material to be used or the manner of constructing a sidewalk is unsatisfactory, or for any other good cause, he may refuse to issue the permit. The applicant shall have the right to appeal to the city council at its next regular meeting. 
(Code 1973, § 21-61; Code 1995, § 90-104) 
Sec. 94-124. - Staking out and supervision of construction; fee; refund. 
(a)  There shall be a fee charged per square yard by the city for staking out and supervising the construction of sidewalks. The engineer shall not issue a permit for the construction unless the application is accompanied by a receipt from the city clerk and treasurer showing that the fee has been paid. The amount of the fee shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(b)  If the permit is refused, the engineer shall write across the back of such receipt "permit refused" and, upon its presentation to the city clerk and treasurer, the amount so paid in shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(Code 1973, § 21-60; Code 1995, § 90-105) 
Secs. 94-125-94-146. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DRIVEWAYS 

Sec. 94-147. - Construction permit-Required. 
    No person shall construct a driveway across a sidewalk in the city without first obtaining a permit. 
(Code 1973, § 21-4; Code 1995, § 90-126) 
Sec. 94-148. - Same-Application; fee. 
(a)  Any person desiring to construct a driveway across a sidewalk in the city shall submit an application to the engineering department giving: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner and occupant of the premises abutting the place where the driveway is to be constructed; 
(2)  A description of the property by lot and block number; 
(3)  Street address; and 
(4)  A description of the width, slope and specifications for the driveway. 
(b)  The application shall be signed by both the owner and occupant of the abutting premises, and shall be accompanied by an inspection and permit fee. The amount of the inspection and permit fee shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 21-5; Code 1995, § 90-127) 
Sec. 94-149. - Same-Inspection of proposed driveway; issuance. 
(a)  The engineering department shall inspect the place where the proposed driveway is to be constructed and the specifications for the construction. If the engineering department is satisfied that the proposed driveway can be constructed according to the specifications submitted in a way as to be safe to the travelling public along the public sidewalks, he shall issue a permit for the construction of such driveway. 
(b)  If an inspection indicates to the engineering department that the width, specifications or slope of the driveway would constitute an unsafe condition, such department shall require of the applicant such change in width, slope and specifications of the driveway as will not constitute a dangerous condition to the travelling public along the sidewalk before the engineering department issues such permit. 
(Code 1973, § 21-6; Code 1995, § 90-128) 
Sec. 94-150. - Inspection after construction; notice. 
(a)  The engineering department shall inspect all driveways for which a permit has been issued to determine that the driveway has been constructed in accordance with the width, slope and specification of the application. 
(b)  If, upon inspection, the person constructing the driveway has neglected and failed to build a driveway in accordance with the width, slope and specifications of the application, the engineering department shall notify him in writing of the variance between the application and the actual construction. The applicant shall, within ten days after receipt of such notice, correct the construction to be in accordance with the application. 
(Code 1973, § 21-7; Code 1995, § 90-129) 
Sec. 94-151. - Violation of article. 
    Any person who shall construct a driveway across a sidewalk in the city at a different width, slope or specification from that contained in the application required by section 94-148, and after a ten days' notice to correct the defects fails or neglects to correct the construction to be in accordance with the application, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-8; Code 1995, § 90-130) 
Secs. 94-152-94-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OBSTRUCTIONS 

Sec. 94-171. - Permit required. 
    No person shall obstruct any street or sidewalk or other public way so as to prevent the free passage of persons on such streets, sidewalks or other public ways without first obtaining a permit from the chief of police. 
(Code 1973, § 21-62; Code 1995, § 90-151) 
Sec. 94-172. - Showcases on sidewalks. 
    No person shall erect or construct upon any sidewalk or any part thereof any showcase or device for advertising purposes, or place any obstruction of any kind or nature on any sidewalk. 
(Code 1973, § 21-69; Code 1995, § 90-152) 
Sec. 94-173. - Meter boxes and appliances; exact grade required; no projections. 
    All gas meters and water meter boxes, cutoffs, pipes and other appliances in the sidewalks or streets of the city shall be placed on an exact grade so as not to project above or be an obstruction in the sidewalk or street. They shall be placed within 12 inches of the curb or curbline. Any appliances not complying with this section may be condemned, as other nuisances are condemned and removed. 
(Code 1973, § 21-74; Code 1995, § 90-153) 
Sec. 94-174. - Placement of pipes and tanks; depth below grade. 
    All service lines for water and gas shall be laid or placed at least 18 inches below grade and all gasoline or oil service tanks shall be placed at least 21/2 feet below the surface of the street or sidewalk. 
(Code 1973, § 21-28; Code 1995, § 90-154) 
Sec. 94-175. - Cellars and vaults; entrances. 
(a)  No person shall leave open, or cause to be left open, the opening to any cellar or vault underneath the sidewalk when the opening is not in actual use, or at night. 
(b)  No person shall allow the entrance to any cellar or vault under any sidewalk under his control to remain in such condition as to render it unsafe or dangerous to persons using the sidewalk. 
(Code 1973, § 21-30; Code 1995, § 90-155) 
Secs. 94-176-94-203. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - HOUSE NUMBERS 

Sec. 94-204. - Display of number; costs. 
(a)  The city council shall have power at any time, by resolution, to require the owners of all buildings to have a number of plain, black figures on a light background put on each house within the city limits in such a conspicuous place as to be legible from the street. The letters shall be not less than two inches in size, and placed on the house by some person designated by the city council to do the work. 
(b)  The owner shall pay such person for each house on which figures are placed. The owners shall be allowed to place on their houses gilt or ornamental figures if they see fit. The amount of the fee paid to the person affixing the house numbers shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 21-17; Code 1995, § 90-176) 
Sec. 94-205. - Displaying unassigned number. 
    No person shall use or display any street number to designate the location of any property owned or controlled by such person, unless such number has been assigned to such property in accordance with the house number plan established by the city. 
(Code 1973, § 21-18; Code 1995, § 90-177) 
Sec. 94-206. - Numbering new buildings; time limit. 
    Every owner or occupant of any building hereafter erected in this city shall within 30 days after the erection of the building, place a number upon the building according to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 21-19; Code 1995, § 90-178) 
Sec. 94-207. - Destruction or change of numbers. 
    No person shall take down, alter, deface or destroy any number assigned to any building or place, retain, substitute or permit to be placed, retained or substituted an erroneous or improper number on any building. 
(Code 1973, § 21-20; Code 1995, § 90-179) 
Secs. 94-208-94-237. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PARADES 

Sec. 94-238. - Permit-Required. 
    No person shall publicly solicit persons together at any place for the purpose of engaging in a parade, procession or other public demonstration on the streets unless a permit for such parade, procession or other public demonstration has been previously secured as required by section 90-202. 
(Code 1973, § 15-148; Code 1995, § 90-201) 
Sec. 94-239. - Same-Procedure for securing. 
(a)  Parade to be in accord with permit specifications. No parade or procession shall occupy, march or proceed along any street except in accordance with a written permit, issued by the police department and such other regulations as are set forth in this chapter or other city ordinances which may apply. 
(b)  Application; contents. Application to conduct such parade or procession shall be made in writing to the chief of police by the person in charge, control or responsible thereof or therefor. Such application shall set forth the route along which such parade or procession is to proceed, the time of starting, the name of the person in control or responsible thereof or therefor, and the purpose of such parade or procession. 
(c)  Investigation of applicant. Upon such application being made, the police chief shall investigate or cause to be investigated the person making the application and the truth of the statements made in such application regarding the purpose or object of such parade or procession. 
(d)  Issuance. If the police chief shall find that such parade or procession will not in any manner tend to a breach of the peace, or unnecessarily interfere with the public use of the streets of the city or the peace and quiet of the inhabitants thereof, it shall issue such permit to the person making application therefor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-21; Code 1995, § 90-202) 
Sec. 94-240. - Parade escort required. 
    An escort shall be required for all parades and processions. The escort required shall be persons who are skilled in directing traffic. If not off-duty police officers, they shall be especially commissioned by the chief of the police department as city police officers in order to have authority to direct the traffic of other vehicles that are likely to endanger persons participating in the parade. 
(Code 1973, § 21-22; Code 1995, § 90-203) 
Sec. 94-241. - Parade column required; escort's position. 
    Parades passing over the streets of the city by automobile shall maintain a column with the escort at the head of the column or at points of danger from intersecting traffic. 
(Code 1973, § 21-23; Code 1995, § 90-204) 
Sec. 94-242. - Marking of parade automobiles; red lights may be ignored. 
(a)  The automobiles in the parade shall keep their headlights lighted or shall have a distinguishing mark or a pennant to indicate that the automobile is a part of the parade. 
(b)  Automobiles so marked as a part of the parade under escort may proceed across traffic control signals where the light is red. 
(Code 1973, § 21-24; Code 1995, § 90-205) 
Sec. 94-243. - Interference with parade by automobiles. 
    No automobile shall cut into, between or in front of a parade proceeding under escort and marked as provided in section 94-242. 
(Code 1973, § 21-25; Code 1995, § 90-206) 
Chapter 98 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Sales and use taxes generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-200 et seq.; state sales and use tax, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 98-1. - Conversion of city taxes for personal use. 
    No officer or person charged with the collection of taxes, general or special, for the city, shall embezzle or fraudulently convert to his own use, or fraudulently secrete with intent to convert to his own use, such taxes, or any portion thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 15-32; Code 1995, § 94-1) 
Sec. 98-2. - Finance director. 
    The finance director is hereby authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
Secs. 98-3-98-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SALES AND USE TAX 

Sec. 98-23. - Provisions of state sales tax statutes applicable to this article and taxes levied. 
    The taxes levied by section 98-25 shall be subject to all definitions, exceptions, exemptions, proceedings, requirements, rules, regulations, provisions, discounts, penalties, fines, punishments, and deductions that are applicable to the taxes levied by the state sales tax statutes, except where inapplicable or where otherwise provided in this chapter, including all provisions of the state sales tax statutes for enforcement and collection of taxes. 
(Code 1995, § 94-26; Ord. No. 2489, § 2, 8-22-1989) 
Sec. 98-24. - State statutes applicable to excise taxes levied in section 98-26. 
    The taxes levied by section 98-26 shall be subject to all definitions, exceptions, exemptions, proceedings, requirements, rules, regulations, provisions, discounts, penalties, fines, punishments and deductions that are applicable to the taxes levied by the state use tax statutes, except where inapplicable or where otherwise provided in this chapter, including all provisions of the state use tax statutes for enforcement and collection of taxes. 
(Code 1995, § 94-27; Ord. No. 2489, § 4, 8-22-1989) 
Sec. 98-25. - Levy of privilege tax on businesses; application of rates against gross sales or receipts. 
    There is hereby levied, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law, and shall be collected as provided in this section, a privilege or license tax against the person on account of the business activities and in the amount to be determined by the application of rates against gross sales, or gross receipts, as the case may be, as follows: 
(1)  Upon every person including the state, the University of Alabama, Auburn University and all other institutions of higher learning in the state, whether such institutions be denominational, state, county or municipal institutions and any association or other agency or instrumentality of such institutions, engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling at retail any tangible personal property whatsoever, including merchandise and commodities of every kind and character, not including, however, bonds or other evidences of debts or stocks, nor sale of material and supplies to any person for use in fulfilling a contract for the painting, repair or reconditioning of vessels, barges, ships, other watercraft and commercial fishing vessels of over five tons load displacement as registered with the U.S. Coast Guard and licensed by the state of department of conservation and natural resources, an amount equal to four percent of the gross proceeds of sales of the business except where a different amount is expressly provided in this section; provided, however, that any person engaging or continuing in business as a retailer and wholesaler or jobber shall pay the tax required on the gross proceeds of retail sales of such business at the rates specified, when his books are kept so as to show separately the gross proceeds of sales of each business, and when his books are not so kept he shall pay the tax as retailer on the gross sales of the business. 
(2)  Upon every person engaged, or continuing within the city in the business of conducting or operating places of amusement or entertainment, billiard and pool rooms, bowling alleys, amusement devices, musical devices, theaters, opera houses, moving picture shows, vaudevilles, amusement parks, athletic contests, including wrestling matches, prizefights, boxing and wrestling exhibitions, football and baseball games, including athletic contests, conducted by or under the auspices of any educational institution within the city or any athletic association thereof, or other association whether such institution or association is a denominational, a state or county, or a municipal institution or association or a state, county or city school or other institution, association or school, skating rinks, race tracks, golf courses or any other place at which any exhibition, display, amusement or entertainment is offered to the public or place when an admission fee is charged, including public bathing places, public dancehalls of every kind and description within the city, an amount equal to four percent of the gross receipts of any such business. Provided, however, notwithstanding any language to the contrary in the prior portion of this article, the tax provisions so specified shall not apply to any athletic event conducted by a public or nonpublic primary or secondary school or any athletic event conducted by or under the auspices of the Alabama High School Athletic Association. The tax amount which would have been collected pursuant to this article shall continue to be collected by the public or nonpublic primary or secondary school, but shall be retained by the school which collected it and shall be used by the school for school purposes. 
(3)  Upon every person engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling at retail machines used in mining, quarrying, compounding, processing and manufacturing of tangible personal property, an amount equal to 11/2 percent of the gross proceeds of the sale of such machines; provided that the term "machines," as used in this subsection, shall include machinery which is used for mining, quarrying, compounding, processing or manufacturing tangible personal property, and the parts of such machines, attachments and replacements thereof, which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machines and which are necessary to the operation of such machines and are customarily so used. 
(4)  Upon every person engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling at retail any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer, an amount equal to two percent of the gross proceeds of sale of such automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer, or mobile home setup materials and supplies; provided where a person subject to the tax provided for in this subsection withdraws from his stock in trade any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer, for the use by him or his employee or agent in the operation of such business, there shall be paid, in lieu of the tax levied in this subsection, a fee of $5.00 per year or part thereof during which such automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer shall remain the property of such person. Each such year or part thereof shall begin with the day or anniversary date, as the case may be, or such withdrawal and shall run for the 12 succeeding months or part thereof during which such automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer shall remain the property of such person. Where any used automobile vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer is taken in trade or in a series of trades, as a credit or part payment on the sale of a new or used vehicle, the tax levied in this subsection shall be paid on the net difference, that is, the price of the new or used vehicle sold, less the credit for the used vehicle taken in trade. 
(5)  Upon every person engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling at retail any machine, machinery or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating and harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock or poultry on farms, and the parts of such machines, machinery or equipment, attachments and replacements therefor which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, and which are necessary to and customarily used in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, an amount equal to 11/2 percent of the gross proceeds of the sale thereof; provided, however, that the 11/2 percent rate prescribed in this subsection with respect to parts, attachments and replacements shall not apply to any automotive vehicle or trailer designed primarily for public highway use, except farm trailers used primarily in the production and harvesting of agricultural commodities. Where any used machine, machinery or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating, and harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock and poultry on farms is taken in trade or in a series of trades as a credit or part payment on a sale of a new or used machine, machinery or equipment, the tax levied in this subsection shall be paid on the net difference, that is, the price of the new or used machine, machinery or equipment sold, less the credit for the used machine, machinery or equipment taken in trade. 
(6)  Upon every person engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling through coin-operated dispensing machines, food and food products for human consumption, not including beverages other than coffee, milk, milk products and substitutes therefor, there is hereby levied a tax equal to three percent of the cost of such food, food products and beverages sold through such machines, which cost for the purpose of this subsection shall be the gross proceeds of sales of such business. 
(Code 1995, § 94-28; Ord. No. 2489, § 1, 8-22-1989; Ord. No. 2552, § I(1), 9-17-1991) 
Sec. 98-26. - Levy of excise taxes on storage; use; consumption of tangible personal property purchased at retail. 
(a)  Imposed. An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property, not including materials and supplies bought for use in fulfilling a contract for the painting, repairing or reconditioning of vessels, barges, ships, other watercraft and commercial fishing vessels of over five tons load displacement as registered with the U.S. Coast Guard and licensed by the state department of conservation and natural resources, purchased at retail on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived for storage, use or other consumption in the city, except as provided in subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section at the rate of four percent of the sales price of such property within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Machines used in mining; compounding; manufacturing of property. An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of any machines used in mining, quarrying, compounding, processing and manufacturing of tangible personal property purchased at retail on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived at the rate of 11/2 percent of the sales price of any such machine, within the corporate limits of the city; provided the term "machine," as used in this subsection, shall include machinery which is used for mining, quarrying, compounding, processing, or manufacturing tangible personal property, and parts of such machines, attachments and replacements therefor, which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machines and which are necessary to the operation of such machines and are customarily so used. 
(c)  Automotive vehicles; truck trailers; semitrailers; house trailers; mobile home setup materials and supplies. An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer, or house trailer and mobile home setup materials and supplies, including but not limited to steps, blocks, anchoring, cable pipes and any other materials pertaining thereto, purchased at retail on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived for storage, use or other consumption in the city at the rate of two percent of the sales price of any such automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer, or house trailer, and mobile home setup materials and supplies as specified above within the corporate limits of the city. Where any used automotive vehicle, truck trailer, or semitrailer or house trailer is taken in trade, or in a series of trades, as a credit or part payment on the sale of a new or used vehicle, the tax levied in this subsection shall be paid on the net difference, that is, the price of the new or used vehicle sold, less the credit for the used vehicle taken in trade. 
(d)  Machines, machinery or equipment used on farms, in planting, cultivating and harvesting or production of produce, livestock or poultry. An excise tax is hereby levied and imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of any machine, machinery or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating and harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock or poultry on farms, and the parts of such machines, machinery or equipment, attachments and replacements therefor which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, and which are necessary to and customarily used in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment which is purchased at retail after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, for the storage, use or other consumption in the city at the rate of 11/2 percent of the sales price of such property within the corporate limits of the city, regardless of whether the retailer is or is not engaged in the business in this city; provided, however, that the 11/2 percent rate prescribed in this subsection with respect to parts, attachments, and replacements shall not apply to any automotive vehicle or trailer designed primarily for public highway use, except farm trailers used primarily in the production and harvesting of agricultural commodities. Where any used machine, machinery or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating, and harvesting farm products or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock and poultry on farms is taken in trade or in a series of trades, as a credit or part payment on the sale of a new or used machine, machinery or equipment, the tax levied in this subsection shall be paid on the net difference, that is, the price of the new or used machine, machinery or equipment, sold less the credit for the used machine, machinery or equipment taken in trade. 
(Code 1995, § 94-29; Ord. No. 2489, § 3, 8-22-1989; Ord. No. 2552, § II(3), 9-17-1991) 
Sec. 98-27. - Article cumulative to city license schedule or ordinance. 
    This article shall not be construed to repeal any of the provisions of the city license schedule or ordinance of the city, but shall be held to be cumulative, and the amounts of all other license taxes imposed by the city by its city license schedule or ordinance. 
(Code 1995, § 94-30; Ord. No. 2489, § 5, 8-22-1989) 
Sec. 98-28. - [Sales tax holiday.] 
(a)  Under the authority granted in Section 1 of Act No. 2017-120 of the Alabama Legislature, there shall be a sales tax holiday each year commencing the third Friday of July at 12:01 a.m. and ending the following Sunday at 12:00 midnight, during which time the payment of the sales tax collected by the City of Bessemer, Alabama will be exempt on the sale of "certain covered items" as the term "certain covered items" is defined in Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-210 et seq., as amended. 
(b)  If a vendor charges tax in error during this period, the vendor should refund the tax upon request of the customer. If the vendor fails to refund the tax, the vendor must remit the tax to the city. If taxes collected by the vendor in error are not refunded to the customer, the tax must be remitted to the city when filing and paying the taxes for the month of August. 
(Ord. No. 3459, §§ 1, 2, 4-19-2011; Ord. No. 3559, §§ 1, 2, 4-18-2017) 
Editor's note- Sections 1 and 2 of Ord. No. 3459, adopted April 19, 2011, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence codification as § 98-28 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 98-29-98-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RENTING, LEASING OF PERSONAL PROPERTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Leasing or renting tangible personal property generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-12-221 et seq. 

Sec. 98-58. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business means all activities which may be licensed under Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-90. 
    Gross proceeds means the value proceeding or accruing from the leasing or rental of tangible personal property, without any deduction on account of the cost of the property, so leased or rented, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, interest paid or any other expenses whatsoever, and without any deduction on account of loss, but shall not include proceeds accruing from charges made for the rental or use of hospital beds. 
    Leasing or rental means a transaction whereunder the person who owns or controls the possession of tangible personal property permits another person to have the possession or use thereof for a consideration and for the duration of a definite or indefinite period of time without transfer of the title to such property. The detention by the user thereof of freightcars, oxygen and acetylene tanks and similar property, in respect of which detention a demurrage or per diem charge is made against the user of such property, shall not be deemed to constitute a transaction whereunder property is leased or rented to another within the meaning of this article. 
    Tangible personal property means personal property which may be seen, weighed, measured, felt or touched or is in any other manner perceptible to the senses. The term "tangible personal property" shall not include stocks, bonds, notes, insurance or other contracts or securities. 
(Code 1995, § 94-51; Ord. No. 2490, § 1, 8-22-1989; Ord. No. 2553, § 1, 9-17-1991) 
Sec. 98-59. - Levy of tax. 
    There is hereby levied in addition to all privilege license taxes of every kind now imposed by law, and shall be collected as provided in this section, a privilege or license tax on each person engaging or continuing within the city in the business of leasing or renting tangible personal property. Such tax shall be in the amounts to be determined by the application of the rates against gross proceeds as follows: At the rate of four percent of the gross proceeds derived by the lessor or renter from the lease or rental of tangible personal property; provided the privilege or license tax on each person engaging or continuing within this city in the business of leasing or renting any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer shall be at the rate of 11/2 percent of the gross proceeds derived by the lessor from the lease or rental of such automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer; provided further that the tax levied in this section shall not apply to any leasing or rental, as lessor, by the state, or any municipality or county in the state. 
(Code 1995, § 94-52; Ord. No. 2553, § 1(2), 9-17-1991) 
Sec. 98-60. - Exemptions. 
    There shall be exempted from the computation of any tax due under this article the following: 
(1)  The gross proceeds accruing from the leasing or rental of film to a lessee who charges admission for viewing such film. 
(2)  The gross proceeds accruing from any charge in respect of the use of docks or docking facilities furnished for boats or other craft operated on waterways. 
(3)  The gross proceeds accruing from any charge made by a landlord to a tenant in respect to the leasing or furnishing of tangible personal property to be used on the premises of real property leased by the same landlord to the same tenant for use as a residence or dwelling place, including mobile homes. 
(4)  The gross proceeds accruing from the leasing or rental of tangible personal property to a lessee who acquires possession of the property for the purpose of leasing or renting to another the same property under a leasing or rental transaction subject to a tax under this article. 
(5)  The gross proceeds accruing from any charge made by a landlord to a tenant in respect to the leasing or furnishing of tangible personal property to be used on the premises of any room, lodging, or accommodations leased or rented to transients in any hotel, motel, inn, tourist camp, tourist cabin, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings or accommodations are regularly furnished to transients for a consideration. 
(6)  The gross proceeds accruing from the leasing or rental of tangible personal property which the city is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution or laws of the United States or under the constitution or laws of the state. 
(7)  The gross proceeds accruing from the leasing or rental of nuclear fuel assemblies, together with the nuclear material contained therein and other nuclear material used or useful in the production of electricity and assemblies containing ionizing radiation sources together with the ionizing radiation sources contained therein used or useful in medical treatment or scientific research. 
(8)  The gross proceeds accruing from a transaction whereunder the lessor leases a truck or tractor-trailer or semitrailer, for operation over the public roads and highways, and such lessor furnishes a driver for each such vehicle. 
(9)  The gross proceeds accruing from the leasing or rental of vehicles in interchange between regulated motor carriers on a per diem basis. 
(10)  The gross proceeds accruing from the leasing or rental of all structures, devices, facilities and identifiable components of any structure, device or facility thereof acquired primarily for the control, reduction or elimination of air or water pollution, and the gross proceeds accruing from the leasing or rental of all materials used or intended for use in structures built primarily for the control, reduction or elimination of air or water pollution. 
(11)  The gross proceeds derived by the lessor (which term includes a sublessor) from the leasing or rental of tangible personal property when the lessor and lessee (which term includes a sublessee) are wholly owned subsidiary corporations of the same parent corporation or one is the wholly owned subsidiary of the other, provided that the appropriate sales or use tax, if any was due, has been paid on such item of personal property, and provided further, that in the event of any subsequent subleasing of such tangible personal property to any person other than any such sister, parent or subsidiary corporation, any privilege or license tax due and payable with respect to such subsequent subleasing under the provisions hereof shall be paid. 
(12)  The gross proceeds accrued or accruing from any leases or rental contracts in effect before October 1, 1989; provided, however, that the exemption hereby afforded shall not apply to any renewal or extension of such leases or contracts and shall not apply to gross proceeds accruing after two years from October 1, 1989. 
(Code 1995, § 94-53; Ord. No. 2490, § 3, 8-22-1989) 
Sec. 98-61. - Tax due and payable in monthly installments; penalty for violation. 
    The privilege license tax levied under this article, except as otherwise provided, shall be due and payable in monthly installments on or before the 20th day of the month next succeeding the month in which the privilege license tax accrues. On or before such 20th day every person on whom the amounts levied under this article are imposed shall render to the city on a form prescribed by the city, a true and correct statement showing the gross proceeds of his business, for the next preceding month, the amount of gross proceeds which are not subject to the privilege license tax, or are not to be used as a measurement of the amounts due by such person and the nature thereof, together with such other information as the city may require, and at the time of making such monthly report such person shall compute the privilege license taxes due and shall pay to the city the amounts shown to be due. If any person subject hereto should fail to render any report required hereby or should willfully make a false statement of facts in the statements or returns required under this article, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. 
(Code 1995, § 94-54; Ord. No. 2490, § 4, 8-22-1989) 
Sec. 98-62. - Cash or credit rentals; method of tax payment. 
    Any person taxable under this article who makes cash or credit leases or rentals, may report such cash leases or rentals only, and he shall thereafter include in each monthly report all credit collections made during the month preceding, and shall pay the privilege license tax due thereon at the time of filing such report. 
(Code 1995, § 94-55; Ord. No. 2490, § 5, 8-22-1989) 
Sec. 98-63. - Recordkeeping; examination; penalty for violation. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person engaging or continuing in any business for which a privilege tax is imposed by this article to keep and preserve suitable records of the gross proceeds of any such business and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax for which he is liable under this article. It shall be the duty of every person to keep and preserve for a period of three years all invoices of gross proceeds, proceeding or accruing from the leasing or rental taxed in this article. All such books, invoices and other records shall be open for examination at any time by the city or its agent. Any person leasing, who in addition leases for re-leasing, shall keep his books so as to show separately the gross proceeds of leasing and the gross proceeds of leasing for re-leasing. Each occurrence of a failure to keep records or allow examination thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person who shall fail to keep records as required in this section or who shall refuse to permit such examination thereof, or who violates any other provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. 
(Code 1995, § 94-56; Ord. No. 2490, § 6, 8-22-1989) 
Sec. 98-64. - Penalty for late payment. 
    Any person who fails to pay the tax levied by this article within the time required by this article shall pay, in addition to the tax, a penalty of ten percent of the amount of tax due, and such penalty to be assessed and collected as part of the tax, provided the city, if a good and sufficient reason is shown, may waive or remit the penalty of ten percent or a portion thereof. 
(Code 1995, § 94-57; Ord. No. 2490, § 9, 8-22-1989) 
Secs. 98-65-98-88. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LODGING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Transient occupancy tax generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-26-1 et seq. 

Sec. 98-89. - Levy of license tax. 
(a)  License and tax required. Every person engaging in the business in the city or its police jurisdiction of renting or furnishing any rooms, lodgings or accommodations to transients in any hotel, motel, inn, tourist cabin, tourist camp or other place in which rooms, lodgings or accommodations are regularly furnished to transients for a consideration shall take out and pay to the city a license as follows: 
(1)  Business conducted in city limits. If such business is being conducted within the corporate limits of the city, the license shall be an amount determined by the application at the rate of six percent of the charge for such room, rooms, lodgings or accommodations including the charge for the use of the rental of personal properties or services purchased in such room. 
(2)  Business conducted outside of city limits. If such business is conducted outside the corporate limits but within the police jurisdiction of the city, the license tax levied in this article shall be an amount equal to one-half of the amount of the license within the corporate limits. 
(3)  Payable in monthly installments. The license tax levied under this article shall be in addition to every other license tax levied and shall be due and payable in monthly installments on or before the 20th day of the month next succeeding the month in which the license accrued. 
(b)  Payment to city clerk and treasurer. The licensee shall compute the amount of tax due and pay the same to the city clerk and treasurer at the time of making the monthly report required. 
(c)  Evidence of amount due. Licensees may, if they desire, submit a copy of the license required to be submitted to the county, as evidence of the amount due. 
(Code 1995, § 94-81; Ord. No. 2224, 1-17-1984; Ord. No. 2554, 9-17-1991; Ord. No. 3465, § I, 6-21-2011) 
Sec. 98-90. - Penalty for violation. 
    If any person subject to this article should fail to render any report required hereby or should willfully make a false statement of facts in the statements or returns required under this article, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. 
Chapter 102 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 

Sec. 102-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to it in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cable television service means any and all services provided by or through the facilities of any cable television system or closed circuit coaxial cable communications system, or any microwave or similar transmission service used in connection with any cable television system or other similar closed circuit coaxial cable communications system. 
(Code 1995, § 26-1; Ord. No. 2166, § 1, 3-16-1982) 
Sec. 102-2. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person violating this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on such conviction shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. 
(Code 1995, § 26-2; Ord. No. 2166, § 4, 3-16-1982) 
Sec. 102-3. - Destruction or tampering with equipment; illegal use of signals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person without the authority of the television company to intentionally or in any way obstruct, injure, break, tamper with or destroy or in any manner interfere with or interrupt any cable television service, line or cable or the transmission of television signals in connection with such line or cable, or in any manner use and receive any television, radio, audio or video signal from any unauthorized connection with such line or cable, or to take, carry away, injure or destroy any of the posts, cables, wires, insulators, fixtures, equipment, installations or other things belonging to any cable television service or used in connection with the furnishings of cablevision services. 
(Code 1995, § 26-3; Ord. No. 2166, § 2, 3-16-1982) 
State Law reference- Criminal tampering, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 13A-7-24-13A-7-26. 
Sec. 102-4. - Diversion of signals; fraud. 
    The presence at any time on or about such wires, cables or cablevision equipment of any device or wire resulting in the diversion of television, radio, audio or video signals shall constitute prima facie evidence of knowledge and intent to divert on the part of the person having custody or control of the room or place where such signals are diverted and received, and shall constitute prima facie evidence of the intention on the part of such person, to defraud and shall bring such person prima facie within the scope, meaning and penalties of this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 26-4; Ord. No. 2166, § 3, 3-16-1982) 
Chapter 106 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Motor vehicles and traffic generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-1-1 et seq.; powers of local authorities generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5-1; appearance upon arrest for misdemeanor generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-1-4; depositing driver's license in lieu of bail, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 32-1-5, 32-1-6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 106-1. - Adoption of traffic code. 
    The provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 32-5-1 et seq. and 32-5A-1 et seq., regulating the operation of motor vehicles and rules of the road are adopted by reference in this chapter as if fully set out. 
(Code 1995, § 98-1) 
Sec. 106-2. - Obstruction of driver's view at intersection; exceptions; obstruction defined. 
(a)  No person who is the owner or occupant of any real property within the city limits abutting upon any public street or avenue shall erect, construct or maintain, or permit the erection, construction or maintenance of any obstruction of such height, size or nature as to obstruct the view of the driver of a vehicle upon such public street in approaching the intersection of such public street with another public street of the city. 
(b)  The obstruction shall be deemed to obstruct the view of the driver of a vehicle upon such street in approaching an intersection of another street therewith, when, at any time during the last 50 feet of his approach to such intersection, the presence of such obstruction upon the property prevents the driver having a clear and uninterrupted view of such approach to such intersection and of the traffic upon all of the thoroughfares or streets entering such intersection for a distance of 200 feet from such intersection. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply within the fire limits of the city, nor shall they apply to property abutting or adjoining the intersection of public streets in the city where automatic signal traffic lights are at all times maintained and operated by the city. 
(d)  For the purpose of this section the term "obstruction" means any bush, hedge, building, structure or other erection erected, maintained or situated along any public street or avenue within the city limits, and within 50 feet of the intersection of such street or avenue with another public street or avenue of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 21-76; Code 1995, § 98-3) 
Sec. 106-3. - Riding outside vehicles prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall ride upon the outside, upon the running board, or upon the fender of any vehicle upon the public streets of the city. 
(b)  No person other than a bus or truck employee in the discharge of his duty shall, without permission of the driver or other person in charge of the bus or truck and with the intention of being transported free and without paying the fare for such transportation, ride or attempt to ride on or about any bus or truck or any part thereof operated on any street in the city operating subject to a certificate of public convenience and necessity granted by the state public service commission. 
(Code 1973, § 22-72; Code 1995, § 98-7) 
Sec. 106-4. - Engine repair or adjustment on street prohibited. 
    No person operating a garage within the city limits or working for such person shall repair or adjust any automobile engine on the streets of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 22-73; Code 1995, § 98-8) 
Sec. 106-5. - Pedestrians crossing streets. 
    No pedestrian shall cross any street within the business district of the city, except and unless he crosses at an intersection, at a right angle to such street, and within the sidewalk lines of such street extended across such intersection. 
(Code 1973, § 22-79; Code 1995, § 98-10) 
Sec. 106-6. - Bicycles-Riding on sidewalks prohibited. 
    No person shall ride a bicycle along or on any sidewalk within the city limits. 
(Code 1973, § 21-40; Code 1995, § 98-12) 
Sec. 106-7. - Same-Warning devices required. 
    Any person riding a bicycle on the streets within the city limits shall have attached to the bicycle a warning device. Any person so riding a bicycle shall be required to sound the warning device on approaching any person on the streets. 
(Code 1973, § 21-41; Code 1995, § 98-13) 
Sec. 106-8. - Driving through processions; exception. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be driven through a procession except by permission of a police officer. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the vehicles carrying United States mail, ambulances and vehicles of the police and fire departments. 
(Code 1973, § 22-66; Code 1995, § 98-14) 
Sec. 106-9. - Movement of traffic on one-way streets, alleys and terraces. 
    Upon the streets and parts of streets and in those alleys or terraces described in the city traffic schedule as amended, which is adopted by reference and made a part hereof, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1973, § 22-59; Code 1995, § 98-16; Ord. No. 2018, § 1, 5-30-1978) 
State Law reference- Authority to provide one-way streets, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5-1. 
Sec. 106-10. - Speed limits. 
(a)  Any person driving a vehicle on a public thoroughfare within the city limits shall drive the vehicle at a careful and prudent speed not greater than is reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the public thoroughfare and to any other conditions then existing. No person shall drive any vehicle upon a public thoroughfare at such speed as to endanger the life, limb or property of any person. 
(b)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (a) of this section and except in those instances where a lower speed is specified, it shall be prima facie lawful for the driver of a vehicle to drive the vehicle at a speed not exceeding the speeds set forth in the city traffic schedule when such speed is safe and reasonable. 
(Code 1973, § 22-7; Code 1995, § 98-17) 
State Law reference- Establishment of speed limits generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-49-4; posting required, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-49-5. 
Sec. 106-11. - Turns. 
    No person shall make a left turn or a right turn at any of the locations described in the city traffic schedule. 
(Code 1973, § 22-62; Code 1995, § 98-19) 
Sec. 106-12. - U-turns. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, any vehicle, in crossing from one side of the street to the other, shall do so by turning to the left at the end of the block, so as to head in the same direction as the traffic on the side of the street to which the vehicle is going. 
(b)  No person operating a vehicle shall make a turn of 180 degrees, or what is commonly known as a U-turn, at any intersection where there is installed and in operation, a traffic control signal lamp. 
(Code 1973, § 22-63; Code 1995, § 98-20) 
State Law reference- Turns at intersections generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-130. 
Sec. 106-13. - Signage and emblems for city vehicles. 
(a)  All city vehicles shall have signage and emblems as hereinafter set out. 
(b)  Automobiles and trucks shall be identified on both driver and passenger doors. The city seal will be approximately six inches circular for automobiles and eight inches circular for trucks. 
(c)  Vehicles operated by the mayor shall be exempt from this section. 
(Code 1995, § 98-21; Ord. No. 3092, 12-21-1999) 
Secs. 106-14-106-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 106-45-106-61. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FINES AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 106-62. - Additional costs for moving violation. 
(a)  In accordance with Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5-313, there is established, imposed and assessed an additional penalty of $1.50 upon the driver of any motor vehicle convicted in the municipal court for an offense involving a moving traffic violation or being cited by a police officer in accordance with section 106-64. 
(b)  There is hereby assessed as additional costs for all convictions, whether based on state law or local ordinances, the additional sum of $16.00 which is required by Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-19-250. 
(Code 1973, § 22-20; Code 1995, § 98-51; Ord. No. 1977, § 1, 6-7-1977) 
Sec. 106-63. - Fines and costs for moving traffic violations. 
    The fines and costs are authorized for summary disposition of moving traffic violations in the city in accordance with Rule 19 of the Judicial Rules of Administration, Alabama Rules of Court, 1977, as amended, shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and will be available for public examination in a fines schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 22-19; Code 1995, § 98-52; Ord. No. 1973, § 1, 5-3-1977; Ord. No. 1977, § 1, 6-7-1977; Ord. No. 2413, §§ 1, 2, 10-13-1987; Ord. No. 3165, § 1, 11-20-2001) 
Sec. 106-64. - Traffic violation citation; presumption as to offender. 
(a)  The officer noting a traffic violation shall issue a citation designating the date, time, location and offense and the name of the officer who issues the citation. The citation shall also contain the make of the car and the license number. 
(b)  It is declared that the person in whose name the motor vehicle is registered presumptively committed the offense for which the citation has been issued. This presumption shall remain as a matter of law until the registered owner shall make further explanation as to the name and address of the person who had possession of the motor vehicle at such time and date. 
(Code 1973, § 22-15; Code 1995, § 98-53) 
State Law reference- Requirement of use of uniform traffic ticket and complaint, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-12-53. 
Sec. 106-65. - Auto defect repair; inspection; citation voided; fine payment. 
(a)  Any person cited under the provisions of this chapter and charged with defective brakes, driving without lights, no taillight, one headlight out, or unnecessary noise shall, within seven days following the date the officer issues the citation for such offense, have the right to have such automobile repaired so as to correct the defect noted, and any other defects of like manner then present on the car. If such person shall then present such automobile to the city police department at the police building between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. during such seven-day period for examination and the defects have been repaired, the citation shall then be voided by the inspecting officer. 
(b)  If such citation is voided, the date, time and place of the examination shall be noted on the citation given to the motorist and shall then be noted on the copy held by the police department, and a copy of such ticket showing the inspection shall be forwarded to the office of the city clerk and treasurer so that no arrest order shall issue. 
(c)  If the payment of the minimum fine has not been paid or the citation voided as provided in this section, then such motorist must pay the fine in the manner provided in section 106-63. 
(Code 1973, § 22-19.1; Code 1995, § 98-54) 
Sec. 106-66. - Remittance to state treasurer. 
    The clerk and treasurer shall remit to the state treasurer the additional costs collected under the provisions of sections 106-62 and 106-63. 
(Code 1973, § 22-21; Code 1995, § 98-55) 
Secs. 106-67-106-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate or prohibit parking, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5-1(e); authority to designate stop, yield intersections, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-113. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 106-91. - Purpose of article. 
    This article shall be deemed and construed to be an exercise of the police power of the city and for the preservation and protection of public safety. All of its provisions shall be liberally construed with a view to the effectuation of such purpose. 
(Code 1973, § 22-57; Code 1995, § 98-76) 
Sec. 106-92. - Stopping vehicle in street. 
    No vehicle in the city, unless blocked by other traffic, or to allow pedestrians or other vehicular traffic to cross its path, shall stop in any public street of the city unless it is parked in the manner provided for in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 22-86; Code 1995, § 98-77) 
Sec. 106-93. - Designation of stop intersections; stopping for signs. 
(a)  The intersections described in the city traffic schedule are designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as required. 
(b)  All vehicles while traveling along any public street in the city, and before entering the intersection of such street with any other street in the city, shall come to a stop at a point within 20 feet of such intersection and before entering such intersection, if the city has erected and is maintaining a stop sign clearly visible at such intersection and located on the right-hand side of and facing the traffic on such street in the direction in which such vehicle is then traveling. 
(Code 1973, § 22-80; Code 1995, § 98-78) 
Sec. 106-94. - Driving upon parking lots-Speed limit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle upon any parking lot in the city in excess of 15 miles per hour. 
(Code 1995, § 98-79; Ord. No. 1912, § 1, 9-16-1975) 
Sec. 106-95. - Same-Willful or wanton disregard of safety of persons or property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle upon any parking lot in the city in wilful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property. 
(Code 1995, § 98-80; Ord. No. 1912, § 1, 9-16-1975) 
Sec. 106-96. - Violation of parking ordinance; presumption of vehicle owner's violation. 
(a)  No person shall park, cause to be parked, or knowingly permit an automobile or other motor vehicle which he owns to be parked on any street in the city in violation of any ordinance of the city. 
(b)  The presence of an unattended automobile or other motor vehicle parked on the streets of the city in violation of an ordinance of the city shall raise a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the automobile or other motor vehicle committed or authorized the parking violation. The burden of proof shall be upon the registered owner to show otherwise. 
(Code 1973, § 22-81; Code 1995, § 98-81) 
State Law reference- Presumption as to person parking in violation of ordinance, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5-152. 
Sec. 106-97. - Parallel parking; designated areas. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided in this article, no vehicle shall remain stationed upon any public street unless it is placed parallel to the curb, with the inside wheels at a distance of not more than 18 inches from the curbline of the street. 
(b)  Any vehicle, when not in motion, shall be parked with all wheels parallel to, and the inside wheels within 18 inches of the curb on the right-hand side, reckoned from the direction in which the front of such vehicle is headed, along any streets and avenues described in the city traffic schedule. 
(c)  No vehicle within the fire limits shall be stopped with its left side to the curb. 
(Code 1973, § 22-82; Code 1995, § 98-82) 
State Law reference- Additional parking regulations, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-138. 
Sec. 106-98. - Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets. 
    No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in the city traffic schedule. 
(Code 1973, § 22-83; Code 1995, § 98-83) 
Sec. 106-99. - Parking time limited on certain streets. 
    Except on Saturday and Sunday and designated holidays, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in the city traffic schedule upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in the city traffic schedule. 
(Code 1973, § 22-84; Code 1995, § 98-84) 
Sec. 106-100. - Parking in alleys. 
    No person shall park any vehicle upon any public alley of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 22-88; Code 1995, § 98-85) 
Sec. 106-101. - Parked vehicles of excessive length; lights. 
    No person shall park any vehicle upon or along any street or avenue of the city in the nighttime, where the length of such vehicle exceeds 20 feet or where the height of such vehicle exceeds seven feet unless parking lights are operated and maintained on such vehicle as provided by law. 
(Code 1973, § 22-94; Code 1995, § 98-86) 
Sec. 106-102. - Exemption of certain vehicles. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to public or private ambulances, police cars, police motorcycles and firefighting equipment of the city, when they are being used in their regular course of duty. 
(Code 1973, § 22-96; Code 1995, § 98-87) 
Secs. 106-103-106-132. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOADING ZONES 

Sec. 106-133. - Designation. 
    The locations described in the city traffic schedule are designated as loading zones. 
(Code 1973, § 22-101; Code 1995, § 98-101) 
Sec. 106-134. - Parking. 
    No person shall park or leave standing any automobile or motor truck or other vehicle on or along, and within a distance of 20 feet of the curbline of any portions of the public streets and avenues of the city designated in section 106-133 as a loading zone. 
(Code 1973, § 22-102; Code 1995, § 98-102) 
Sec. 106-135. - Marking. 
    The curbline on and along each parking space described in the city traffic schedule shall be painted yellow. A sign shall be placed on or along each prohibited parking space with substantially the following legend printed thereon: "LOADING ZONE-NO PARKING." 
(Code 1973, § 22-103; Code 1995, § 98-103) 
Sec. 106-136. - Use restriction. 
    The prohibited parking zones described in the city traffic schedule shall be used only for the loading and unloading of motor trucks or other freight vehicles serving businesses located in the block where such prohibited zone is designated. No prohibited zone shall be used as a parking place for any vehicle. 
(Code 1973, § 22-104; Code 1995, § 98-104) 
Sec. 106-137. - Bus loading zones-Designation. 
    The locations described in the city traffic schedule are designated as bus loading zones. 
(Code 1973, § 22-105; Code 1995, § 98-105) 
Sec. 106-138. - Same-Parking. 
    No person shall park or leave standing any automobile, motor truck or other vehicle on or along and within a distance of 20 feet of the curbline of any designated portions of the public streets and avenues designated in section 106-137 as bus loading zones. 
(Code 1973, § 22-106; Code 1995, § 98-106) 
Sec. 106-139. - Same-Marking. 
    The curbline on and along the prohibited parking spaces designated in the city traffic schedule as bus loading zones shall be painted yellow. A sign shall be placed on or along each such prohibited parking space with substantially the following wording: "NO PARKING-BUS LOADING ZONE." 
(Code 1973, § 22-107; Code 1995, § 98-107) 
Sec. 106-140. - Same-Use restriction. 
    The prohibited parking zones described in the city traffic schedule shall be used only as loading and unloading zones for common carriers of passengers for hire operating bus transportation in or through the city. 
(Code 1973, § 22-108; Code 1995, § 98-108) 
Sec. 106-141. - Loading zones designated in parking zones; use. 
(a)  The chief of police shall mark off loading zones in the parking zones described in the city traffic schedule and in any other zones established. 
(b)  The loading zones shall be designated by lines painted or durably marked on the curbing or surface of the street. Each space so marked shall be used for the purpose of loading and unloading. 
(Code 1973, § 22-44; Code 1995, § 98-109) 
Secs. 106-142-106-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TWENTY-FOUR-HOUR PARKING 

Sec. 106-166. - Parking over 24 hours. 
    No person shall park any vehicle or allow any vehicle to stand continuously for more than 24 hours upon the public streets of the city in the territory described in the city traffic schedule. 
(Code 1973, § 22-91; Code 1995, § 98-121) 
Secs. 106-167-106-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - METERED PARKING 

Sec. 106-186. - Parking spaces designated; use. 
    The chief of police shall mark off individual parking spaces in the parking zones described in the city traffic schedule and in any other zones established. The parking spaces shall be designated by lines painted or durably marked on the curbing or surface of the street. At each space so marked, no person shall park any vehicle in such a way that such vehicle will not be entirely within the limits of the space so designated. 
(Code 1973, § 22-45; Code 1995, § 98-131) 
Secs. 106-187-106-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - TWO-HOUR PARKING 

Sec. 106-211. - In front of city police department; limited use; penalty for violation. 
(a)  No person shall park any vehicle in front of the city police department on the north side of that section of 15th Street, located between Alabama Avenue and 1st Avenue between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except and unless that person has business to conduct in the police department building, and then the vehicle shall not remain parked in a space in excess of two hours. 
(b)  Any person parking a vehicle in the area designated by the provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to the penalty in section 1-8. 
(Code 1995, § 98-141; Ord. No. 2590, §§ 2, 3, 6-15-1993) 
Sec. 106-212. - On streets between 8:00 a.m. until 6:00. p.m., Mondays through Saturdays except holidays. 
(a)  No motor vehicle shall be parked upon the streets of the city for more than two hours from 8:00 a.m. until 6:00 p.m. on Mondays through Saturdays, except holidays in the following areas: 
(1)  On both sides of First Avenue between 18th and 20th Streets; 
(2)  On both sides of Second Avenue between 17th and 21st Streets; 
(3)  On both sides of Third Avenue from 17th Street to 20th Street; 
(4)  On the Northeast side of 17th Street between Second Avenue and Third Avenue; 
(5)  On both sides of 18th Street between First Avenue and Fourth Avenue; 
(6)  On both sides of 19th Street between First Avenue and Sixth Avenue. 
(b)  The chief of police shall have the authority to designate certain parking spaces in the areas described in subsection (a) of this section as loading zones, handicapped parking spaces or less than two-hour parking. 
(Code 1995, § 98-142; Ord. No. 2625, 6-21-1994) 
Secs. 106-213-106-232. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RAILROADS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Railroad companies using municipal streets are required to keep their tracks, the streets between their rails, and 18 inches of the streets on each side of their tracks in repair as may be prescribed by the municipal governing body, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-49-3. 

Sec. 106-233. - Conformity to grade of streets. 
(a)  Every railroad company building a railway through the streets of the city shall be required to conform strictly to the grade of such street. Any railroad company shall, before laying down its tracks in or upon any street within the city limits, first obtain from the city engineer the proper grade of such street over which such line of railway is to run, if such street has been brought to grade. Such road shall be put on exact grade so as not to interfere with or impede travel. If such street has not been brought to grade, then such railway shall be required to conform to the then surface of the street, so as not to interfere with or impede travel over and along such street. 
(b)  If any company shall lay down tracks on streets not brought to grade, the right of the city to grade such streets in the future shall not be prejudiced. The owners, proprietors or lessees of such railway tracks shall, whenever required by the city council, raise or lower such tracks so as to conform to the grade of the streets without cost to the city. 
(Code 1973, § 18-5; Code 1995, § 98-161) 
Sec. 106-234. - Assessment of costs of improvements against railroads. 
(a)  If a railroad track on any street or highway improved or reimproved, the cost of such improvement, except stormwater and sanitary sewers, between the tracks and the rails of the tracks and, in case there are two or more tracks, the space between such tracks and 18 inches on each side of the tracks, including switches and turnouts, shall be paid by the owner of the railroad and shall be assessed against and form a lien on the railroad and the property connected therewith. If stormwater sewers are constructed which drain, serve or benefit the streets or avenues or rights-of-way on which a railroad is located, whether the sewer is a continued or separate system, there shall be assessed against such railroad a fair and just proportion of the cost of construction of such sewer, to be determined by the council, and such assessment shall be a lien like other assessments and may be collected in like manner, and the council may require the owners of such railroad to prepare or construct its tracks for the receipt of such paving or other improvements in a manner satisfactory to the council. 
(b)  If protection against storms and floods are constructed which protect or benefit streets or avenues or rights-of-way on which a railroad is located, whether the protection is a continued or separate system, there shall be assessed against such railroad a fair and just proportion of the cost of construction of such protection against storms and floods, to be determined by the city council, and such assessment shall be a lien like other assessments and may be collected in like manner; provided, however, that such assessments shall not exceed the increased value of such railroad by reason of the benefits received by such railroad from the construction of such protection. 
(Code 1973, § 18-6; Code 1995, § 98-162) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-48-19. 
Sec. 106-235. - Alterations or extensions; permit; distance of sidetrack extensions. 
(a)  No railroad company within the city limits shall make alterations in its lines, or extend its sidetracks or turnouts, without first obtaining permission from the city council. 
(b)  No railroad company shall extend sidetracks for a longer distance than one block. 
(Code 1973, § 18-7; Code 1995, § 98-163) 
Sec. 106-236. - Laying tracks; obstructions; rubbish removal. 
(a)  All railroad companies in the construction or repair of their roads or roadbeds shall carefully lay the ties and rails so as to prevent hindrance to the free passage of vehicles. They shall allow no holes or excavations to remain open sufficiently long to cause the same to hold stagnant water, or to disfigure the streets. 
(b)  No rubbish or abandoned work of any kind shall be left in such condition as to disfigure the streets, impede the free use of the streets or endanger persons or vehicles. 
(Code 1973, § 18-8; Code 1995, § 98-164) 
Sec. 106-237. - Culverts required; penalty. 
    At any point along a railroad where culverts for drainage may be deemed necessary by the city engineer, the owners, proprietors or lessees of such roads shall be required to put in good substantial culverts of sufficient capacity to carry off all water that may run through them. If any company, the owner, proprietor or lessee of such road, fails to build such culverts after due notice being given by the city council, such company shall not have the right to run cars through the city over such roads until the provisions of this section have been complied with. 
(Code 1973, § 18-9; Code 1995, § 98-165) 
Sec. 106-238. - Automatic signal warning lights and safety gates required; locations. 
(a)  The Alabama Great Southern Railroad Company shall provide, maintain and operate constantly, automatic crossing safety gates and automatic signal warning lights where its tracks cross the following streets within the city: First Street, Ninth Street, 14th Street, 15th Street, 16th Street, 19th Street and 20th Street. 
(b)  The crossing safety gates shall be erected and maintained by the railroad company in a manner approved by the city council. Such gates shall be erected in such a manner so as to prevent the passage of any vehicle over or upon such crossing when any train is approaching such crossings with sufficient nearness so as to constitute a menace to the safe crossing of any such crossing. 
(Code 1973, § 18-12; Code 1995, § 98-166) 
Sec. 106-239. - Blocking streets or sidewalks. 
(a)  No person shall block any of the streets or sidewalks of the city for a longer period of time than five minutes by the placing of any engine or car thereon. 
(b)  Railroad cars shall not stop so as to obstruct any intersection, including that part of the street which is within the line of the sidewalk projected. 
(Code 1973, § 18-14; Code 1995, § 98-167) 
Secs. 106-240-106-256. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ABANDONED VEHICLES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to abate nuisances generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-117; abandoned motor vehicles generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-13-1 et seq.; officers authorized to remove vehicles, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-139. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 106-257. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Highway means every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield the right-of-way to vehicles on such through highway in obedience to a stop sign, yield sign, or other official traffic control device, when such signs or devices are erected as provided in this chapter. 
    Impounding agency means the City of Bessemer Police Department. 
    Legal owner means a lienholder, person with a security interest in a motor vehicle, a lessor of a motor vehicle, assignee of the lessor, or the person who is the registered owner of the motor vehicle. 
    Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled and shall include, without limitation, an automobile, a truck, a trailer, a motorcycle and a tractor. 
(b)  The definition of "abandoned motor vehicle" set forth in Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-13-1 (Abandoned motor vehicle defined; posted notice), shall be effective as a definition of that terms when used in this article. 
(Code 1995, § 98-191; Ord. No. 2579, § 1, 12-25-1992; Ord. No. 3281, § 1(a), 4-19-2005) 
Sec. 106-258. - Abandonment on public property. 
    No person shall abandon a motor vehicle on any street, highway, alley, or other public way of this city. 
(Code 1995, § 98-193; Ord. No. 2579, § 2, 12-25-1992) 
Sec. 106-259. - Abandonment on property of another. 
    No person shall abandon for any length of time a motor vehicle on the private property of another person without the express or implied permission of the owner or lessee of the private property. Any resident of the city on whose property a motor vehicle is abandoned may file a complaint with the police department. Thereafter, the motor vehicle shall be impounded and subject to the same treatment as provided for motor vehicles abandoned on the public ways. 
(Code 1995, § 98-194; Ord. No. 2579, § 3, 12-25-1992) 
Sec. 106-260. - Abandonment on operator's personal property. 
    No person in charge or control of any property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled nonoperating, wrecked, discarded or abandoned motor vehicle to remain on such property longer than seven days; except that this article shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in an enclosed building; a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprises; or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city. 
(Code 1995, § 98-195; Ord. No. 2579, § 4, 12-25-1992) 
Sec. 106-261. - Removal procedure; impoundment. 
(a)  Any regularly employed and salaried law enforcement officer of this city or other employee of the city designated by the city council, who has reasonable grounds to believe that a motor vehicle has been abandoned, shall affix to the windshield or other prominent part of the vehicle, a tow warning emblem. The emblem shall be five by seven inches or larger, bright orange in color, with the printed words "Towing Warning" in bold letters at least two inches high, and shall also state that unless the vehicle is removed before ____________ a.m./p.m. in the ____________ of the day of ____________ , ____________ , the vehicle will be impounded and taken to ____________ , and after 60 days it will be sold to recover the costs of removal, storage, and sale. The emblem shall be self-adhesive, and the blanks indicated in this subsection shall be completely filled in with permanent dark ink indicating the required details. The time set for removal shall be at least seven days after the emblem is affixed. After the time set for removal has expired, any designated city employee or officer shall cause the motor vehicle to be removed to the depository maintained by the city for the purpose of storing such motor vehicles. If the vehicle is illegally parked or is disabled, a tow warning emblem need not be affixed, and the vehicle may be immediately impounded. 
(b)  Upon arrival at the depository, the vehicle shall be impounded and its contents inventoried. 
(c)  The police department shall, within five days after a motor vehicle is impounded, notify the state department of motor vehicles of the impoundment of the motor vehicle, and such notification shall include such information as is available that will enable the department of motor vehicles to identify the registered owner of the vehicle. 
(Code 1995, § 98-196; Ord. No. 2579, § 5, 12-25-1992) 
Sec. 106-262. - Notification of owner and claiming of impounded vehicles. 
(a)  The police department shall give written notice to the owner, secured parties of record, and known lienholders, if any, at least 30 days prior to the date of the sale of the motor vehicle advising such parties of: 
(1)  The complete description of the vehicle and the date and place the vehicle was found or taken into possession; 
(2)  The approximate amount owed for the cost of repair, towing and storage; 
(3)  The location of the vehicle; 
(4)  The time and place that a sale of the vehicle will be held; 
(5)  The right of the owner, secured parties or lienholders to contest the right to sell such vehicle by the filing, within ten days before the date of the sale of the vehicle, of an application for hearing to be conducted before the date of the sale of the vehicle of an application for hearing to be conducted before the judge of the district court or circuit court of the county in which the sale is to be held. The notice required by this section shall be deemed to be given when sent by certified mail, postage prepaid, to the address of the owner, secured party of record, and known lienholder shown on any public filing evidencing such ownership, security interest, or lien; or if none, to any such address ascertained by reasonable effort. 
(b)  If the name and address of the owner, secured parties or lienholders of the vehicle are known or cannot be reasonably ascertained, then the notice required in this section shall be given by publication once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the sale is to be held. The first publication shall be at least 30 days before the date of sale. 
(c)  The registered owner, or other person who can prove he is entitled to possession of a motor vehicle impounded pursuant to the provisions of this article, may claim the motor vehicle within 30 days of the date of impoundment by presenting himself at the depository and by paying a fee determined by the chief of police to reimburse the city for the reasonable and necessary costs of removing and storing the motor vehicle. The fees for costs of removal and storage shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. The standard towing charges for privately owned vehicles shall be as established by ordinance or resolution of the city council, from time to time. The amount of the charge shall be available for public examination in a fee schedule in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 98-197; Ord. No. 2579, § 6, 12-25-1992) 
Sec. 106-263. - Disposal. 
(a)  If a motor vehicle remains unclaimed after the expiration of 60 days from the date of impoundment, the chief of police shall cause such vehicles to be disposed of in accordance with the procedures established under state statutes, garageman's, materialman's, or mechanic's liens. 
(b)  The proceeds of the sale shall be applied first to the expenses of the sale, and to the costs of removal and storage as expenses of the sale, and to the costs of removal and storage as determined pursuant to section 106-262. Any remaining proceeds from the sale shall be held by the chief of police for six months after the date of the sale and shall be turned over to the person who can prove he held the title to the motor vehicle upon the demand of such person. If at the end of the six months period, no person has claimed the proceeds of the sale, they shall be turned over to the city clerk and treasurer for deposit in the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 98-198; Ord. No. 2579, § 7, 12-25-1992) 
Secs. 106-264-106-289. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - IMPOUNDMENT PROCEDURE 

Sec. 106-290. - Vehicle parked overtime; declared obstruction; removal. 
    Any vehicle parked upon a public street of the city at a place, in a manner or for a length of time prohibited by any section of this chapter or other ordinance of the city is, if unoccupied, declared to be an obstruction in such street and a public nuisance. Any police officer of the city shall cause the vehicle to be removed to and impounded in the depository provided by the city for such purposes. 
(Code 1973, § 22-22; Code 1995, § 98-211) 
Sec. 106-291. - Removal of vehicles; authorization. 
    Whenever any police officer of the city finds upon any public street of the city, or upon any street within the police jurisdiction of the city, any vehicle which he has reasonable cause to believe to be lost, stolen or abandoned, or any vehicle which is or is likely to become an obstruction on a public way, or to be without proper protection by reason of the person in charge or control thereof having been arrested and incarcerated, the officer shall have authority to immediately cause the vehicle to be removed to, and impounded in the depository provided by the city for such purposes. 
(Code 1973, § 22-23; Code 1995, § 98-212) 
Sec. 106-292. - Authority of contract hauler. 
    Where a contract exists between the city and any person, under the terms of which such person agrees to haul and store vehicles for the city in a depository provided for in such contract, the person and his employees, servants or agents, when requested by any police officer of the city to haul or store any vehicle which is upon a public street or alley, shall have the authority to haul or store such vehicle as requested by such officer. 
(Code 1973, § 22-24; Code 1995, § 98-213) 
Sec. 106-293. - Report of removal. 
    Whenever any police officer of the city shall cause the removal and impounding of any vehicle, he shall immediately report to the chief of police in writing, giving a description of such vehicle and the date and cause of removal and impounding of such vehicle. 
(Code 1973, § 22-25; Code 1995, § 98-214) 
Sec. 106-294. - Recovery by owner prior to sale; release. 
    Any owner or person entitled to possession of an impounded vehicle may claim the vehicle at any time before its sale by filing a written claim with the chief of police, upon a form to be provided by the chief. If the chief of police is satisfied that the claimant is the owner or entitled to possession of such vehicle, he shall notify the depository and agent to cause the vehicle to be released to the claimant upon payment of proper charges. 
(Code 1973, § 22-26; Code 1995, § 98-215) 
Sec. 106-295. - Sale of impounded vehicle. 
    When any vehicle has remained in the depository provided by the city for as long as 60 days from its reception and no claim for such vehicle has been made within such period, the chief of police is authorized to release the vehicle to the depository agent in order that it may be sold as provided in the code of the state to recover their charges. 
(Code 1973, § 22-27; Code 1995, § 98-216) 
Sec. 106-296. - Impoundment of vehicles driven by unlicensed drivers. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, and except as otherwise provided in this section, a motor vehicle is subject to impoundment as a nuisance if it is driven on a highway or other public roadway in the city, and any of the following conditions exist: The motor vehicle is driven by a person whose driver's license or license privilege is revoked for any reason under the laws of this state or similar laws of any other state or territory, or while his driver's license or driving privilege is suspended as a consequence of a DUI-related offense, including, but not limited to, being adjudicated delinquent or a youthful offender based on a DUI-related offense, or while his driver's license or driving privilege is suspended as a result of failure to comply with the implied consent law of this state or laws of another state, or who has been adjudicated a delinquent child or a youthful offender based on an offense that if the person had been an adult would have been a conviction of driving under the influence of a controlled substance or alcohol or failure to comply with the implied consent law. 
(b)  If a driver is unable to produce a valid driver's license on the demand of the police officer, the vehicle shall be impounded regardless of ownership, unless the police officer is reasonably able, by other means, to verify that the driver is properly licensed. Prior to impounding the vehicle, a police officer shall make a reasonable attempt to verify the license status of a driver who claims to be properly licensed, but who is unable to produce the license on demand of the police officer. A notation of the officer's attempt to verify that the driver is properly licensed shall be noted on the arrest/incident offense report. The driver and occupants of the vehicle will be transported to a place of safety by the impounding officer and an impoundment or tow-in report made with a full inventory of items in the vehicle. 
(c)  A police officer shall not impound a vehicle pursuant to this section if the license of the driver expired within the preceding 90 days and the driver would otherwise have been properly licensed. 
(d)  If the owner of the vehicle or another family member of the owner is present in the vehicle and has a valid driver's license, the vehicle shall not be impounded and towed. 
(e)  If there is a medical necessity jeopardizing life or limb, the law enforcement officer may elect not to impound the vehicle. 
(f)  A vehicle impounded pursuant to this section shall be released if: 
(1)  The registered owner appears at the police department or a representative with written notarized authorization from the registered owner appears, and presents a valid driver's license, a copy of the title, tag receipt, or notarized bill of sale, and a copy of the written authorization, if applicable, to be copied by the police department. 
(2)  If the registered owner does not have a valid driver's license he may bring someone with them who has a verified valid driver's license and the vehicle may be released without written notarized permission upon signing a release. 
(g)  Any owner of a vehicle who suffers any loss due to the impoundment of any vehicle pursuant to this section may recover the amount of the loss from the unlicensed, suspended or revoked driver. 
(h)  The person redeeming the vehicle at the wrecker lot will be responsible for paying the established towing and storage fees, as well as an administrative fee to be forwarded by the wrecker company to the city. 
(i)  Any vehicle impounded that is not redeemed pursuant to this division within 60 days may be sold by the wrecker company for fees owed according to the Alabama Abandoned Motor Vehicle Act (Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-13-1). 
(Ord. No. 3281, §§ 1(b)-1(d), 4-19-2005) 
Secs. 106-297-106-325. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TRUCK ROUTES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to prohibit or impose limits on the weight of vehicles on designated streets, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-1-3. 

Sec. 106-326. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Deviating truck means a truck which leaves and departs from a truck route while traveling inside the city. 
    Truck means any vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of property, and whose frame, rack or body has a load capacity of 2,000 or more pounds. 
    Truck route means a way over certain streets, over and along which trucks coming into and going out of the city shall operate. 
(Code 1973, § 22-109; Code 1995, § 98-236) 
Sec. 106-327. - Trucks restricted to truck routes; exceptions. 
(a)  All trucks within the city shall be operated only over and along the truck routes established in this article and on the other designated streets over which truck travel is permitted. 
(b)  This article shall not prohibit: 
(1)  The operation of trucks upon any street where such operation is necessary to the conduct of business at a destination point, provided the streets upon which such traffic is permitted are used until reaching the intersection nearest the destination point. 
(2)  The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street of the city. 
(3)  The operation of trucks owned or operated by the city, public utilities, any contractor or materialman, while engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets, public improvements, or street utilities within the city. 
(4)  The operation of trucks upon any officially established detour in any case where such truck could lawfully be operated upon the street for which such detour is established. 
(Code 1973, § 22-110; Code 1995, § 98-237) 
Sec. 106-328. - Designation of truck routes. 
    The streets or parts of streets described in the city traffic schedule are designated as truck routes. 
(Code 1973, § 22-111; Code 1995, § 98-238) 
Sec. 106-329. - Truck traffic from outside city; deviation by shortest permissible route. 
(a)  Single destination. All trucks entering the city for a destination point in the city shall proceed only over an established truck route and shall deviate only at the intersection with the street upon which such traffic is permitted, nearest to the destination point. Upon leaving the destination point, a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest permissible route. 
(b)  Multiple destinations. All trucks entering the city for multiple destination points shall proceed only over established truck routes and shall deviate only at the intersection with the street upon which such traffic is permitted, nearest to the first destination point. Upon leaving the first destination point a deviating truck shall proceed to other destination points by the shortest direction and only over streets upon which such traffic is permitted. Upon leaving the last destination point, a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest permissible route. 
(Code 1973, § 22-112; Code 1995, § 98-239) 
Sec. 106-330. - Truck traffic from within city. 
(a)  Destinations-Outside city. All trucks, on a trip originating in the city and traveling in the city for a destination point outside the city shall proceed by the shortest direction over streets on which such traffic is permitted to a truck route. 
(b)  Same-Within city. All trucks, on a trip originating in the city, and traveling in the city for destination points in the city shall proceed from the point of origin to the nearest established truck route and over the established truck route to the point thereon nearest the point of destination, thence from the point on the truck route nearest the point of destination by the shortest route to the point of destination. All trucks leaving a first point of destination in the city to another point in the city shall proceed to the nearest established truck route, thence over the truck route to the point nearest the second or latter destination point, thence by the shortest possible route to the point. 
(Code 1973, § 22-113; Code 1995, § 98-240) 
Sec. 106-331. - Maintenance of maps. 
    The city clerk and treasurer shall keep and maintain accurate maps setting out truck routes and streets upon which truck traffic is established and designated as truck routes. The maps shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and treasurer and shall be available for inspection by the public. 
(Code 1973, § 22-115; Code 1995, § 98-241) 
Sec. 106-332. - Maintenance of signs. 
    The chief of police shall cause all truck routes to be clearly marked by appropriate signs. It shall not be a legal defense for violation of this article that the truck routes have not been marked with such clearness as to give warning to any person charged with such violation. 
(Code 1973, § 22-116; Code 1995, § 98-242) 
Sec. 106-333. - Enforcement; duty of police officers. 
    It shall be the duty of police officers on duty observing a motor truck on a street in the city, other than on an established truck route, to stop the truck and inspect the bill of lading, invoice or other papers to determine that the truck is being operated on streets as required by the terms of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 22-117; Code 1995, § 98-243) 
Sec. 106-334. - Presumption of intercity passage. 
    Any person driving a motor truck over any street in the city other than a designated truck route shall be presumed to be passing through the city and not making a local delivery, and unless the driver has a bill of lading or invoice showing a local delivery, it shall be the duty of any police officer apprehending such truck driver to arrest him for violation of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 22-118; Code 1995, § 98-244) 
Secs. 106-335-106-360. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TRAFFIC CALMING DEVICES 

Sec. 106-361. - Policy. 
    This article establishes a policy for the installation of traffic calming devices and establishes certain warranting criteria to be used to determine whether a traffic calming device may be installed along a roadway in the city. 
(Ord. No. 3407, § 1, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 106-362. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Traffic calming devices means any device installed in the roadway designed to limit vehicle operating speeds and to encourage vehicles to seek alternative routes, including, but not limited to, the following: 
    Rumble strips means a series of small raised pavement undulations, often seen on the approaches to intersections on high speed roadways. The rumble strip is a series of five to seven raised pavement areas, each being eight inches wide and one-half inch high, spaced on ten inch gaps. 
    Speed bumps , also referred to as a speed breaker, means a raised pavement section typically less than one foot wide and three to four inches in height, typically found in commercial parking lots and driveways. The design of speed bumps generally makes them inappropriate for use on the public right-of-way. 
    Speed humps means a raised pavement section approximately 12 to 14 feet long and three inches high. Speed humps typically have the cross section of a section of an arc of a circle, and extend from edge of asphalt paving to edge of asphalt paving on the roadway without obstructing the gutter using a 12-inch taper to the gutter seam. Typical materials for the construction of a spend hump are asphalt, concrete, rubber, and brick. 
    Speed lumps , also known as speed cushions, are a variation of speed humps. Instead of a continuous hump, it is divided into several smaller sections which allows for unobstructed passage of emergency vehicles, buses, trucks and other wide wheelbase vehicles and allows for improved drainage. The gaps are spaced such that only one set of standard vehicle tires will go through the gap while the other set of vehicle tires must go over the hump. 
    Speed tables means devices similar to speed humps, except that the overall length of the table is extended to approximately 22 feet, which allows for a ten- to 12-foot flat area on top of the speed hump. This flat area is sometimes used as an area for pedestrian crossing and is known as a raised crosswalk. 
(Ord. No. 3407, § 2, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 106-363. - Approval required prior to installation; traffic calming study and criteria. 
    No traffic calming device shall be installed along a roadway in the city without the prior approval of the city council. Prior to the installation of a traffic calming device upon any roadway in the city, there shall be conducted a traffic calming study which may or may not recommend the installation of a traffic calming device based upon the following warranting criteria: 
(1)  Traffic volume criteria. Traffic calming devices will not be considered for roadways which have less than 750 total vehicles traveling in both directions on a daily basis, nor more than 7,500 total vehicles traveling in both directions on a daily basis. 
(2)  Speed criteria. Traffic calming devices will not be considered unless the average travel speed of all vehicles observed is equal to or greater than 35 miles per hour or the 85th percentile travel speeds of all vehicles is equal to or greater than 40 miles per hour. 
(3)  Roadway classification criteria. Traffic calming devices will not be installed on roadways which are classified as a federal aid route according to the current roadway classification map for the Birmingham Study Area as held by the Regional Planning Commission of Greater Birmingham. Traffic calming devices will not be installed on roadways which are classified in the city's major street plan. 
(4)  Roadway geometric criteria. Traffic calming devices will not be installed in the following roadway geometric conditions: 
a.  A horizontal curve or a vertical curve where the visibility of the traffic calming device is restricted, or on an approach to such curves; 
b.  On roadways at any location where the grade exceeds five percent, including the approaches to each traffic calming device installation; 
c.  On roadways more than two lanes wide or less than 18 feet wide; 
d.  On roadways having a posted speed limit of greater than 30 miles per hour; 
e.  On roadways that have a curb and cutter or valley gutter on both sides of the roadway; or 
f.  Where placement of traffic calming devices are impractical due to the location of the public roadway intersections and/or driveways. 
(5)  Accident criteria. Accident patterns shall be studied to determine trends of accidents which: 
a.  Might have been prevented if vehicle operating speeds were generally lower on the subject roadway; or 
b.  Might have been more severe if traffic calming devices were in place. 
There are no criteria for the minimum number of accidents which might have been prevented if operating speeds were generally lower. However, there must have been no more than two accidents in the three-year period which would have been possibly made more severe if traffic calming devices were in place. 
(6)  Traffic diversion criteria. An estimate of the diversion of traffic to other residential roadways which would result if traffic calming devices were installed on the roadway, which is the subject of the complaint, shall be performed. Traffic calming devices will not be installed if the traffic diversion would result in a traffic increase on any other residential roadway of 50 percent or more for that roadway. 
(7)  Emergency access and route criteria. Traffic calming devices shall not be permitted on roadways which serve as a primary route for emergency vehicles (defined as an average of at least five emergency vehicles a day or an emergency call) or a primary access route for emergency vehicles into an area of 100 or more residential dwelling units or ten or more businesses. 
(8)  Public involvement criteria. The preferable method of public involvement for the installation of traffic calming devices is through an established homeowner's association. In the absence of a homeowner's association, or if the geographic area encompassed by the homeowner's association does not cover the full impact are of the proposed traffic calming device installation, a geographic area determined by the city shall be considered in the public involvement process. Public input may be gathered by either ballot or petition. The installation of traffic calming devices must be approved ay a 75 percent majority of all dwelling units within the confines of either the homeowner's association or geographic impact area as determined by the city. In any case, only one vote or signature on a petition per dwelling unit will be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 3407, § 3, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 106-364. - Limitations on placement. 
    The following shall be limitations upon the use or installation of certain traffic calming devices in the city: 
(1)  Speed bumps. Because of their design, speed bumps are generally considered inappropriate for use on the public right-of-way. 
(2)  Speed humps. Speed humps shall not be placed in the following locations: 
a.  On horizontal and vertical curves, or the approaches to such curves; 
b.  On a grade of five percent or greater, or the approach to such grades; 
c.  Adjacent to a driveway; 
d.  Within 250 feet of a traffic signal; 
e.  Within 50 feet of a public roadway intersection; 
f.  Over or near manholes; 
g.  Adjacent to fire hydrants; or 
h.  Immediately upstream of drainage inlets. 
(3)  Rumble strips. Rumble strips are not recommended for use in traffic calming situations. Any recommendation calling for their use shall be accompanied by a compelling reason. 
(4)  Striping, signage and pavement markings. Any recommendation to install a traffic calming device shall include recommendations for appropriate striping, signage and other pavement markings to delineate the traffic calming device. 
(Ord. No. 3407, § 4, 6-2-2009) 
Secs. 106-365-106-380. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - AUTOMATED TRAFFIC SAFETY SYSTEM[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3562, §§ 1-17, adopted May 16, 2017, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as art. VIII, §§ 106-381-106-397 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 106-381. - [Title.] 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Bessemer Automated Traffic Safety System Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 3562, § 1, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 106-382. - Findings. 
    The City Council of the City of Bessemer, Alabama makes the following findings as the basis for the undertakings on its part herein contained: 
(1)  Vehicles that violate traffic control regulations and signage have been and are a dangerous problem in the City of Bessemer, Alabama. 
(2)  Studies have found that automated traffic camera enforcement in a municipal area is a highly accurate method for detecting violations of traffic control regulations and signage and is very effective in reducing the number of traffic violations and decreasing the number of traffic accidents, deaths, and injuries. 
(3)  Current Alabama law provides that failing to stop and remain stopped at a traffic-control signal which is emitting a steady red signal is a criminal misdemeanor. Current Alabama law also provides that failing to abide by traffic signage or speed limits is also a criminal misdemeanor. Under Alabama law one who commits any of these misdemeanors is subject to prosecution only if the misdemeanor was witnessed by either a duly empowered police officer or other witness who makes a verified complaint to a sworn magistrate. 
(4)  A reduction in the number of drivers exceeding speed limits and running red lights and stop signs through a program utilizing photographic evidence and enforcement through the imposition of civil fines will help promote and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City of Bessemer. Act Number 2016-323 duly enacted by the Legislature of Alabama granted to the City of Bessemer to establish a program to enforce traffic signal violations, stop sign violations, and speeding violations by the use of photographic evidence and the imposition of civil fines. 
(5)  By providing for the use of automated traffic cameras in traffic signal enforcement, stop sign enforcement, and speed limit enforcement in the City of Bessemer, the city council expects to decrease the occurrence in the city of traffic signal violations, stop sign violations, and speeding violations. 
(Ord. No. 3562, § 2, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 106-383. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    City means the City of Bessemer, Alabama. 
    City council means the governing body of the City of Bessemer, Alabama. 
    Civil violation means a violation of the provisions of this article, the penalty for which violation shall be the payment of a fine, the enforcement of which will not be otherwise permissible. 
    Fine means the monetary amount assessed by the City of Bessemer pursuant to this article for a determination of civil liability for a traffic signal violation, stop sign violation, or speeding violation, which may include administrative hearing costs associated with the infraction. 
    Intersection means the place or area where two or more streets intersect. 
    Owner means the owner or owner of record of a motor vehicle as shown on the motor vehicle registration and title records of the Alabama Department of Revenue or the analogous department or agency of another state or nation. The term shall not include motor vehicles displaying dealer license plates, in which event "owner" shall mean the person to whom the vehicle is assigned for use; nor shall the term include the owner of any stolen motor vehicle, in which event "owner" shall mean the person who is guilty of stealing the motor vehicle and who was operating the vehicle at the time of the civil violation. 
    Photographic stop sign traffic enforcement system means a system that: 
(1)  Consists of a still camera system and full motion video camera system (30 frames per second or greater); and 
(2)  Is capable of producing at least two separate recorded images, i.e.: 
a.  An image of the rear of a vehicle prior to entering the intersection; and 
b.  An image of the rear of the vehicle showing the license plate. 
    Photographic traffic signal enforcement system means a system that: 
(1)  Consists of a still camera system and full motion video camera system (30 frames per second or greater) installed to work in conjunction with an electrically operated traffic control signal; and 
(2)  Is capable of producing at least three separate recorded images, i.e.: 
a.  An image of the rear of a vehicle prior to entering the intersection on a red signal; 
b.  An image of the rear of the vehicle showing the license plate; and 
c.  An image of the rear of the vehicle in or through the intersection when the red signal is visible. 
(3)  All images must be synchronized to a single time source and provide the elapsed time between the first, second, and third photographs or digital images specified in this subparagraph b. 
    Photographic vehicle speed enforcement system means a system that: 
(1)  Has a mobile or fixed electronic speed enforcement system, or both, which is certified and in compliance with the rules of the Federal Communications Commission; and 
(2)  Is capable of producing two or more recorded images, at least one depicting the license plate attached to the rear of a vehicle being operated at a speed in excess of the applicable speed limit. 
    Recorded image means an image recorded by the system depicting the rear of a vehicle which is automatically recorded as a photograph or digital image, which also depicts the recorded speed, date, location, and time of the recorded image. 
    Speed limit means the established maximum speed limit on a given roadway prescribed by law. 
    Speeding violation means any violation of a motor vehicle at a speed that exceeds the legal maximum speed limits set forth in or adopted pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 32-5A-170 to 32-5A-178, inclusive, or of any combination thereof; provided, however, that speed limits set by action of the Bessemer City Council, if any, shall supersede the limits set in Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 32-5A-170 to 32-5A-178, inclusive. A speeding violation shall be a civil violation as defined in this article. 
    Stop sign means a fixed sign of the type authorized by the Alabama Department of Transportation which requires a vehicle to come to a complete stop before entering the intersection. 
    Stop sign violation means any violation of Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-112, wherein a vehicle proceeds into an intersection after failing to stop at a clearly marked stop line. A stop sign violation shall be a civil violation as defined in this article. 
    Traffic control signal means any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed as defined in Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-1-1.1. 
    Traffic signal violation means any violation of Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 32-5A-31, 32-5A-32, or 32-5A-35, or of any combination thereof, wherein a vehicle proceeds into a signalized intersection at a time while the traffic-control signal for that vehicle's lane of travel is emitting a steady red signal. A traffic signal violation shall be a civil violation as defined in this article. 
    Trained technician means a sworn law enforcement officer or a person certified by the Alabama Peace Officers' Standards and Training Commission (APOSTC), employed or contracted by the city, who has received instruction and training in the proper use of the photographic traffic signal enforcement system, the photographic stop sign enforcement system, and the photographic vehicle speed enforcement system used by the city, the city's traffic engineer or the city's designee. 
(Ord. No. 3562, § 3, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 106-384. - Imposition of fine and/or costs for civil violations of this article; signage required where photographic enforcement systems are located. 
(a)  (1)  Fines collected pursuant to this article for traffic signal violations and stop sign violations shall be $110.00. 
(2)  a.  Except for speeding violations that occur in school zones, fines collected pursuant to this article for speeding violations shall not exceed the fines as shown in the following table. The following fine shall apply to the owner when captured by the photographic vehicle speed enforcement system where the vehicle was recorded as traveling at the following speeds over the speed limit: 
Speed over Speed Limit Fine 5 through 10 mph $ 60.00 Greater than 10 mph through 15 mph 110.00 Greater than 15 mph through 20 mph 135.00 Greater than 20 mph 160.00  
b.  The fines stated above in subsection (a)(2)a. shall be doubled if that violation occurs and was electronically recorded within a segment of the roadway or intersection designated with signage or signals as a school zone only during school hours when school is in session and one hour before and after school hours. 
(3)  The first $10.00 of each fine authorized by this article and collected by the city or its designee shall be paid to the Alabama Criminal Justice Information Center as compensation for record keeping with respect to violation notices issued pursuant to this article in accordance with Act No. 2016-323 of the Legislature of Alabama. 
(4)  Administrative hearing costs shall be assessed only in contested cases. A person who is found liable after an administrative hearing or who requests an administrative hearing and thereafter fails to appear at the time and place of the hearing shall pay the fine amount plus any late fee in addition to a $30.00 administrative hearing fee. If the person is found not liable at the administrative hearing, the $30.00 administrative hearing fee will not be assessed or any fine and fee paid related to that citation shall be refunded. 
(b)  The city or its designee may place photographic traffic signal enforcement systems, photographic stop sign enforcement systems, and photographic vehicle speed enforcement systems at locations within the city without notice of the specific location and may change locations without public notice. 
(c)  The city or its designee shall post a sign or signs at each intersection at which a photographic traffic signal enforcement system or photographic stop sign enforcement system is located informing motorists that such devices are in operation at the intersection. The city or its designee shall post a sign or signs along each roadway or street at which a photographic vehicle speed enforcement system is located informing motorists that such a device is in operation. 
(d)  The city may contract with a vendor to perform services authorized by this article. 
(Ord. No. 3562, § 4, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 106-385. - Enforcement; procedures. 
(a)  The city or its designee shall mail a notice of violation by U.S. mail to the owner of the motor vehicle which is recorded by the photographic traffic signal enforcement system, photographic stop sign enforcement system, or photographic vehicle speed enforcement system while committing a traffic signal violation, stop sign violation, or speeding violation. The notice shall be sent not later than the 30th day after the date the traffic signal violation, stop sign violation, or speeding violation is recorded to: 
(1)  The owner's address as shown on the records of the Alabama Department of Revenue; or 
(2)  If the vehicle is registered in another state or country, to the owner's address as shown on the motor vehicle registration records of the department or agency of the other state or country analogous to the Alabama Department of Revenue. 
(b)  A notice of violation issued under this article shall contain the following: 
(1)  Description of the violation; 
(2)  The date, time, and location of the violation; 
(3)  A copy of a recorded image of the vehicle; 
(4)  The amount of the fine to be imposed for the violation; 
(5)  The date by which the fine must be paid; 
(6)  A statement that the person named in the notice of violation may pay the fine in lieu of appearing at an administrative hearing; 
(7)  Information that informs the person named in the notice of violation: 
a.  Of the right to contest the imposition of the fine in an administrative hearing; 
b.  Of the manner and time in which to contest the imposition of the fine; and 
c.  That failure to pay the fine or to contest liability is an admission of liability; 
(8)  A statement that a recorded image is evidence in a proceeding for the imposition of a fine; 
(9)  In the case of a motor vehicle rental or leasing company, the procedure for transferring liability to the renter or lessee and a request for the name, address, and driver's license number of the renter or lessee; 
(10)  A statement that failure to pay the fine within the time allowed shall result in the imposition of a late penalty not exceeding $25.00; and 
(11)  Any other information deemed necessary by the city or its designee. 
(c)  A notice of violation under this article is presumed to have been received on the tenth day after the date the notice of violation is placed in the United States mail. 
(d)  A fine imposed pursuant to this article shall be paid within 30 days of the tenth day after the date the notice of violation is mailed. 
(e)  It shall be within the discretion of the trained technician to determine which of the recorded traffic signal violations, stop sign violations and speeding violations are to be enforced based upon the quality and legibility of the recorded image. 
(Ord. No. 3562, § 5, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 106-386. - Administrative adjudication hearing. 
(a)  An administrative hearing officer appointed by the mayor of the city is vested with the power and jurisdiction to conduct administrative hearings of civil violations provided for in this article. In conducting administrative hearings of violations of this article, the hearing officer shall have the powers and duties conferred by Act No. 2016-323 of the Legislature of Alabama. 
(b)  A person who receives a notice of violation may contest the imposition of the fine by submitting a request for an administrative hearing of the civil violation, in writing, within 15 days of the tenth day after the date the notice of violation is mailed. Upon receipt of a timely request, the city or its designee shall notify the person of the date and time of the administrative hearing by U.S. mail. 
(c)  Failure to pay a fine or to contest liability in a timely manner is an admission of liability in the full amount of the fine assessed in the notice of violation. 
(d)  Any fine imposed pursuant to this article shall not be collected if, after a hearing, the administrative hearing officer appointed by the mayor of the city enters a finding of no liability. 
(e)  If an administrative hearing is requested, the city shall have the burden of proving the traffic signal violation, stop sign violation, or speeding violation by a preponderance of the evidence. The reliability of the photographic traffic signal enforcement system or photographic stop sign enforcement system used to produce the recorded image of the violation may be attested to by affidavit of a trained technician. An affidavit of a trained technician that alleges a violation based on an inspection of the pertinent recorded image is admissible in a proceeding under this article and is evidence of the facts contained in the affidavit. 
(f)  The notice of violation, the recorded and reproduced images of the traffic signal violation, stop sign violation, or speeding violation, regardless of the media on which they are recorded, accompanied by a certification of authenticity of a trained technician, and evidence of ownership of a vehicle as shown by copies or summaries of official records shall be admissible into evidence without foundation unless the administrative hearing officer finds there is an indication of untrustworthiness, in which case the city shall be given a reasonable opportunity to lay an evidentiary foundation. 
(g)  All other matters of evidence and procedure not specifically addressed in this article shall be subject to the rules of evidence and the rules of procedure as they apply in the small claims courts of this state, except that on any petition to Jefferson County Circuit Court for trial de novo, the evidence and procedures shall be as for any civil case in the district court except as otherwise provided in this article and Act No. 2016-323 of the Legislature of Alabama. 
(h)  A person who is found liable for a civil violation pursuant to this article after an administrative hearing or who requests a hearing and thereafter fails to appear at the time and place of the hearing is liable for administrative hearing costs and fees set out herein in addition to the amount of the fine assessed for the violation. A person who is found liable for a civil violation after an administrative hearing shall pay the fine and costs within ten days of the hearing. 
(i)  Whenever payment of a fine is owed to the city, the amount of the fine as set by this article may not be increased, decreased, or abated by the city, and the liability may be satisfied only by payment. 
(j)  It shall be an affirmative defense to the imposition of civil liability under this article, to be proven by a preponderance of the evidence, that: 
(1)  The traffic control signal was not in proper position and sufficiently visible to an ordinarily observant person; 
(2)  The operator of the motor vehicle was acting in compliance with the lawful order or direction of a police officer; 
(3)  The operator of the motor vehicle violated the instructions of the traffic control signal so as to yield the right-of-way to an immediately approaching authorized emergency vehicle; 
(4)  The motor vehicle was being operated as an authorized emergency vehicle under Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 32-5A-7 and 32-5-213, and that the operator was acting in compliance with those chapters; 
(5)  The motor vehicle was stolen or being operated by a person other than the owner of the vehicle without the effective consent of the owner; 
(6)  The license plate depicted in the recorded image of the violation was a stolen plate and being displayed on a motor vehicle other than the motor vehicle for which the plate had been issued; 
(7)  The presence of ice, snow, unusual amounts of rain, or other unusually hazardous road conditions existed that would make compliance with this article more dangerous under the circumstances than noncompliance; or 
(8)  There was no sign installed as required by this article near the location at which the violation allegedly occurred warning that a photographic traffic signal enforcement system was being used. 
(k)  To establish that at the time of the violation the motor vehicle was a stolen vehicle or the license plate displayed on the motor vehicle was a stolen plate, the owner must submit proof acceptable to the hearing officer that the theft of the vehicle or license plate, prior to the time of the violation or promptly following the theft, had been timely reported to the appropriate law enforcement agency. 
(l)  No person who rents to another person or is the lessor of a motor vehicle pursuant to a written lease agreement, nor any affiliates thereof, shall be liable for a photographic stop sign traffic enforcement system, photographic vehicle speed enforcement system, or photographic traffic signal enforcement system violation involving such motor vehicle during the period of the rental or lease, provided that upon request of the city or its designee received within 60 days after the violation occurred, such person provides to the city within 30 days after receipt of such request the name and address of the renter or lessee of such motor vehicle. The driver's license number of the renter or lessee may be subsequently specifically requested by the city or its designee if needed for the enforcement of this article. Upon the provision by the lessor, its affiliate or its designee, of the information as described in this subsection, the city or its designee may issue a new notice of violation to the renter or lessee of the vehicle in the same manner it would issue a notice of violation to an owner pursuant to section 106-385, except that the notice will be sent no later than 30 days after receiving the renter's or lessee's information from the person, or any affiliate thereof, who rented or leased the motor vehicle. The renter or lessee may be held liable for the violation in the same manner that an owner may be held liable pursuant hereto. 
(m)  Notwithstanding anything in this act to the contrary, a person who fails to pay the amount of a fine or to contest liability in a timely manner is nevertheless entitled to an administrative hearing on the violation if: 
(1)  The person files a sworn affidavit with the hearing officer stating the date on which the person received the notice of violation that was mailed to the person, if such notice was not received by the tenth day after same was mailed as set out in subsection (a) of section 106-385; or 
(2)  Within 15 days of the date of actual receipt of such notice, such person requests an administrative hearing. 
(Ord. No. 3562, § 6, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 106-387. - Order of hearing officer. 
(a)  Following an administrative hearing, the administrative hearing officer shall issue an order stating: 
(1)  Whether the person charged with the civil violation is liable for the violation; and 
(2)  If the person is found to be liable, the amount of the fine assessed against the person, along with the fees and costs provided for herein. 
(b)  Orders issued under this section may be filed in the office of the judge of probate in any county in Alabama, and shall operate as a judicial lien in the same manner and with the same weight and effect as any other civil judgment filed therein. 
(c)  A person who is found liable after an administrative hearing may challenge that finding of civil liability in the Jefferson County Circuit Court, by filing a petition for judicial review with the Jefferson County Circuit Court. The petition for judicial review must be filed not later than the 14th day after the date on which the administrative hearing officer entered the finding of civil liability. The filing of a petition for judicial review shall stay the enforcement of the fine. After a petition for judicial review has been filed, civil liability will be determined by the circuit court by trial de novo pursuant to the jurisdiction granted in Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-11-30. 
(Ord. No. 3562, § 7, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 106-388. - Procedures for judicial review. 
    The circuit court hearing a petition for judicial review shall utilize the procedures applicable to proceedings in the Jefferson County District Court with the following qualifications: 
(1)  The proceedings shall retain their civil nature with the circuit court applying the preponderance of the evidence standard; 
(2)  If the person is adjudicated by the circuit court to be responsible for payment of the fine, circuit court costs shall be owed by the person adjudicated responsible, with 100 percent of those court costs collected to be retained by the circuit court, which costs shall be calculated in the same manner as court costs for criminal appeals from the Jefferson County District Court, provided that, in the event the circuit court finds the person petitioning for judicial review to not be responsible, any fine or fee paid, related to that citation, shall be refunded by the city; 
(3)  Regardless of the civil nature of the proceedings, the circuit court may assign case numbers as for criminal appeals or civil appeals and place the appeals on criminal dockets in the same manner as criminal appeals from the Jefferson County District Court or on civil dockets in the same manner as civil appeals from the Jefferson County District Court; 
(4)  The circuit court shall sit as trier of both fact and law in the civil proceedings in the circuit court; and 
(5)  The city attorney shall represent the city in the circuit court proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 3562, § 8, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 106-389. - Clarity of license plate image required to issue notice of violation. 
    In the event the evidence produced by a photographic traffic signal enforcement system, a photographic stop sign enforcement system or a photographic vehicle speed enforcement system does not produce an image of the license plate with sufficient clarity for a trained technician to determine the identity of the owner, and if the identity thereof cannot otherwise be reliably established, then no notice of violation may be issued pursuant to this article. If, however, a notice of violation is issued, to the degree constitutionally allowed, those issues related to the identity of the vehicle or its owner shall affect the weight to be accorded the evidence and shall not affect its admissibility. 
(Ord. No. 3562, § 9, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 106-390. - Late fees; effect of liability for violations of ordinance. 
    Late fees not exceeding $25.00 shall attach to untimely paid fines that are authorized pursuant this article and imposed pursuant hereto. No person may be arrested or incarcerated for nonpayment of a fine or late fee. No record of an adjudication of civil violation made under this article shall be listed, entered, or reported on any criminal record or driving record, whether the record is maintained by the city or an outside agency. An adjudication of civil violation provided for in this article shall not be considered a conviction for any purpose, shall not be used to increase or enhance punishment for any subsequent offense of a criminal nature, and shall not be considered a moving violation. The fact that a person is held liable or responsible for a fine for a traffic signal violation, stop sign violation or speeding violation shall not be used as evidence that the person was guilty of negligence or other culpable conduct, and as evidence in any other proceedings if it is or becomes admissible under the rules of evidence applicable therein. 
(Ord. No. 3562, § 10, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 106-391. - Collection actions. 
    The city attorney or his designee is authorized to file civil actions to enforce the provisions of this article, including but not limited to pursuing collection actions to obtain judgments for unpaid fines, fees or both, imposed under this article, by lawful means to secure payments of the same. 
(Ord. No. 3562, § 11, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 106-392. - Statistical data required. 
(a)  The city shall keep statistical data regarding the effectiveness of photographic traffic signal enforcement systems or photographic stop sign enforcement systems in reducing traffic-control device violations and intersectional collisions and shall communicate the data on an annual basis to the Alabama Department of Transportation and the Alabama Criminal Justice Information Center. 
(b)  The city shall keep statistical data regarding the effectiveness of automated photographic speeding enforcement systems in reducing speeding violations and collisions and shall communicate the data on an annual basis to the Alabama Department of Transportation and the Alabama Criminal Justice Information Center. 
(Ord. No. 3562, § 12, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 106-393. - Placement and timing of traffic signals. 
    The placement of control devices in the city and timing of yellow lights and red light clearance intervals shall conform to the most recent edition of the Traffic Engineering Handbook. It shall be presumed that such devices and timing are in compliance with this section unless the contrary is shown by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(Ord. No. 3562, § 13, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 106-394. - Exclusion of civil remedy. 
    No fine may be imposed and no adjudication of liability for a civil violation may be made under this article if the operator of the vehicle was arrested or was issued a citation and notice to appear by a sworn police officer for a criminal violation of any portion of Code of Ala. 1975, art. 2, ch. 5A, tit. 32, including, but not limited to, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 32-5A-31, 32-5A-34, and 32-5A-35, or any other municipal ordinance which embraces and incorporates the statutes contained in that article, and which occurred simultaneously with and under the same set of circumstances that were recorded by the photographic traffic signal enforcement system, the photographic stop sign enforcement system, or the photographic vehicle speed enforcement system. 
(Ord. No. 3562, § 14, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 106-395. - Impartiality of trained technician. 
    Under no circumstances shall the salary or other compensation of the trained technician be related to the number of notices of violation issued or amount of fines collected. 
(Ord. No. 3562, § 15, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 106-396. - [Not to invoke provisions.] 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as invoking the provisions of the Alabama Administrative Procedure Act, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 41-22-1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 3562, § 16, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 106-397. - Uses of penalties, fines and fees collected. 
    The penalties, fines, and fees collected from the imposition of civil liability under this article shall be deposited into the Bessemer Traffic Safety Fund Account established by the city council. Funds deposited into this traffic safety fund shall be expended first for the costs of the system for payment to the vendor/operator of the system, public relations, and general implementation of the program. The remaining funds shall be used for the following purposes, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Traffic or pedestrian public safety programs; 
(2)  Transportation planning; 
(3)  The construction, reconstruction, maintenance widening, alteration and improvement of public roads, bridges, streets and other public ways, including payment of the principal and interest on any securities at any time issued by the city pursuant to law in connection with the construction, reconstruction, maintenance widening, alteration and improvement of public roads, bridges, streets and other public ways; 
(4)  Intersection safety improvements; 
(5)  Driver education; 
(6)  Police officers dedicated to traffic safety; or 
(7)  Projects or programs subject to the joint written determination by the mayor of the city and the city council, but only if such expenditures are public safety related. 
(Ord. No. 3562, § 17, 5-16-2017) 
Chapter 110 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Public utilities generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-50-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 110-1. - Adoption of city utilities consumer handbook. 
    The most current edition of the Bessemer Utilities Consumer Handbook, as approved by the mayor and council, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set out in this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 102-1) 
Sec. 110-2. - Adoption of state standards for public utilities. 
    The state highway department standards for accommodating utilities on highway rights-of-way and any and all amendments thereto are adopted by this reference and made a part of this chapter as set out in full in this section, as standards for use by the city for accommodating utilities on roads and streets under the jurisdiction of the city on those roads and streets which have or will involve the expenditure of state or federal highway funds. 
(Code 1973, § 23-9; Code 1995, § 102-2) 
Sec. 110-3. - Sale or transfer of city-owned utilities; voters approval. 
    The city council shall not sell, trade or transfer any or all of the utilities which are now owned by the city or which hereafter may become the property of the city, unless such proposal of sale or transfer has first been submitted to the qualified voters of the city and unless a majority of the voters have approved any such proposal or sell or transfer any of the utilities owned by the city or any part thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 23-10; Code 1995, § 102-3) 
Sec. 110-4. - License tax on sellers of electric current outside city limits. 
(a)  Each person engaged in the business of selling electric current or energy outside the city limits but within the police jurisdiction thereof, shall be charged a license tax in an amount equal to 11/2 percent of the gross receipts derived during the preceding calendar year from the sale of electrical current or energy to consumers, users or distributors thereof, residing or having a place of business outside the city limits, but within the police jurisdiction of the city, when such current or energy after sale thereof at any place, is consumed or used outside the corporate limits, but within the police jurisdiction of the city by such consumers or users, or is distributed from any point outside the city limits but within the police jurisdiction of the city by such distributors. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the term "gross receipts" shall have the same meaning as defined in section 22-2. 
(Code 1973, § 10-79; Code 1995, § 102-4) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to and maximum amount of license tax municipality may annually assess and collect from utility doing business in the municipality, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-51-90.2(f), 11-51-129. 
Sec. 110-5. - Adoption of utility rate charges and service fees. 
(a)  The rules, regulations and rate charges of Bessemer Electric and Water Service shall be reviewed and adjusted each year on the first day of February, 2017 and every year thereafter, based on the consumer price index (CPI) of the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics for all urban consumers, using the October CPI of each preceding year as the base denominator (i.e. October 2016 is used to calculate for 2016-2017), and are hereby adopted by the city council to be effective as of February 1, 2017 and each year thereafter. 
(b)  A copy of the rules, regulations and rate charges of Bessemer Electric and Water Service are available for public examination in deposit and rate schedules as maintained in the office of the city clerk and as published online at www.bessemerutilities.com or any other approved online or print medium. 
(c)  As of February 1, 2017, the following comprises the Bessemer Electric and Water Service Deposit, Rate and Service Fee Schedule and is stated fully herein: 
Exhibit A-"Bessemer Electric and Water Service Rate Charges and Service Fees Schedule" is attached hereto and is incorporated by reference as if stated fully herein. 
(Code 1995, §§ 102-42, 102-63; Ord. No. 2425, § II, 3-15-1988; Ord. No. 2582, § 1, 1-19-1993; Ord. No. 3134, 2-6-2001; Ord. No. 3561, § 1, 5-2-2017) 
Sec. 110-6. - Deposit. 
(a)  All residential or commercial accounts for utility service(s) require a deposit and service fee for each service regardless of the number of accounts or properties the customer has with Bessemer Electric and Water Service. 
(b)  The minimum deposits required for utility service shall be established and comprised in the Bessemer Electric and Water Service Rate Charges and Service Fee Schedule as stated in section 110-5(c) and under the instructions provided in section 110-50 "deposit policy." 
(Code 1995, §§ 102-42, 102-63; Ord. No. 2425, § II, 3-15-1988; Ord. No. 2582, § 1, 1-19-1993; Ord. No. 3134, 2-6-2001; Ord. No. 3561, § 2, 5-2-2017) 
Secs. 110-7-110-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND ELECTRIC SERVICE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 110-31-110-48. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SERVICE POLICIES AND PROCEDURES 

Sec. 110-49. - Service policies. 
(a)  Upon application for service or upon request, a utility service customer will be given a copy of the customer information handbook which contains a summary of the service, deposit and billing; a copy and explanation of current rates, instructions on how to read the electric and water meters, including a diagram of the meters; and a copy of the customer collection and account review procedure. 
(b)  Upon request a customer will receive a statement of his monthly kilowatt hours (kwh) consumption for the prior 12-month period. 
(c)  Notice of rate schedules, rate schedule changes, consumption information, and service policies will be given to the public by local newspapers or public service announcements on radio or television or publication online at www.bessemerutilities.com. 
(d)  After receipt of the required deposit and service fee(s), utility service will begin the following day from the date of customer's application for electric or water service. Same day service is available for an additional fee and will be charged for each service. 
(e)  If a customer requests that utility service be restored after said service has been discontinued or disconnected, an additional reconnection fee will be charged; and the customer may be required to post an additional deposit prior to service reconnection. 
(Code 1995, § 102-41; Ord. No. 2425, § I, 3-15-1988; Ord. No. 3561, § 3, 5-2-2017) 
Sec. 110-50. - Deposit policy. 
(a)  For a new customer, a presently disconnected customer, or a return customer, Bessemer Electric and Water Service requires a deposit to establish electric, water and sewer utility service, prior to providing service and to guarantee final bill payment. In addition, when service is upgraded or renewed the current deposit amount for water and electric must be also upgraded. This includes account name changes and reconnects. 
(b)  For residential water customers only. All residential customers will pay at least a one month deposit of the residential class average monthly bill of the past 12 months or the minimum deposit amount as provided in the Bessemer Electric and Water Service Rate Charge and Service Fee Schedule, whichever is greater. Such deposit may be sent by separate bill or included in the customer's first monthly billing but payment is required prior to receiving service. If such deposit is not made at the time specified, Bessemer Electric and Water Service may withhold service. If service is disconnected for non-payment, Bessemer Electric Service reserves the right to increase the deposit up to twice the average monthly bill for the actual billing location prior to re-initiation of service, and service shall not be reconnected until said deposit is paid. 
(c)  Minimum deposit for residential water customers only. A minimum deposit as determined in the Bessemer Electric and Water Service Rate Charge and Service Fee Schedule is required for meter sizes less than one inch. For meter sizes of one inch or larger, the deposit will be no less than two times the minimum deposit charge for each meter or the average estimated usage, whichever is greater. 
(d)  Minimum deposit for residential electric customers only. A minimum deposit of $75.00 or as determined in the Bessemer Electric and Water Service Rate Charge and Service Fee Schedule, whichever is greater, is required for residential electric customers. 
(e)  For commercial customers. All commercial customers will pay a two-month deposit of the average monthly bill for the billing location as determined over the past 12-month period. Where a billing history does not exist, the deposit will be estimated based on projected energy loading or usage for the customer. Such deposit may be sent by separate bill or included in the customer's first monthly billing. If such deposit is not made at the time specified, Bessemer Electric and Water Service may withhold service. If service is disconnected for non-payment, Bessemer Electric and Water Service reserves the right to increase the deposit up to three times the average monthly bill for the actual billing location prior to re-initiation of service, and service shall not be reconnected until said deposit is paid. 
(f)  Deposits shall accrue interest annually at the rate, if any, as determined by the deposit holding account. Such interest shall be paid annually, calculated to December 1 of each year for the time such deposit was held by the utility, unless such period is less than one month. Said interest, if any, will be paid by credit to the customer's account on the December billing. 
(g)  If any customer's account is no longer in good standing and frequently becomes past due, Bessemer Electric and Water Service may require an additional deposit should the customer's usage increase sufficiently to warrant an additional deposit. 
(h)  Upon disconnection or discontinuation of service, the customer's deposit, where available, including any interest accrued shall be credited to their final bill. Any remaining deposit balance will be returned to the forwarding address provided by the customer at time of service disconnection (within approximately four to six weeks). If deposit balance remains unclaimed for more than one year from service disconnection, said deposit will be turned over to the office of the Alabama State Treasurer, Unclaimed Property Division. 
(Code 1995, § 102-42; Ord. No. 2425, § II, 3-15-1988; Ord. No. 3561, § 4, 5-2-2017) 
Sec. 110-51. - Billing. 
(a)  Meters will be read as nearly as possible the same day each month or the same day each quarter. 
(b)  Each month will be divided into eight billing cycles and bills will be mailed within eight calendar days from the day the first account is read for that billing cycle. 
(c)  Bills will be due no less than 15 days after bills are mailed. 
(d)  Bills will contain current meter readings, amount used, amount of charges for each service, the date the bill is due, the amount before the late payment charge, the amount of the late payment charge, and the amount including the late charge. 
(e)  A late payment charge will be added to each bill after the due date. A late payment charge of five percent on electric and ten percent on water of the current bill charged will be added to the customer's current balance. 
(f)  Payments received by mail after the due date will not be charged a late charge provided the U.S. postmark is on or before the due date regardless as to when the payment is actually received. 
(g)  If the due date is on a Sunday or holiday, the following day will be considered a day of grace if the payment is made in the office and not in the night depository. 
(h)  A notice will be mailed no earlier than two business days after the due date advising the customer that their bill has not been paid. This notice will advise the customer that the late charge has been added and that an additional ten days has been granted. If the bill is not paid, service will be discontinued. Such notice shall contain instructions on how to apply for a hearing if the bill is disputed or if the customer is in financial distress and unable to pay the bill. 
(i)  If the customer fails to respond either with payment or by notifying the utility, disputing the amount of the bill, or by advising the office of the customer's inability to pay, service will be discontinued as scheduled. 
(j)  If the customer disputes the amount owed or the right of Bessemer Electric and Water Service to collect or is unable to pay the bill, then the customer can follow the instructions set out in section 102-44. 
(k)  Bessemer Electric and Water Service evaluates weather conditions daily through the National Weather Service at www.weather.gov, which is a component of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and is the operating unit of the U.S. Department of Commerce, and in the event that the forecasted high temperature is expected to exceed 98 degrees Fahrenheit (F) or is expected to be below 32 degrees Fahrenheit (F) on that day, Bessemer Electric and Water Service will postpone the disconnection of service of residential customers for non-payment. During such extreme weather events where disconnection is postponed due to weather conditions, the postponement will not extend beyond the extreme weather condition, and the customer will be billed and is responsible for any utility used during this period. 
(l)  Customers with life threatening medical conditions may provide a letter from a medical doctor or nurse practitioner licensed to practice in the State of Alabama and submit it to Bessemer Electric and Water Service documenting his/her life threatening medical condition. The letter must include a signature from an attending physician or nurse practitioner affirming that the disconnection of electricity would create a medical emergency and possibly death. It is the responsibility of the customer to ensure that the form is on file with the Bessemer Electric and Water Service. A life threatening medical condition does not relieve a customer from its obligation to pay for electrical service, including any late fees incurred or other applicable charges. Upon acceptance of the form by Bessemer Electric and Water Service, the disconnection will be postponed for 30 days from the original scheduled disconnection date. Bessemer Electric and Water Service will only grant this postponement of termination two times in a 12-month period for the life threatening medical conditions. If full payment of the past due amount including all late fees is not received by the end of the 30-day postponement period, electric or water service will be terminated on the next available date. The customer will be billed and is responsible for any utility used during this period. 
(Code 1995, § 102-43; Ord. No. 2425, § III, 3-15-1988; Ord. No. 3561, § 5, 5-2-2017) 
Sec. 110-52. - Account review and collection. 
(a)  This shall be the primary document from which specific procedures and guidelines governing all aspects of the account review and collection function of Bessemer Utilities are drawn and shall be the statement of basic policy which governs all Bessemer Utilities account review and collection activities. 
(b)  This policy is based on the premise that it shall be the duty and responsibility of Bessemer Utilities to maintain customer accounts in such a manner that the investment made in these public utility agencies, owned over the years by the city, may be protected and maintained in trust for all past, present, and future citizens and customers and in such a manner that current customers may be protected against possible inequities arising from the failure of persons to pay bills. 
(c)  Due process shall be offered customers of Bessemer Utilities through notification that both a customer collections procedure and accounts review procedure exist and will be furnished on request, and that a customer can be represented by anyone of his choosing at any stage of the proceedings. 
(d)  The account review procedure will provide all customers of the system an opportunity to maintain utility service by entering into an agreement that within ten days after a final determination, the customer will pay the amount determined unless the customer elects to use the provisions of the customer collections procedure. 
(e)  The customer collections procedure will provide all customers of the system an opportunity to maintain utility service by entering into and honoring a written agreement that they will keep all monthly bills current and paid in full and reduce any balance that is in arrears to zero dollars over an agreed period. 
(f)  Failure to pay, or to make arrangements to pay, or to honor the arrangement to pay the bill due to Bessemer Utilities in a manner which will keep all monthly bills current and paid in full and reduce any balance that is in arrears to zero dollars in an agreed period will be cause, after notification by the mailing of a final notice, for termination of service. 
(g)  The accounts review procedure will provide customers of Bessemer Utilities adequate opportunity for an investigation, hearing and review process. The customer shall have the right to an informal hearing before a designated supervisor where an agreement as to the balance due on their bill cannot be reached. 
(h)  The customer has the right, if he so requests, to a formal hearing before a board of review made up of the office manager, accountant, and engineering assistant of the utilities, or their appointed representatives. It shall also offer an opportunity for the temporary maintenance of service or the temporary restoration of service to customers whose claim entitles them to consideration under this procedure. Such maintenance or restoration of service shall be temporary and for the term of this procedure only. Customers seeking such relief will agree in writing to firm conditions concerning such maintenance or temporary restoration of service before service is continued or actually restored. It shall be the responsibility of the customer to produce sufficient documentation to support the possible validity of the claim. 
(i)  The employees of Bessemer Utilities are prohibited from collecting part payment except as provided in the customer collection procedures as set out in section 110-53. 
(j)  A daily log of all transactions and account dispositions pertinent to the account review and collection policy review shall be maintained. 
(k)  The accounts review procedure shall be as follows: 
(1)  This provision is to provide and guarantee each customer of Bessemer Electric and Water Service of an adequate opportunity for investigation and a due process hearing for the purpose of resolving the customer's complaint. It shall also offer an opportunity for temporary continuance of service, or if the service has been discontinued, the temporary restoration of service to customers whose claim entitles them to consideration under this procedure. Such restoration of service shall be temporary and for the term of this procedure only. 
(2)  When it is determined that the customer disputes the amount owed, or the correctness of the bill, or the accuracy of the meter reading, or that their account has not been properly credited, or the right of Bessemer Utilities to terminate his services, or honor written agreements, the customer will be routed to the account clerk, who will first make an attempt to resolve the issue raised by the customer. If the account clerk is unable to resolve the issue raised by the customer, then the account clerk will grant to the customer an informal hearing. 
(3)  At the opening of the hearing, the account clerk will give the customer a copy of this article and explain to the customer the procedure to be used. The customer will be advised that he has the right to have his service restored if it has been discontinued or continued while the account review procedures are in progress, if the customer is willing to sign an agreement concerning the continuance or restoration of service. Failure to sign an agreement will cause the customer to forfeit his rights to have his service continued or restored as the case may be. As part of the proceedings the customer has the right to examine Bessemer Utilities records pertaining to that customer's service. If, after examining the records, the account clerk or the customer has a question about the reading on the meter, then the hearing will be recessed to a date certain and a utilities representative will be sent to obtain a current reading. The customer will be notified at the time when the representative will read the meter so the customer may be present. At the appointed time, the hearing will be reconvened, all pertinent records, including the latest reading of the meter, will be available. The customer may be present and represented by any one of his choosing, to cross examine witnesses and present any evidence he may desire. Within five days of the hearing a written decision will be mailed to the customer. This decision shall include a notification to the customer that he has a right to a formal hearing before a board of review and advise him of the necessary steps to invoke the review process. 
(4)  If the customer accepts the judgment of the account clerk then he will have ten days in which to pay the amount found due by the account clerk or to invoke the customer collection proceedings as set out in subsection (1) of this section. If the customer fails to give notice of appeal to the account review board within five days of the decision being hand delivered or mailed, paying the amount determined to be due or exercising his right under the customer collection procedure within ten days, then a final notice will be sent and service terminated within five days of sending the notice. 
(5)  If the customer wishes to appeal the account clerk's decision and files a notice of appeal, the office manager shall set a time and date for a hearing and a notice of such hearing shall be sent to the customer. The notice must be sent at least five days before the hearing. Within five days after the hearing, a written decision shall be mailed to the customer. The decision will determine the amount owed by the customer and the date by which it must be paid. This will then be entered in the records of Bessemer Utilities. 
(6)  If the customer fails to make payments as provided in the decision or fails to exercise his rights under the customer collection procedures, then a final notice shall be sent to the customer, and service shall be terminated within five days of mailing the final notice. 
(Code 1995, § 102-44; Ord. No. 2425, § IV, 3-15-1988) 
Sec. 110-53. - Customer collection procedure. 
(a)  If the customer is not disputing the amount owed, nor the right of Bessemer Utilities to collect due bills, line employees, including cashiers and customer complaint clerks will deal directly with each customer's collection inquiry. The employee will determine specifically the customer's problem and, if possible, provide the appropriate relief under this policy and guidelines as provided by the utilities manager and enter into a written agreement with the customer at that time. The line employee must maintain adequate records on each such transaction. All agreements with the customer to maintain service shall be executed in writing, routed to the supervisor of the service desk for review, filed, and appropriate interaction with the data processing section taken. A daily log of all inquiries, transactions, and account dispositions shall be maintained by each employee and routed at the end of each working day to the supervisor of the service desk. The same basic process shall apply to longterm agreements exceeding one month. In all cases, the customer will pay monthly bills in full and an agreed portion of the arrears each month. 
(b)  If the customer fails to make payments as provided in the agreement, then a final notice shall be sent to the customer and service terminated within five days. 
(c)  The circumstances under which the line employees must refer the customer to the supervisor of the service desk for review and decision on inquiry by the customer includes any case in which a customer: 
(1)  Reveals, through a CRT search and other indicators, that he may not be either willing or able to enter into a longterm written agreement to pay current bills and arrears in a manner consistent with the declining account balance policy. 
(2)  Claims special circumstances prevent him from entering into a written agreement. 
(3)  Discloses that a total dollar amount in excess of $300.00 is owed. 
(4)  May be a verifiable hardship case. 
(5)  Is in an uncontrollable emotional state. 
(d)  If the customer is referred to the supervisor of the service desk or his designated representative, the supervisor will listen to the customer's claim, establish a written record of what the customer is alleging, and determine whether it is within the supervisor's authority to make a final disposition of the inquiry, whether it is a situation which requires further investigation, whether, in fact, it is a dispute over the amount of the bill or a customer relations dilemma rather than a collection matter. If it is determined that it is other than a collection matter, then the written record of each transaction will be routed to the account clerk. 
(e)  If the issues raised by the customer fall within the collection procedures guideline and an agreement cannot be worked out with the customer, then an informal hearing will be conducted by the supervisor of the service desk, and within five days of the hearing a written decision will be handed to or mailed to the customer. As part of the decision, the supervisor will determine whether or not the customer is entitled to an extension and, if so, the amount to be paid by the customer on the arrearage each month and will advise the customer that he has a right to a final review process and shall be informed of the nature of such final review process. The customer shall have five days from the day the decision is mailed or the decision is personally delivered to him by the supervisor to invoke the appeals process to the review board. If the customer fails to invoke the appeals process, it shall be construed as consent to the decision of the supervisor, and the decision of the supervisor will be entered in the same manner as an agreement and the customer will be expected to pay as directed by the supervisor. 
(f)  If the customer fails to make payments as provided in the agreement with the supervisor or the supervisor's determination, as the case may be, then a final notice shall be sent to the customer and service terminated within five days. 
(g)  In the event the customer wishes to appeal the supervisor's decision and files a notice of appeal, the office manager shall set a time and date for a hearing and a notice of such hearing shall be sent to the customer. The notice must be sent at least five days before the hearing. Within five days after the hearing, a written decision shall be mailed to the customer. The decision will determine whether the customer is entitled to an extension and the amount to be paid by the customer on the arrearage each month. This will then be entered in the records of the Bessemer Utilities and the customer notified of his schedule of payments. 
(h)  If the customer fails to make payments as provided in the decision, then a final notice shall be sent to the customer and service terminated within five days. 
(Code 1995, § 102-45; Ord. No. 2425, § IV, 3-15-1988) 
Sec. 110-54. - Diversion of water or electricity; determination; assessment of penalty; posting of notice; hearing. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to tamper with a meter, reverse the meter, remove the meter installed by Bessemer Utilities and substitute a jumper, another meter not assigned or some other device designated to divert electricity or water in any manner. 
(b)  On an account where service has been terminated or discontinued, if the service is turned on by someone other than an authorized employee of Bessemer Utilities or someone does one or more of the prohibited acts as set out in subsection (a) of this section, the service will be immediately discontinued at this location without notice, and steps shall be taken to prevent the unauthorized restoration of service. A penalty will be charged against the location for the unlawful act and service will not be restored until this penalty and the other charges provided in this article are paid. 
(c)  On an active account, if someone does one or more of the prohibited acts as set out in subsection (a) of this section, the employees of Bessemer Utilities shall immediately remove the device and preserve it for evidence, install a new meter and seal it with locking devices, and give notice at the location that within five business days a hearing will be held before the accounts review board, as provided in section 110-52. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the accounts review board to determine if there has been a diversion of water or electricity. If this is determined in the affirmative, the accounts review board will determine if the person responsible for the location, as reflected in the records of Bessemer Utilities, knew of the diversion or benefited from it. If this is found in the affirmative, then the accounts review board will determine if service is to be immediately discontinued or continued and on what conditions. If the accounts review board determines that there has been a diversion, and that the customer of Bessemer Utilities knew of the diversion or benefited from it, then the board is hereby authorized to determine the value of the water or electricity diverted and may assess this against the customer or account and are further authorized to assess a penalty for an amount within the discretion of the board. 
(e)  The posting of the following notice on the entrance of the customer's residence or business, as the case may be, will be sufficient service. The notice will advise the customer of the date and time of the hearing, that they may be represented by counsel, that the hearing could result in the termination of their utility service, a determination being made by the review board of the amount of water or electricity diverted and their being charged for this plus a penalty and a new deposit and fees for reconnecting the service. 
(f)  The amount of any penalty charge, new deposit or other fee listed in this section shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1995, § 102-46; Ord. No. 2425, § V, 3-15-1988) 
State Law reference- Tampering with availability of gas, electricity, or water, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-8-23. 
Sec. 110-55. - Implementation of article. 
    The utility manager is hereby authorized and directed to issue such guidelines and directives as are necessary to implement this article. 
(Code 1995, § 102-47; Ord. No. 2425, § VI, 3-15-1988) 
Sec. 110-56. - Delinquent charges. 
(a)  No member of a customer's family, or any person living in the same house, building, or on such property with the customer where the electricity service or water service has been discontinued, shall have the right to make a deposit for electricity and/or water, or to request that the electricity and/or water be turned on at such place, so long as: 
(1)  The delinquent customer lives therein or thereon; and 
(2)  The electricity and/or water bill or charges (plus a reasonable charge for turning on and off the electricity and/or water) is unpaid. 
(b)  Delinquent charges owed by any member of the customer's family or anyone else living in the same house, building, or on such property with the customer will be charged back by the city utilities to the current, active customer account for electricity and/or water service for this residence. 
(Code 1995, § 102-50; Ord. No. 3097, 2-22-2000) 
Secs. 110-57-110-71. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WATER SERVICE 

Sec. 110-72. - Rates. 
    The rates for water service shall be as established by ordinance or resolution of the city council, from time to time, and shall be available for public examination in a fee schedule in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 102-61; Ord. No. 2582, § 1, 1-19-1993) 
Sec. 110-73. - Incidental services fees and charges. 
    The fees and charges for the other incidental services furnished by the city water service shall be as established by ordinance or resolution of the city council, from time to time, and shall be available for public examination in a fee schedule in the office of the city clerk and attached as an appendix to this Code 
(Code 1995, § 102-62; Ord. No. 2582, § 1, 1-19-1993) 
Sec. 110-74. - Capital recovery fees. 
(a)  Establishment of water capital recovery fees. The owner of any property who or which connects said property to the city's water system shall pay a nonrefundable capital recovery fee to the City of Bessemer in the following amount: 
Size of Line Fee 3/4" $1,000.00 1" 1,000.00 2" 1,500.00 4" and above 5,000.00  
For each unit on said property to be serviced by the city's water system. Said fee is payable to the City of Bessemer at the time an application for water service is tendered to the City of Bessemer Water Service and prior to connecting to the city's water system. Said water capital recovery fee is payable in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other fee now existing or hereinafter established by the city. The fees generated pursuant to this section shall be placed in a separate bank account and used by the city only for capital improvements to the city's water system. 
(b)  Definition of "unit." A unit, for purposes of this section, is hereby defined as follows: A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the shelter, support, or enclosure of persons; and when supported by division walls from the ground up without ingress and egress provided between such divisions by suitable openings, each portion of such building so divided shall be deemed a separate unit. For residential purposes, any portion of a building used as a separate abode for a family shall be considered a "unit." For commercial and industrial purposes, any portion of a building used as separate quarters for the operation of a separate business shall be considered a "unit." 
(c)  Establishment of water capital recovery fees for hotels/motels, apartments, nursing homes/assisted living facilities, and hospitals. 
(1)  Hotels/motels. 
Water capital recovery fee. The owner of any property who or which constructs a hotel or motel on said property and connects said property to the city's water system shall pay a nonrefundable capital recovery fee in an amount determined by multiplying the number of rooms in the hotel/motel by .35 by the amount set forth for a three-quarter-inch line in subsection (a) above. Said fee is payable at the time a building permit is issued for said property. Said water capital recovery fee is payable in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other fee now existing or hereafter established by the city. The fees generated pursuant to this section shall be used by the city only for capital improvements to the city's water system. 
(2)  Apartments. 
Water capital recovery fee. The owner of any property who or which constructs apartments on said property and connects said property to the city's water system shall pay a nonrefundable capital recovery fee in an amount determined by multiplying the number of apartments by .50 by the amount set forth for a three-quarter-inch line in subsection (a) above. Said fee is payable at the time a building permit is issued for said property. Said water capital recovery fee is payable in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other fee now existing or hereafter established by the city. The fees generated pursuant to this section shall be used by the city only for capital improvements to the city's water system. 
(3)  Nursing homes/assisted living facilities. 
Water capital recovery fee. The owner of any property who or which constructs a nursing home or assisted living facility on said property and connects said property to the city's water system shall pay a nonrefundable capital recovery fee in an amount determined by multiplying the number of units by .30 by the amount set forth for a three-quarter-inch line in subsection (a) above. Said fee is payable at the time a building permit is issued for said property. Said water capital recovery fee is payable in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other fee now existing or hereafter established by the city. The fees generated pursuant to this section shall be used by the city only for capital improvements to the city's water system. 
(4)  Hospitals. 
Water capital recovery fee. The owner of any property who or which constructs a hospital on said property and connects said property to the city's water system shall pay a nonrefundable capital recovery fee in an amount determined by multiplying the number of beds in the hospital by .50 by the amount set forth for a three-quarter-inch line in subsection (a) above. Said fee is payable at the time a building permit is issued for said property. Said water capital recovery fee is payable in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other fee now existing or hereafter established by the city. The fees generated pursuant to this section shall be used by the city only for capital improvements to the city's water system. 
(d)  Water capital recovery fee to be added to Bessemer Utilities Rate Charges and Service Fees Schedule. The water capital recovery fee established by this section shall be added to Bessemer Utilities Rate Charges and Service Fees Schedule as amended from time to time. Any increase or decrease in the water capital recovery fee established by this section shall be by resolution of the City Council of the City of Bessemer, Alabama, or as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 3476, §§ 1-4, 5-15-2012) 
Editor's note- Sections 1-4 of Ord. No. 3476, adopted May 15, 2012, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 110-74 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 110-75-110-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ELECTRIC SERVICE 

Sec. 110-90. - Rates. 
    Rates and charges for electric service shall be set from time to time by the city council and are on file in the city clerk and treasurer's office. 
(Code 1995, § 102-76) 
Secs. 110-91-110-108. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER SERVICE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- The Ord. No. 3232, as adopted by the city council of the City of Bessemer, Alabama on January 20, 2004 stated that Bessemer Utilities is hereby authorized to terminate the collection of sewer maintenance fees imposed by Ord. No. 2665 and that Ord. No. 2665 is rescinded. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 110-109. - Obstruction of sewers. 
    No person shall throw or deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited in any vessel or receptacle connected with the sewers, any garbage, hair, ashes, fruit, vegetables, peelings, refuse, rags, cotton, newspapers or any other substance whatever which may clog up such sewers or stop the flow of water therein. 
(Code 1973, § 20-15; Code 1995, § 102-96) 
Sec. 110-110. - Connections to sewer system; resolution declaring necessity; contents. 
(a)  If in the judgment of the city council it is deemed necessary or expedient for the protection of the public health to require the owner of any property within the city limits to install and connect with the sewer system of the city, the city council may, in addition to the present regulation in lieu thereof, adopt a resolution declaring that in the opinion of the city council it is necessary and expedient that such work be done. 
(b)  The resolution shall contain: 
(1)  The name of the owner of the lot; 
(2)  The lot and block number and the survey in which the lot is situated; 
(3)  The location at which the water closet shall be installed; 
(4)  The character of the work and quality of the water closet, including necessary water pipelines to be installed; 
(5)  The estimated cost of providing and installing the lines; and 
(6)  The date for the hearing of the property owner, which shall not be less than 20 days after the adoption of such resolution. 
(Code 1973, § 20-1; Code 1995, § 102-97) 
State Law reference- Authority to require connection to sewer, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-50-53, 11-50-54. 
Sec. 110-111. - Notice of hearing to property owner; proof of service. 
(a)  Upon the adoption of the resolution as provided in section 110-110, the city clerk and treasurer shall issue a notice to the property owner named in such resolution. The notice shall set forth the resolution so adopted and shall notify the property owner to appear, either in person or by counsel, before the city council on the day named in such resolution to show cause, if any, why he should not be peremptorily required to immediately construct the water closet at the place mentioned in such resolution at his own expense. 
(b)  The notice shall be served upon the property owner by the chief of police or by any police officer by leaving a copy of such notice with the property owner. The police officer making such service shall make return in writing upon the notice to the city clerk and treasurer. The notice shall be served at least ten days before the day fixed in such resolution for the hearing. 
(Code 1973, § 20-2; Code 1995, § 102-98) 
Sec. 110-112. - Hearing and protest; filing protest. 
(a)  Upon the day fixed in the resolution provided for in section 110-110 for hearing the property owner's objections, the city council shall proceed to hear any objections or defenses which the property owner may make in writing and to hear all evidence which the property owner may offer in support of any protest or objection so made. If the property owner fails to protest in writing, on the hearing of such resolution he shall be held to have consented to the making of the connections in the manner provided in this article. 
(b)  The protest required in subsection (a) of this section shall be filed with the city clerk and treasurer by the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 20-3; Code 1995, § 102-99) 
Sec. 110-113. - Order to make connections. 
    After the hearing provided for in section 110-110, the city council shall have the power to peremptorily order by resolution the property owner to make such connections within ten days. 
(Code 1973, § 20-4; Code 1995, § 102-100) 
Sec. 110-114. - Connection by city; lien; requirements; interest. 
(a)  In case of a failure to install or connect a water closet with the sewer system of the city within ten days after the peremptory resolution ordering the installation has been adopted, the city shall install on the premises of the property owner a proper water closet with necessary water supply line and connect it with the sewer system of the city at the expense of the owner. The cost shall be a lien upon the property in favor of the city to be collected as other debts are collected or liens enforced. 
(b)  The sewage discharge line installed shall be of the kind designated in the original resolution, provided for in section 110-110 and the cost of such installation shall not exceed the sum estimated in the original resolution. 
(c)  The amount of the cost shall bear interest at the rate of eight percent from the date of the completion and installation as certified by the mayor. 
(Code 1973, § 20-5; Code 1995, § 102-101) 
Sec. 110-115. - Statement of connection by city; filing. 
(a)  Upon the completion of the installation and connection of a sewage discharge line, the mayor shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, a statement in writing setting forth the name of the owner of such property and a description of the property on which such improvement has been made, together with the cost of such sanitary connection and installation of such sewage discharge line. 
(b)  The statement shall be signed by the mayor in his official capacity and filed with the county probate judge for record in the mortgage records of the county. The filing of such statement shall operate as notice of the existence of the lien from the date of its filing. 
(Code 1973, § 20-6; Code 1995, § 102-102) 
Sec. 110-116. - Notice of assessment; protest; consent. 
(a)  The notice of lien provided for in section 110-115 shall not be filed for record in the office of the county probate judge until the property owner has been given notice by registered mail, addressed to his last known address, of the fact of the completion of such installation and the amount of the assessment. At any time within five days after such notice has been deposited in the post office of the city, in accordance with the provisions of this section, the property owner shall have the right to file in writing with the city clerk and treasurer any objection against the material used, the manner in which the work is constructed or the cost of such assessment. 
(b)  The city council at its next regular meeting, after the filing of such protest, shall hear such protest and any evidence which the property owner may offer. It may either confirm, modify or repeal the resolution fixing the assessment. 
(c)  If the property owner fails to protest within the time and manner stated, he shall be held to have consented to such assessment. 
(Code 1973, § 20-8; Code 1995, § 102-103) 
Sec. 110-117. - Appeal of decision; bond. 
(a)  Any property owner feeling himself aggrieved by the action of the city council in overruling any protest filed in accordance with section 110-116, either in whole or in part, may within two days after such assessment has been finally fixed, appeal to the county circuit court. 
(b)  The property owner shall give a bond in twice the amount of the assessment with two good and sufficient sureties, conditioned to prosecute such appeal to effect, and to pay to the city such judgment as the court may render upon the hearing of such appeal. 
(Code 1973, § 20-9; Code 1995, § 102-104) 
Sec. 110-118. - Transcript of proceedings; hearing. 
    Upon the appeal provided for in section 110-117 being taken, the city clerk and treasurer shall immediately send to the county circuit court to which the appeal is taken a transcript of the proceedings, including the protest and bond, and the cause shall thereupon be set down for immediate hearing by such court. The court shall hear the appeal on the merits and render judgment accordingly. 
(Code 1973, § 20-10; Code 1995, § 102-105) 
Sec. 110-119. - Filing statement in absence of protest. 
    If the property owner has not protested, as provided in section 110-116, the statement in writing provided for in section 110-115 shall immediately be filed in the office of the county probate judge. 
(Code 1973, § 20-11; Code 1995, § 102-106) 
Sec. 110-120. - Applicability of sections 110-110 to 110-119 and 110-122. 
    The provisions of sections 110-110 to 110-119 and section 110-122 shall not apply to any property unless the property is located within 500 feet of a sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1973, § 20-12; Code 1995, § 102-107) 
Sec. 110-121. - Notice of readiness of sewer for use; connection of privies, sinks and urinals within 30 days. 
(a)  If any line of sanitary sewers is laid in or along any street and is ready for use, the city clerk and treasurer shall notify the owners, their agents or the occupants of all houses, tenements or other buildings situated on lots abutting upon the street in which such sewer is laid, to connect all closets, privies, sinks, cesspools and urinals with such sewer within 30 days from the date of such notice. 
(b)  After the expiration of the time stipulated in such notice, no tenant or owner of such house or building shall keep or maintain any surface closets, sinks, cesspools, dry wells or urinals upon such lot or in any building situated thereon. 
(Code 1973, § 20-13; Code 1995, § 102-108) 
Sec. 110-122. - Payment of assessment; methods. 
(a)  Any person whose property has been assessed under the provisions of this article shall have the right to pay the assessment in cash at any time within 30 days after the amount of such assessment has been ascertained by resolution adopted by the city council. Notice of the assessment shall be given to the property owner by registered mail at his last known address. 
(b)  The property owner shall have the right in lieu of paying such assessment in cash to pay the amount in monthly installments, each installment to equal 1/20th of the principal amount of the assessment. At the time of paying such monthly installment the property owner shall also pay the interest on the unpaid balance from the date of the last preceding payment to the date upon which the monthly installment is paid. 
(c)  If such property owner fails to pay the principal in cash within 30 days after notice that such assessment has been ascertained and fixed, or fails to pay any monthly installments when due and the installment remains in default for 30 days, then, at the option of the city, the entire amount shall become due and payable. The city clerk and treasurer shall proceed to collect the entire amount and to enforce the payment in any court having jurisdiction, or by sale as provided by law, for foreclosing street improvement assessment liens. 
(Code 1973, § 20-7; Code 1995, § 102-109) 
Sec. 110-123. - Improperly constructed drain or closet connection. 
    No person shall permit any drain to remain connected with any sewer if the work has been improperly done. No person shall permit any water closet connected with a sewer to be used or remain connected with the sewer system without a proper supply of water connected therewith, ready at all times to flush such water closet. When any water closet is out of repair, it shall be put in good order and repair without delay. 
(Code 1973, § 20-14; Code 1995, § 102-110) 
Secs. 110-124-110-144. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SEWER IMPACT FEES 

Sec. 110-145. - Payment required-Properties served by Pine Lane Sewer Main. 
    Prior to the issuance of any building permit by the city, to any applicant for a building permit whose property will be served by the sanitary sewer line known as the Pine Lane Sewer Main shall be required to pay to the city a sewer impact fee in accordance with the rules and regulations of the county sewer impact fee in effect at the time of the application. The city sewer impact fee shall be equal to 50 percent of the impact fee paid to the county in accordance with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the county. 
(Code 1995, § 102-121; Ord. No. 2473, § 1, 4-4-1989) 
Sec. 110-146. - Same-Buildings discharging sanitary sewer wastes to Pine Lane Sewer Main. 
    Pursuant to this division, the city shall not issue a permit for any building or other improvement which will discharge sanitary sewer wastes to the Pine Lane Sewer Main, either directly or indirectly, until payment of the city impact fee has been received by the city. 
(Code 1995, § 102-122; Ord. No. 2473, § 2, 4-4-1989) 
Sec. 110-147. - Same-For all sewers constructed. 
    All sewers constructed under the provisions of this division shall be operated and maintained by the city after approval for the final construction of such sewers, and shall be subject to payment of the city impact fee described in this division. 
(Code 1995, § 102-123; Ord. No. 2473, § 3, 4-4-1989) 
Sec. 110-148. - Same-Properties served by Powder Plant Sewer Main. 
    Prior to the issuance of any building permit by the city, any applicant for such building permit whose property will be served by the sanitary sewer line known as the Powder Plant Sewer Main shall be required to pay to the city a sewer impact fee in accordance with the rules and regulations of the county sewer impact fee in effect at the time of the application. The city sewer impact fee shall be equal to 50 percent of the impact fee paid to the county in accordance with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the county. 
(Code 1995, § 102-124; Ord. No. 2491, § 1, 8-29-1989) 
Sec. 110-149. - Same-Buildings discharging sanitary sewer wastes to Powder Plant Sewer Main. 
    Pursuant to this division, the city shall not issue a permit for any building or other improvement which will discharge sanitary sewer wastes to the Powder Plant Sewer Main, either directly or indirectly, until payment of the city impact fee has been received by the city. 
(Code 1995, § 102-125; Ord. No. 2491, § 2, 8-29-1989) 
Chapter 114 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Abatement of nuisances generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-117; maintenance of civil actions to enjoin and abate public nuisances, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-118; powers as to health, sanitation generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-130 et seq.; authority of cities to require weeds to be cut, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-140. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 114-1-114-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WEEDS 

Sec. 114-19. - Certain weeds declared public nuisance. 
    All weeds growing upon private property within the city which bear seeds of a wingy or a downy nature, which attain such a large growth as to become a fire menace when dry or which are otherwise noxious or dangerous are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1995, § 106-26; Ord. No. 2509, § 1, 4-10-1990) 
Sec. 114-20. - Declaration of nuisance to name particular property. 
    The director of public works of the city shall present to the city council a resolution declaring that the weeds on private property upon a named street, describing the property upon which or in front of which the weeds exist by giving a legal description thereof, or giving a street address or parcel number of the property, declaring the growing weeds on the property to be a public nuisance. 
(Code 1995, § 106-27; Ord. No. 2509, § 2, 4-10-1990) 
Sec. 114-21. - Determination of public nuisance by council; resolution. 
    The city council shall determine whether the weeds growing upon private property are a public nuisance and shall declare the weeds to be a public nuisance by passage of a resolution. 
(Code 1995, § 106-28; Ord. No. 2509, § 3, 4-10-1990) 
Sec. 114-22. - Notice and hearing; list of contractors; publication. 
(a)  After the passage of the resolution, notice of a public hearing on the matter shall be given by certified mail, return receipt requested, mailed 30 days prior to the date of the hearing and shall inform the owner of the date, time and place of the hearing and the reason therefor. Such notice shall be mailed to the owner of the property as the owner's name and address appears on record in the tax assessor's office in the Bessemer division of the county. 
(b)  The notice shall carry a list of names of persons and/or private contractors who perform such work and are registered with the city clerk and treasurer. Such names shall not constitute a recommendation, and the failure to include such a list shall in no way affect the operation of this article. 
(c)  Notice shall also be given by publication in a newspaper normally read by all segments of the population, published in the county once a week for two consecutive weeks. The first notice shall be published at least 14 days prior to the date of the scheduled hearing. 
(Code 1995, § 106-29; Ord. No. 2509, § 4, 4-10-1990) 
Sec. 114-23. - Posting of signs. 
(a)  The director of public works shall cause two signs to be posted on the property. The wording on the signs shall be a minimum of one inch in height and shall be in the following form: 
Notice to Destroy Weeds 
    Notice is hereby given that on the ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ (a.m./p.m.) in the council chamber, the council of the City of Bessemer will consider a resolution regarding the weeds growing upon or in front of this property, a copy of the resolution which is on file in the office of the city clerk and treasurer; and at that time and place will determine whether the same constitutes a public nuisance which must be abated by the removal of the noxious or dangerous weeds; and, if so, will order the abatement and removal of the nuisances, in which case the cost of such abatement and removal shall be assessed upon the lots and lands from which such weeds are removed, and such cost will constitute a lien for weed removal upon such lots or lands until paid. 
    If no objections are filed with the city clerk and treasurer at least five days before the meeting of the city council and unless such person appears before the city council in person or through his representative to show cause, if any, why his objection should be sustained, it shall be presumed that the person accepts the notice as fact and waives any rights he may have to contest the removal of the weeds. The action of the council shall be final unless good and sufficient cause can be otherwise shown. 
    Reference is hereby made to the resolution, on file in the office of the city clerk and treasurer, for further particulars. 
    Dated this ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
(b)  The signs shall be posted at least seven days prior to the time of the hearing. 
(Code 1995, § 106-30; Ord. No. 2509, § 5, 4-10-1990) 
Sec. 114-24. - Hearing procedure; abatement order; abatement by city or private contractors. 
(a)  At the hearing the city council shall hear and consider all objections, evidence and protests regarding the proposed removal of weeds. The city council may continue the hearing from time to time. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the council, by resolution, shall decide whether a public nuisance exists, and if so, shall order it to be removed or abated with respect to any property or part thereof described. The city council, by passage of the resolution, shall be deemed to have acquired jurisdiction to proceed and either to perform or have performed the work of removal or abatement with respect to such property or part thereof. The decision of the city council on the matter shall be deemed final and conclusive. 
(b)  Upon approval of the resolution finding the conditions of the property to be a public nuisance and ordering its abatement, all employees and duly authorized agents of the city are hereby expressly authorized to enter upon private property for that purpose. 
(c)  The city council may, at its option, authorize private contractors, companies, enterprises or individuals to abate and remove the nuisance. The city council, by resolution, shall designate the contractors, companies, enterprises or individuals who may perform the work. Those persons so designated are authorized to enter upon private property for purposes of abating or removing the nuisance. Compliance with the competitive bid law is not required. 
(Code 1995, § 106-31; Ord. No. 2509, § 6, 4-10-1990) 
Sec. 114-25. - Owner's right to abate. 
    Any property owner shall have the right to have such weeds removed at his own expense, providing the removal is done prior to the commencing of the work by the city, its employees, agents, contractors, enterprises or individuals employed to do the work. 
(Code 1995, § 106-32; Ord. No. 2509, § 7, 4-10-1990) 
Sec. 114-26. - Report of abatement costs to city council. 
    The director of public works shall keep an account of the costs of abating or removing nuisances on each separate lot or parcel of land where the work is being done by city employees or by a duly authorized private contractor, company, enterprise or individual and shall render an itemized report in writing to the city council showing the cost of removing the nuisance on each separate lot, provided that before the report is submitted to the city council, a copy of the report shall be posted for at least five days prior thereto on or near the chamber door of the city council together with a notice of the time when the report shall be submitted to the city council for confirmation. 
(Code 1995, § 106-33; Ord. No. 2509, § 8, 4-10-1990) 
Sec. 114-27. - Abatement charges. 
    The minimum charges for removing such nuisance on each separate lot or parcel of land if cleared by the city streets and sanitation department shall be $300.00 plus $100.00 per hour in excess of two hours plus an administrative fee of $150.00. The minimum charges for removing such nuisance on each separate lot or parcel of land if cleared by private contractor, company, enterprise or individual, shall be the cost assessed by the contractor plus an administrative fee of $150.00. 
(Code 1995, § 106-34; Ord. No. 2509, § 9, 4-10-1990; Ord. No. 3282, 4-19-2005) 
Sec. 114-28. - Weed lien. 
(a)  At the time fixed for receiving and considering the report, the city council shall hear the report with any objections which may be raised by any of the property owners liable to be assessed for the work of abating the nuisance and shall make a determination by motion or resolution confirming the report. 
(b)  Upon the adoption of the motion or resolution, the amount of cost for abating the nuisance shall be referred to as a "weed lien" and shall constitute a weed lien on the property for such amount. 
(c)  After confirmation of the report of costs, the city clerk and treasurer shall turn over to the tax collector of the county, a copy of the report, and the tax collector will collect the weed lien under the optional method of taxation, pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-51-40 through 11-51-74. The weed liens shall be added to the next regular bill of taxes levied against the parcels of land and shall be collected in the same manner as ordinary city ad valorem taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency. 
(Code 1995, § 106-35; Ord. No. 2509, § 10, 4-10-1990) 
Chapter 118 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Renting, hiring and using motor vehicles, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-15-1 et seq.; authority to license and regulate vehicles for hire, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-101. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 118-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Operator means every person operating or driving or assisting in operating or driving any taxicab within the city limits or the police jurisdiction thereof. 
    Owner means and includes every person who owns any interest in any taxicab being operated within the city limits. 
(Code 1995, § 110-1) 
Sec. 118-2. - Operation of vehicles in compliance with chapter. 
    No person, either as owner or operator, shall operate or permit to be operated within the city limits any vehicle for hire unless such person complies with the provisions and requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 18-23; Code 1995, § 110-2) 
Sec. 118-3. - License required; exception. 
(a)  No person shall operate or conduct a business involving vehicles for hire without first obtaining a license from the city. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the receiving or taking up of passengers or the discharging or setting down of passengers on the streets, avenues, alleys or public places within the city limits by any transportation company at any depot or bus terminal maintained and duly licensed at a fixed place. 
(Code 1973, § 18-24; Code 1995, § 110-3) 
Sec. 118-4. - License application; contents; fees. 
(a)  Every person desiring to operate a business involving vehicles for hire shall file an application for each such business or vehicle with the city clerk and treasurer. 
(b)  The application shall be made by the owner of the business or vehicle for which the license is sought, and state the following facts: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant and owner of the business or vehicle. 
(2)  The address of the principal place of business of the applicant. 
(3)  The trade name under which the applicant does or proposes to do business. 
(4)  The address of the stand from which such vehicle for hire proposes to operate, is applicable. 
(5)  The make, model, seating capacity and engine number of the vehicle for hire for which such license is requested. 
(6)  A schedule of rates and fares to be charged in the operation of the business or vehicle. 
(c)  Every owner or operator of a vehicle for hire within the city limits and the police jurisdiction shall pay annually the license fees for the operation of the vehicle for hire as may be provided in the city license schedule. 
(Code 1973, § 18-25; Code 1995, § 110-4) 
Sec. 118-5. - Operator's permit-Required. 
(a)  Every driver of a vehicle for-hire shall be required annually to obtain an operator's permit in accordance with this chapter. 
(b)  Every operator of such vehicle licensed in accordance with this section shall be given by the city a permit or card upon which shall be placed, among other information deemed desirable by the city, the photograph of the person so licensed, which shall be carried on the person of the licensee or displayed in a prominent place upon the vehicle so operated at all times. Any person shall have the right to request the identification of the driver and inspect such permit. 
(c)  For the obtaining of the permit as described in this section, the person applying therefor shall pay, in addition to any other license required, a fee to the city clerk and treasurer. The amount of the operator's permit fee shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1995, § 110-5; Ord. No. 1921, §§ 1, 3, 11-4-1975; Ord. No. 1928, § 1, 1-6-1976) 
Sec. 118-6. - Same-Disqualifications. 
    No permit to drive or operate a taxicab within the city limits shall be issued to any person: 
(1)  Who is under the age of 17 years; 
(2)  Who by reason of physical or mental defects is not competent to operate or drive a taxicab; 
(3)  Who is not experienced in the operation of motor vehicles; 
(4)  Who is addicted to the use of intoxicating liquors; 
(5)  Who has been convicted of a felony; 
(6)  Who does not have a valid driving license issued by the state director of public safety; or 
(7)  Who has been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude. 
(Code 1973, § 18-39; Code 1995, § 110-6) 
Secs. 118-7-118-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Consent of city to use streets, etc., for operation of private enterprise required, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-49-1. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 118-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Taxicab means an automobile or other vehicle employed in the carriage of passengers for hire within the city limits and the police jurisdiction thereof, exclusive of a bus and other common carrier duly licensed by the city. 
(Code 1973, § 18-22; Code 1995, § 110-31) 
Sec. 118-32. - Public liability insurance required; amount; notice. 
(a)  Every licensee shall, before the operation of any taxicab within the city limits, procure a policy of public liability and property damage insurance issued by some responsible liability insurance company duly authorized to do business in the state. Such policy of insurance shall indemnify such licensee, his agents and employees, from all damages by reason of injury to or destruction of life or property arising out of the ownership, maintenance or operation of any taxicab within the city limits, including injury to or death of any person being carried as a passenger in a taxicab. 
(b)  The policy of insurance shall insure such licensee, his agents and employees on account of accidents arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of a motor vehicle in the amount of $100,000.00, because of bodily injury to or death of one person in any one accident, and, subject to the limit for one person, in the amount of $300,000.00 because of bodily injury to or death of two or more persons in any one accident, and in the amount of $50,000.00 because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any one accident, resulting from the ownership, maintenance or operation of each taxicab operated by such licensee in the city. 
(c)  A true copy of the policy of insurance shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and treasurer before the licensee is permitted to operate any taxicab within the city limits. Both the insurer and the insured are required to immediately report in writing to the city clerk and treasurer the fact of any cancellation of or amendment to any such policy so filed. 
(Code 1973, § 18-26; Code 1995, § 110-32) 
Sec. 118-33. - Maintenance of taxicab required. 
    Every taxicab operated within the city limits shall be maintained in a good state of repair mechanically and shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition for the protection of the safety and health of the passengers being transported therein. 
(Code 1973, § 18-30; Code 1995, § 110-33) 
Sec. 118-34. - Service to public. 
    Each licensed taxicab within the city limits shall serve the public generally, and upon the schedule of rates and fares filed with the city clerk and treasurer and posted in the taxicab as set out in section 118-66. 
(Code 1973, § 18-32; Code 1995, § 110-34) 
Sec. 118-35. - Charging or collecting illegal rates. 
    No operator, owner or licensee of any taxicab operating within the city limits shall charge or collect any fees, rates or prices for his services other than the fees, rates and prices filed with the city clerk and treasurer at or prior to the time of the issuance of the license for such operation. 
(Code 1973, § 18-28; Code 1995, § 110-35) 
Sec. 118-36. - Advertising on taxicabs. 
    No person owning or operating or assisting in the owning or operating of any taxicab within the city limits shall permit any advertising matter to be placed or carried thereon. 
(Code 1973, § 18-33; Code 1995, § 110-36) 
Sec. 118-37. - Operation over fixed route. 
    No person operating a taxicab within the city limits shall: 
(1)  Operate the taxicab over any fixed or regular route; or 
(2)  Pass any specified point on a fixed or regular time schedule for the purpose of picking up passengers. 
(Code 1973, § 18-34; Code 1995, § 110-37) 
Sec. 118-38. - Signs on taxicabs required. 
    Every person owning or operating a taxicab within the city limits shall cause to be painted on the body of such taxicab, in a conspicuous place and in full view of the public, the word "taxi" together with the name of the owner of the taxicab, and the number which the taxicab bears upon the records of the owner's taxicab business. The printing of these words on the taxicab shall be in letters not less than 21/2 inches high. 
(Code 1973, § 18-38; Code 1995, § 110-38) 
Secs. 118-39-118-64. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES AND PERMITS 

Sec. 118-65. - License contents; transferability; violation. 
(a)  Each owner or operator of a taxicab within the city limits shall procure for each taxicab a license as provided for in section 118-32. The license shall bear upon its face: 
(1)  The name of the owner of such vehicle; 
(2)  The address of the principal place of business of the owner thereof; and 
(3)  The make, model and engine number of such vehicle. 
(b)  The license for the vehicle, when issued by the city, shall not be transferred to or used in or upon any vehicle other than the vehicle for which the license was issued. 
(c)  No person shall operate within the city limits any taxicab in violation of the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 18-29; Code 1995, § 110-51) 
Sec. 118-66. - License; operator's permit; rate schedule; display. 
    Every operator of a taxicab within the city limits shall exhibit at all times in a conspicuous place in the taxicab where the same may be readily seen by passengers and by the public: 
(1)  The license certificate issued for such taxicab by the city; 
(2)  An operator's permit including a photograph of the driver or operator of such taxicab; and 
(3)  A schedule of the rates or fares upon which such taxicab operates. 
(Code 1973, § 18-27; Code 1995, § 110-52) 
Sec. 118-67. - Possession, inspection of operator's permit. 
    Every person driving or operating a taxicab within the city limits shall carry with him at all times the operator's permit issued to him by the city. The permit shall be subject to inspection by any official or police officer of the city or by any member of the public who becomes a passenger for hire in such vehicle. 
(Code 1973, § 18-40; Code 1995, § 110-53) 
Sec. 118-68. - Licenses and permits; transferability; revocation. 
(a)  Neither the owner's taxicab license certificate nor the taxicab driver's or operator's permit shall be transferable. 
(b)  Either or both may be revoked by the city council at any time upon a showing made before the city council that the owner or operator of such taxicab: 
(1)  Has violated any of the provisions or requirements of this article; or 
(2)  Has been convicted of violating any traffic laws or regulations of the city or of the state. 
(Code 1973, § 18-37; Code 1995, § 110-54) 
Sec. 118-69. - Operation of taxicab after license or permit revocation. 
    No person shall operate or assist in the operation of any taxicab within the city limits where the license issued for the taxicab has been revoked, or where the permit of the operator has been revoked. 
(Code 1973, § 18-36; Code 1995, § 110-55) 
Secs. 118-70-118-96. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ESCORT SERVICES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 118-97. - Qualifications and dress of employees. 
(a)  All employees of the motor vehicle escort service who will operate vehicles must be certified police officers, the certification being from the state. Each employee shall be of good reputation, and be familiar with the traffic laws of the city. All employees must be familiar with the operation of motor vehicles and motorcycles. 
(b)  All employees of the licensee who operate vehicles in the motor vehicle escort service upon the streets and public ways of the city shall wear police uniforms that are approved by the chief of police. 
(c)  Reserve officers who serve the city may be certified by the chief of police when such reserve officers are complying with the rules and regulations of the city police department. 
(Code 1995, § 110-76; Ord. No. 2436, § 2, 7-5-1988) 
Secs. 118-98-118-122. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

Sec. 118-123. - Required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of operating any motor vehicle escort service in the city or its police jurisdiction unless such person holds a valid license issued by the city. 
(Code 1995, § 110-86; Ord. No. 2436, § 1, 7-5-1988) 
Sec. 118-124. - Application; contents. 
(a)  Any person desiring to engage in the business of operating a motor vehicle escort service shall first make application to the chief of police so that an investigation can be performed by the chief of police as to the qualifications of the applicant to engage in such business. 
(b)  The application shall: 
(1)  Specify the street address from which he intends to carry on such business. 
(2)  Be signed by the applicant. 
(3)  Give the name of at least three citizens of good reputation who will certify to the reputation of the applicant, or if the applicant is a corporation, to the reputation of the managing officer of the corporation. 
(4)  Show the kind, make and model of the vehicles with which the applicant intends to operate the business. 
(5)  Give any other information necessary to show the chief of police that the applicant is ready, willing and able to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(6)  List the names and street address of all employees that are to be used in the motor vehicle escort business to operate vehicles on the streets and public ways of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 110-87; Ord. No. 2436, § 2, 7-5-1988) 
Sec. 118-125. - Finding and recommendation. 
    Within 21 days after the application has been filed, the chief of police shall make a finding and recommendation as to the applicant's being qualified and ready, willing and able to comply with the provisions of this article and the territory proposed to be served by the operation under the license to be issued. Unless the chief of police finds that the application fulfills all of the provisions of this article, the application shall be refused. 
(Code 1995, § 110-88; Ord. No. 2436, § 3, 7-5-1988) 
Sec. 118-126. - Refusal; appeal; hearing. 
    If the chief of police shall refuse to approve the application of the applicant, the applicant may file a notice of appeal with the city clerk and treasurer and ask that the city council review the decision of the chief of police. This hearing may be held at a regular meeting of the city council or at such other time and place as the council may direct. 
(Code 1995, § 110-89; Ord. No. 2436, § 3, 7-5-1988) 
Sec. 118-127. - Issuance. 
    If the city council finds that the applicant meets the qualifications of this article, the city council may issue a directive to the city clerk and treasurer to issue a license to the applicant for the operation of a motor vehicle escort service. Notwithstanding the city council granting the license, the applicant must comply with all ordinances, laws and statutes of the city, county and state in the operation of the business. 
(Code 1995, § 110-90; Ord. No. 2436, § 3, 7-5-1988) 
Sec. 118-128. - Transferability. 
    A license granted under the provisions of this article shall not be transferrable to any other person to operate a motor vehicle escort service upon the streets and public ways of this city. 
(Code 1995, § 110-91; Ord. No. 2436, § 4, 7-5-1988) 
Sec. 118-129. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Any license issued to any person to operate a motor vehicle escort service upon the streets and public ways of this city under the provisions of this article shall be subject to suspension or revocation upon the recommendation of the chief of police to the city council. 
(b)  Suspension or revocation can be issued by the city council for the violation by such person or his agents, servants or employees who violate any provision of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 110-92; Ord. No. 2436, § 5, 7-5-1988) 
Sec. 118-130. - Fee. 
    The applicant for a motor vehicle escort service license must pay the fee provided in the city license schedule upon issuance of the license. 
(Code 1995, § 110-93; Ord. No. 2436, § 6, 7-5-1988) 
Secs. 118-131-118-158. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MOVING AND STORAGE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Alabama Motor Carrier Act, Code of Ala. 1975, § 37-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 118-159. - Moving vehicle owner moving household goods; report. 
    All persons owning or operating within the city limits any dray, moving van, furniture car, transfer wagon, express wagon or any other vehicle, who hauls or moves or causes to be hauled or moved household goods or personal effects, other than baggage, of any person within the city limits who is changing the place of his abode, shall make a report thereof to the chief of police. The report shall be made within one day thereafter on a blank form as described in section 118-160. 
(Code 1973, § 18-1; Code 1995, § 110-116) 
Sec. 118-160. - Report form. 
    The form or blank to be filled in by the person required by section 118-159 to make a report to the chief of police shall be established by the city council, from time to time and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1973, § 18-3; Code 1995, § 110-117) 
Sec. 118-161. - Maintenance of reports; expenses. 
(a)  The chief of police shall keep in a well-bound book, open for inspection at the police station, the reports required by section 118-159, alphabetically indexed. 
(b)  The entire expense and cost of executing and carrying out the provisions of this section shall be free of cost to the city, except the expense of furnishing such book and the blank described in section 118-160. 
(Code 1973, § 18-4; Code 1995, § 110-118) 
Sec. 118-162. - Use of fictitious or false name by employer of mover. 
    No person causing the removal of any property described in section 118-159 shall give the owner or operator of any vehicle employed to haul such property a fictitious name or refuse to give the correct name of the owner or party in possession of such property, so as to willfully deceive such operator as to the correct information. 
(Code 1973, § 18-2; Code 1995, § 110-119) 
Appendix A - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
Adopted by the City of Bessemer Planning and Zoning Commission 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein are the subdivision regulations as adopted by the city council on June 16, 1983. Amendments to these regulations are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original regulations. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Additions made for purposes of clarity are indicated by brackets. 

SECTION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1.1. - Title. 
    These regulations shall hereafter be known, cited and referred to as the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Bessemer, Alabama. 
Sec. 1.2. - Authority. 
    Under the provisions of title 11, subtitle 2, chapter 52, articles 2 and 3 of the Code of Alabama, 1975 [Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-52-30-11-52-36 and 11-52-50-11-52-54], these following regulations governing the subdivision and development of land are hereby adopted by the Bessemer Planning and Zoning Commission at a meeting on September 16, 2008. 
Sec. 1.3. - Jurisdiction. 
(1)  On and after September 16, 2008, these subdivision regulations shall apply to all subdivisions and development of land, as defined herein, located within the corporate limits of the City of Bessemer. 
(2)  No land shall be subdivided within the corporate limits of the City of Bessemer until: 
(a)  The subdivider or his agent has submitted the required plats and plans to the planning and zoning commission, and 
(b)  Approval of all plats and plans, including approval of the final plat, by the planning and zoning commission, and 
(c)  The approved final plat is recorded with the office of the Judge of Probate, Jefferson County. 
(3)  No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any lot, parcel, plot of land or building site which was created by subdivision after the effective date of, and not in conformity with the provisions of these subdivision regulations, and no excavation of land or construction of any public or private improvements shall take place or be commenced except in conformity with these regulations. 
Sec. 1.4. - Purpose. 
    The purpose and intent of these regulations is to establish objective, citywide standards for public improvements and the subdivision of land within the City of Bessemer. These regulations are based upon the following elements: 
(1)  Proper, subdivision design criteria. 
(2)  The impact of development upon adjacent property. 
(3)  The definition of public and private development responsibilities. 
(4)  Concern for the health, safety and welfare of the entire city. 
(5)  Encouragement of an orderly and efficient development pattern. 
(6)  Coordination with other applicable ordinances and plans. 
SECTION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 2.1. - Enforcement, violations and penalties. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the City of Bessemer Building Official to enforce these regulations and to enforce these regulations and to bring to the attention of the Bessemer City Attorney any violations or lack of compliance herewith. 
(2)  No owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of land located in a proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell any such parcel before a final plat of such subdivision has been approved by the planning and zoning commission, in accordance with the provisions of these regulations, and filed with the Judge of Probate, Jefferson County. The description of metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer shall not exempt the transaction from these penalties. 
(3)  The penalty for transferring a lot in an unapproved subdivision shall be five hundred dollars for each lot or parcel so transferred or sold. The City of Bessemer may enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by action for injunction brought in any court or equity jurisdiction or may recover the same penalty by a civil action in any court or [of] competent jurisdiction. 
Sec. 2.2. - Conflict with other laws. 
    Whenever the provisions of these regulations impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other ordinance, the regulations herein contained shall prevail. Whenever the provisions of any other ordinance requires more restrictive standards than are required herein, the requirements of such regulations shall prevail. 
Sec. 2.3. - Seperability. 
    If any section, clause or portion of these regulations shall be held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such findings shall not affect any other section, clause or portion of these regulations. 
Sec. 2.4. - Variances. 
(1)  Hardship. Where the planning and zoning commission finds that unusual hardship may result from strict compliance with these regulations, it may approve variances to these regulations so that substantial justice may be done, provided that such variation shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent or purpose of these regulations. 
(2)  Conditions for variance. The planning and zoning commission shall not approve variances unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence that presented to it in each specific case that: 
(a)  The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare or injurious to other property. 
(b)  The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not applicable generally to other property. 
(c)  Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the property involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of these regulations are carried out. 
(3)  Petition. A petition for such variance shall be submitted in writing by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is filed for the consideration by the planning and zoning commission. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the application and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner. 
(4)  Documentation. Any variance thus authorized shall be entered in writing in the minutes of the planning and zoning commission with the reason which justified the departure to be set forth. 
Sec. 2.5. - Amendment. 
    These regulations may be amended after notice and public hearing in the same manner as prescribed by law for their original adoption. 
Sec. 2.6. - Assurance for completion of improvements. 
(1)  General[ly]. The subdivider shall be responsible for the provision of all required improvements to the subdivision. This may be accomplished by either the full installation of all required improvements by the subdivider at the time the final plat is submitted to the planning and zoning commission, or by the provision of a financial guarantee of performance. 
(2)  Financial guarantee of performance. The guarantee of performance by the subdivider shall be in the form of a subdivision improvement bond or an [a] certificate of deposit, and shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  Bond or certificate of deposit must be approved by the city engineer, and building official. 
(b)  Bond or CD must be in an amount not less than 200 percent of the total cost to cover the installation of all required roads, paving, and utilities and fees encountered in the completion of improvements. 
(3)  Failure to complete work. If within twelve months after filing said bond the subdivider has not completed all necessary improvements, or in the opinion of the planning and zoning commission said improvements have not been satisfactorily installed, the bond shall be used by the city to complete the improvements in a satisfactory manner, or the city may take such steps as may be necessary to require performance under the bond. 
(4)  Guarantee against faulty material. The planning and zoning commission may require a maintenance bond for five years for street construction maintenance and one year for sewer lines and other facilities if there is reasonable doubt concerning the stability or proper construction of any improvement required herein. This bond shall be made in cash or by a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Alabama. 
Sec. 2.7. - Vacation of plat or map. 
(1)  Any plat or map, whether or not executed and recorded as provided in these regulations, may be vacated by the owner, his executor, administrator or guardian of the lands at any time before the sale of any lot therein by a written instrument declaring the same to be vacated, executed, acknowledged and recorded in like manner as conveyances of land which declaration, being duly recorded, shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of the plat or map so vacated and to divest all public rights in the streets, alleys and public grounds and all dedications laid out or described in such plat or map. 
(2)  When lots have been sold, the plat or map may be vacated, in the manner herein provided by all the owners of lots in such plat or map joining in the execution of such writing. 
SECTION 3. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 3.1. - Usage. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided herein, all words shall have the customary dictionary meaning. 
(2)  The present tense includes the future tense. The singular number included [includes] the plural, and the plural includes the singular. 
(3)  The word "person" includes a firm, corporation, association, organization, trust or partnership. The word "lot" include[s] "plot" or "parcel." The word "building" includes "structure". The word "shall" is mandatory. The word "may" is permissive. 
Sec. 3.2. - Specific definitions. 
(1)  Alley. A minor public way designed to afford a secondary means of access to abutting properties. 
(2)  Arterial streets. Those which serve the major traffic movements and which provide intracommunity continuity but do not penetrate identifiable neighborhoods. 
(3)  Block. A tract of land bounded by streets, or a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways, or boundary lines of municipalities or counties. 
(4)  Building official. The duly designated building official of the City of Bessemer, Alabama. 
(5)  Building setback line. A line parallel to the property line in front of which no structure may be erected. 
(6)  City. The City of Bessemer, Alabama. 
(7)  City attorney. The licensed attorney designated by the city commission to furnish legal assistance for the administration of these regulations. 
(8)  City clerk. The duly designated clerk of the City of Bessemer, Alabama. 
(9)  City commission. The city commission of the City of Bessemer, Alabama. 
(10)  City engineer. The duly designated engineer of the City of Bessemer, Alabama. 
(11)  City specifications. All construction specifications or codes which have been adopted by the city commission or as required by the planning and zoning commission. 
(12)  Collector streets. Those which collect traffic from local streets to the arterial streets by providing both land access and traffic circulation within neighborhoods and commercial and industrial areas. 
(13)  Corner lot. A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
(14)  Cul-de-sac. A local street with only one outlet and designed to have one end permanently closed; the closed end terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
(15)  Double frontage lot. A lot having frontage on two non-intersecting streets as distinguished from a corner lot. 
(16)  Easement. A grant of rights by the property owner for use of a strip of land for specific purposes. 
(17)  Final plat. A plat of a tract of land which meets the requirements of these regulations and is in form for recording in the office of Probate Judge, Jefferson County. 
(18)  Fire chief. The duly designated fire chief of the City of Bessemer, Alabama. 
(19)  Group development. A development comprising two or more structures, built on a single lot, tract or parcel of land, and designed for occupancy by separate families, firms or other enterprises. 
(20)  Half-street. A street which does not meet the minimum right-of-way widths set forth in these regulations. 
(21)  Health department. The Jefferson County Department of Health. 
(22)  Local street. Those intended to provide access to abutting properties and to other streets. 
(23)  Lot. A parcel of land having its principal frontage on a public street and intended for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for building development. 
(23A)  Lot, interior. A parcel of commercial or industrial property not having its principal frontage on a public street. Any subdivision or resubdivision having an interior lot shall be considered by the planning and zoning commission for approval on a case by case basis. Minimum access, lot sizes, and dimensions requirements shall be met for all interior lots in accordance with land parcel zoning. 
(24)  Open space. Any land either publicly or privately owned which is designated as being permanently undeveloped and used for recreation, conservation or preservation. 
(25)  Owner's engineer. The engineer or land surveyor registered and in good standing with the State Board of Registration of Alabama who is the agent in his professional capacity of the owner of land which is proposed to be subdivided or which is in the process of being subdivided. 
(26)  Planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission of the City of Bessemer, Alabama. 
(27)  Preliminary plat. The preliminary drawing(s), described in these regulations, indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision. 
(28)  Right-of-way. A strip of land separate and distinct from the lots adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots, which is occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or for another special use. 
(29)  Subdivider. The person(s), firms(s), or corporation(s) engaged in the process of creating a subdivision or having completed a subdivision. 
(30)  Subdivision. The division of a lot, tract or parcel or land into two or more lots, plats, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of subdividing or re-subdividing. Also, when appropriate, this term includes changing of lot size, alteration or relocation of private or public streets and alleys, and extension of major locations. 
(31)  Zoning ordinance. The official zoning ordinance, as amended, of the City of Bessemer, Alabama. 
(Ord. No. 3526, § I, 10-21-2014) 
SECTION 4. - SUBDIVISION APPLICATION PROCEDURE AND APPROVAL PROCESS 

Sec. 4.1. - Applicability. 
    The following may be exempted within the definition of subdivision or be subject to the requirements thereof: the city engineer and zoning administrator may exempt the following parcel divisions if divisions shall not have negative effects on traffic, drainage, utility service or public safety. 
(1)  The original parcel being divided into no more than two tracts with no street construction, utility installation or other public improvements involved. Any further division of this original tract will require a recording of a subdivision plat. 
(2)  The division of land into parcels greater than ten acres where no street construction, utility installation, or other public improvements involved. Any further division will require a recording of a subdivision plat. 
(3)  Where property is divided by probated family estates. 
Sec. 4.2. - General procedure. 
    Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, before any contract is made for the sale of any part thereof, and before any permit for the erection of a structure in such proposed subdivision shall be granted, the subdivider shall apply for and secure approval of such proposed subdivision in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  The preparation and submission to the planning and zoning commission of a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision. 
(2)  The preparation and submission to the planning and zoning commission of a final plat, with required certificates. This final plat becomes the document to be recorded in the office of Judge of Probate, Jefferson County, when duly signed by the chairman of the planning and zoning commission and by the city clerk. 
Sec. 4.3. - Preliminary plat. 
(1)  Application procedure. 
(a)  Before preparing the preliminary plat for a subdivision, the subdivider should discuss with the building official the procedure for adoption of a subdivision plat and the design requirements. The building inspector shall also advise the subdivider to discuss the proposed subdivision with the city engineer. 
(b)  The application for approval of a preliminary plat shall be made on a form available from the building inspector (see appendix [1A]). 
(c)  The application, including five prints of the subdivision plan, shall be submitted to the building official at least 22 days prior to the planning and zoning commission's regularly scheduled meeting. A fee of $100.00 is due at the time [of] submission. 
(2)  Contents. The preliminary plat, which shall meet the minimum standards of design and the general requirements for the construction of public improvements set forth in these regulations, shall contain the following information: 
(a)  [Vicinity sketch map.] Vicinity sketch map, at a scale of one inch equal 2,000 feet showing the following: 
1.  Name of subdivision. 
2.  Names, addresses and telephone numbers of owner(s) and person(s) responsible for subdivision design. 
3.  Description of property location by section, township, range, 1/4, 1/4 graphic scale, north arrow and date. 
4.  Location of streets and other general development of the surrounding area. 
5.  Boundaries and approximate dimensions. 
6.  Amount of acreage to be subdivided. 
7.  Major arterial streets, utilities and community facilities (shopping areas, schools, parks, hospitals, churches, etc.). 
(b)  [Preliminary sketch plan.] Preliminary sketch plan of subdivision at a scale of not more than one inch equals 100 feet showing the following: 
1.  Name of subdivision. 
2.  Names, addresses and telephone numbers of owner(s) and person(s) responsible for subdivision design. 
3.  Description of property location by section, township and range; graphic scale; north arrow; and date. 
4.  Amount of acreage to be subdivided. 
5.  Topography at two-foot contour intervals. 
6.  The approximate location, dimensions and areas in square feet of all existing and proposed lots. 
7.  Names and location of all existing and proposed streets within the subdivision and adjacent to it. 
8.  Location of and widths of all existing and proposed street rights-of-way within the subdivision. 
9.  Plans and profiles showing the locations and typical cross-section of street pavements including curbs and gutters, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way, manholes and catch basins. 
10.  Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations along center lines of all streets. Where a proposed street intersects an existing road, the elevation along the center line of the existing road within 100 feet of the intersection shall be shown. 
11.  Profiles showing approximate radii of all curves, lengths of tangents and central angles on all streets. 
12.  The location and dimensions of all building setback lines along each street. 
13.  Preliminary proposals for utilities showing connections to existing water supply and sanitary sewage systems. When such connections are not practical, all proposed individual water supply and sewage systems shall have the approval of the Jefferson County Department of Health. 
14.  The location and sizes of all proposed culverts, storm sewers, inlets and drainage facilities. 
15.  The location, width and purpose of all easements. 
16.  The approximate location, dimensions and area of all parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for parks, schools, open space or other public use; and conditions, if any, of the dedication or reservation. 
17.  The existing zoning classification of the subdivision and adjacent land. 
18.  A fire protection plan showing the location and size of all existing and proposed water lines and fire hydrants. 
19.  Assurances that the provisions of the latest Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways will be adhered to during construction. Detail plan may be required by city engineer. 
20.  Provide information as shown on city engineer's checklist. 
(3)  Review process. 
(a)  At least 15 days prior to the regularly scheduled planning and zoning commission meeting and public hearing, the building official shall transmit copies of the preliminary plat to the city engineer, fire chief, and any other applicable city or county official for review and recommendations. 
(b)  A public hearing shall be held at the regularly scheduled planning and zoning commission meeting. Such hearing shall be advertised in the manner as the provisions of section 11-52-77 of the Code of Alabama, 1975 [Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-77]. 
(4)  Approval. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission shall approve, approve subject to modifications, or disapprove the preliminary plat within 30 days after the date of its regularly scheduled meeting at which time the public hearing was held. 
(b)  The recommendations of the city engineer, fire chief, and any other applicable city or county official concerning the preliminary plat shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission before action is taken. 
(c)  One copy of the preliminary plat shall be retained by the building inspector for the official planning and zoning commission files and one copy shall be returned to the subdivider with the date of approval, approval with modifications, or disapproval and the reasons therefore accompanying the plat. 
(d)  The approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of one year at the end of which time final approval on the subdivision must have been obtained from the planning and zoning commission. Any plat not receiving final approval within the period of time set forth herein shall be null and void, and the subdivider shall be required to resubmit a new plat for preliminary approval subject to all new zoning restrictions and subdivision regulations. 
Sec. 4.4. - Final plat. 
(1)  Application procedure. 
(a)  The application for approval of a final plat shall be made on a form available from the building inspector (see appendix [1B]). 
(b)  The application, including five copies of the original plat done on Mylar and in black ink, shall be submitted to the building official at least 22 days prior to the planning and zoning commission's regularly scheduled meeting. 
(c)  The final plat shall be drawn to a scale of not more than one inch equals 100 feet, on sheets not larger than 42 inches wide. When more than one sheet is required, an index sheet of the same size shall be filed as a key, showing the entire subdivision. 
(2)  Contents. The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved, and shall contain the following information: 
(a)  [Vicinity sketch map.] Vicinity sketch map, at a scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet showing the same information as the preliminary plat, with modified date, may be used. 
(b)  [Final plat.] Final plat of subdivision at a scale of not more than one inch equals 100 feet showing the following: 
1.  Name of subdivision. 
2.  Names, addresses and telephone numbers of owner(s) and person(s) responsible for subdivision design. 
3.  Description of property location by 1/4, 1/4 section, township and range; graphic scale; north arrow; and date. 
4.  Names and location of all streets within the subdivision and adjacent to it. 
5.  Names, location and width of all streets and other rights-of-way within the subdivision. 
6.  Lot numbers in numerical order for all lots. 
7.  House numbers for all lots. 
8.  Dimensions to the nearest one tenth of one foot, bearings of all angles to the nearest one minute, and location which can be reproduced on the ground for the following information: 
a.  Lot lines; 
b.  Boundary lines; 
c.  Block lines; 
d.  Building setback lines; 
e.  Street lines. 
9.  Location, width and purpose of all utility and other easements. 
10.  Location and description of all monuments for lot and right-of-way boundaries. 
11.  Double land tie to government survey. 
(c)  [Certifications.] Certifications regarding the following: 
1.  Certification that the subdivider is the legal owner of the land. 
2.  Certification of formal irrevocable offer of formal dedication of streets, rights-of-way and other sites for public use. 
3.  Certification by the owner's engineer of the accuracy of the plat. 
4.  Certification of approval by health department or environmental services for sewage disposal. 
5.  Certification by the city engineer and building official complied with one of the following: 
a.  Installed all improvements according to these regulations. 
b.  Posted a surety bond or certificate of deposit, in an amount sufficient to assure the completion of all required improvements. 
(d)  [Restrictive covenants.] Restrictive covenants that apply to the subdivision shall be submitted with the final plat. 
(3)  Review process. 
(a)  At least 15 days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting of the planning and zoning commission, the building official shall transmit copies of the final plat to the city engineer and any other applicable city or county official for review and recommendations. 
(b)  The recommendations of the city engineer and any other applicable city or county official concerning the final plat shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission before action is taken. 
(4)  Approval. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission shall approve or disapprove the final plat within 30 days after the date of its regularly scheduled meeting at which the final plat is introduced. 
(b)  If the final plat is disapproved, the reasons therefor shall be stated in the official minutes of the planning and zoning commission. 
(c)  If the final plat is approved, a certificate of planning and zoning commission approval shall be executed (see appendix [1B]), and one copy of the certificate and final plat filed by the building inspector with the Judge of Probate, Jefferson County, within 30 days after acceptance by the city council of the various dedications, including subdivision streets, as public property. 
(d)  The original of the final plat with the planning and zoning commission resolution shall be returned to the subdivider while one copy shall be maintained in the files of the planning and zoning commission and the city engineer. 
Sec. 4.5. - Acceptance of streets and other public ways. 
    Approval of the final plat by the planning and zoning commission shall not constitute acceptance by the public of the dedication of any street or other public way or ground. After approval of the final plat and the construction of streets shown thereon, the city engineer may recommend to the city council that it accept these streets as public roads and other ways or grounds as public facilities and take over their perpetual maintenance. 
SECTION 5. - DESIGN STANDARDS FOR STREETS 

Sec. 5.1. - Inspection. 
(1)  The city engineer shall approve the proposed grades, type of paving, size of drainage structures, and any or all other engineering problems involved therein before a subdivider commences to grade or pave streets within a subdivision. 
(2)  Before construction of streets, the city engineer shall be notified no less than 24 hours in advance of any phase of operation to be started. 
(3)  The base shall be inspected and installed under the direction of the city engineer. 
(4)  No paving shall be installed until the base is approved. 
(5)  No paving shall be installed until approval is given as to type of paving and materials used. 
(6)  In cases in which the city engineer has reasonable doubt concerning the stability or proper construction of any streets, he may require that after installation of the binder course that the seal course of bituminous pavement be delayed for a period of minimum of six months. 
Sec. 5.2. - Topography and arrangement. 
(1)  All streets shall be designed along contour elevations which will result in minimum grades and greatest visibility whenever practicable with consideration given to the anticipated use of the land. Grades of streets shall conform as closely as possible to the original topography. 
(2)  The proposed street layout shall be made according to sound land planning principles for the type of development proposed. 
(3)  Local and collector streets shall be laid out to discourage use by through traffic, to permit efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum number of streets necessary to provide convenient and safe access to property. 
(4)  Existing streets and right-of-way which are proposed to be retained shall be incorporated into the street system so as not to cause hazardous conditions. 
(5)  Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography of other physical conditions, or unless in the opinion of the city engineer and planning and zoning commission such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision with the existing layout or the most advantageous future development of adjacent tracts. 
(6)  Where a proposed subdivision has no frontage on an existing public road or public right-of-way, the subdivider must provide and dedicate to the city a suitable right-of-way for ingress and egress. This connecting road becomes part of the street system of the proposed subdivision and is subject to all regulations regarding streets. 
(7)  The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of principal streets between adjacent properties when such continuation is necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire protection, or for efficient provision of utilities. If the adjacent property is undeveloped and the street must be a dead-end street temporarily, the right-of-way shall be extended to the property line. A temporary cul-de-sac turnabout shall be provided on all temporary dead-end streets, with the notation on the subdivision plat that land outside the normal street right-of-way shall revert to abuttors whenever the street is continued. The planning and zoning commission may limit the length of temporary dead-end streets in accordance with the design standards of these regulations. 
(8)  Where a road does not extend to the boundary of the subdivision and its continuation is not required by the planning and zoning commission for access to adjoining property, its terminus shall normally not be nearer to such boundary than 50 feet. However, the planning and zoning commission may require the reservation of an appropriate easement to accommodate drainage facilities, pedestrian traffic or utilities. A cul-de-sac turnaround shall be provided at the end of a permanent dead-end street in accordance with the design standards of these regulations. For convenience to traffic and more effective police and fire protection, permanent dead-end streets shall, in general, be limited to 750 in length. 
Sec. 5.3. - Intersections. 
(1)  Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and in no case at an angle of less than 75 degrees. An easement radius may be required by the city engineer for intersections having an interior angle of less than 90 degrees. 
(2)  Intersections involving more than four basic street legs or approaches shall be prohibited. Merging lanes, deceleration lanes, "Y" intersections, and traffic circles are not included in this prohibition but are considered as being parts of one street leg or approach. 
(3)  Opposing intersections shall be placed opposite each other where practical or placed at a minimum of 150 feet apart, except where the intersected street has separated dual drives without median breaks at either intersection. 
(4)  Minimum curb radius at all intersections shall be at least 15 feet unless a different figure is expressly approved by the city engineer because of special topographical considerations or sound engineering practices. 
(5)  Intersections should be planned and located to provide as much sight distance as possible. In achieving a safe highway design, as a minimum, there should be sufficient sight distance for the driver on the local or collector street to cross an arterial without requiring approaching traffic to reduce speed. 
(6)  The vertical alignment in the intersection area should be as flat as possible. Where the grade of any street at the approach to an intersection exceeds three percent, a leveling area shall be provided, having not greater than a three percent grade for a distance of fifty feet from the intersection of the street centerline. 
Sec. 5.4. - Street right-of-way widths. 
(1)  The planning and zoning commission shall determine the classification of city streets. 
(2)  Minimum widths of right-of-way are as follows: 
Street Classification Minimum 
Right-of-Way 
Width 
(in feet) Alley 20 Local 50 Collector 50 Arterial or commercial/industrial 80 Cul-de-sac 50  
(3)  Subdivisions that adjoin existing streets shall dedicate additional right-of-way to meet the minimum right-of-way width requirements. 
(a)  The entire right-of-way shall be provided where any part of the subdivision is located on both sides of the existing streets. 
(b)  When the subdivision is located on only one side of an existing street, a sufficient amount of right-of-way shall be provided by the applicant in order to meet the right-of-way requirements. 
Sec. 5.5. - Street pavement widths. 
    Minimum pavement widths are as follows: 
Street Classification Minimum 
Pavement Width 
(Lane) Alley 10 feet Local 24 feet Collector 24 feet Arterial or commercial/industrial 24 feet Cul-de-sac 40 feet 
(radius)  
Sec. 5.6. - Street grades and vertical alignment. 
(1)  The grades for all streets shall not exceed 15 percent or be less than one percent. 
(2)  The maximum street grade is as follows: 
Street Classification Minimum 
Right-of-Way 
Width Alley 8% Local 15% Collector 12% Arterial or commercial/industrial 8%  
(3)  Grades approaching intersections shall not exceed three percent for a distance of 50 feet from the intersection of the street centerline. 
(4)  Vertical curves shall be used at all changes of grade exceeding one percent and shall be designed with equal tangents in order to avoid hazardous profiles. 
(5)  Proper drainage shall be provided at the low point in vertical curves. 
Sec. 5.7. - Cross slope. 
(1)  On streets in tangent alignment the high point of the road shall be at the center of the pavement. 
(2)  On typical asphalt treated seal coats, the cross slope from the center line shall be 1/4" per foot. On other types of surfacing, the cross slope shall be determined by the city engineer. 
Sec. 5.8. - Horizontal curvature for streets. 
(1)  All streets shall have a minimum radius of curvature of 250 feet. 
Sec. 5.9. - Super elevation. 
(1)  Super elevation shall normally be used on curves to aid the vehicle in negotiating the curve. 
(2)  The maximum rate of super elevation cross slope shall not exceed 8 percent. The centerline of the street shall normally be used for the axis of rotation. 
(3)  Care shall be taken to avoid drainage pockets in the low points of the super elevation. 
(4)  The transition from a crown slope to super elevation shall be determined by standard engineering practice. 
Sec. 5.10. - Sight distance. 
(1)  Stopping. 
(a)  The minimum stopping sight distance is the distance required by the driver of the vehicle to a complete stop after an object in the street ahead becomes visible. Stopping sight distance is measured from the driver's eye's, which are assumed to be 3.75 feet above the street surface, to an object 6 inches high on the street surface ahead. 
(b)  The minimum stopping sight distances for design of all two-lane streets shall be determined by the city engineer. 
Design Speed 
(MPH) Minimum Stopping 
Sight Distance 
(feet) 25 175 30 200 35 230 40 275 45 310 50 350 55 415  
(2)  Passing. 
(a)  Passing sight distance is the minimum sight distance that enables a driver to safely pass another vehicle without interfering with oncoming traffic traveling at the designed speed. The sight distance available for passing is the longest distance at which a driver whose eyes are 3.75 feet above the street can see the top of an object 4.5 feet above the street surface ahead. 
(b)  The minimum passing sight distance shall be determined by the city engineer. 
Design Speed 
(MPH) Minimum Stopping 

Sight Distance 

(feet) 25 900 30 1,100 35 1,300 40 1,500 50 1,800 55 1,900  
Sec. 5.11. - Alleys. 
(1)  Alleys may be required in commercial and industrial districts to facilitate access to parking, loading, and service points. 
(2)  Alleys are not permitted in residential districts, except when the planning and zoning commission determines that special conditions warrant a secondary means of access. 
Sec. 5.12. - Road surfacing. 
(1)  Applicability. A permanent type paving shall be applied to all streets in a proposed subdivision. 
(2)  Subgrade. 
(a)  The subgrade shall be thoroughly compacted and shaped prior to application of the base. 
(b)  The subgrade where Portland cement paving is to be used shall be brought to a firm and unyielding condition with a uniform density of 95 percent proctor. 
(c)  The city engineer shall have the subgrade roll tested at the developers cost and approved prior to base placement. 
(3)  Base. 
(a)  The city engineer shall determine if a special base is required for Portland cement concrete surfaced streets. 
(b)  The base materials for asphalt surfaced roads shall be approved, as to mixture and durability, by the city engineer. 
(c)  The base material shall be spread without segregation in a loose maximum eight-inch lift and shall be compacted by vibratory, steel wheel rollers or other approved rollers to a maximum density of 95 percent proctor. Additional depth of base material may be required because of anticipated traffic. 
(d)  The base shall be inspected and installed under the direction of the city engineer and no surfacing shall be installed until the base has been approved by the city engineer. 
(4)  Asphalt surfacing. 
(a)  A minimum of a two inch hot bituminous plant mixed binder layer shall be placed on the approved base. 
(b)  A minimum of a (11/2) hot bituminous wearing surface shall be placed on the approved binder layer after approval of the city engineer. 
(c)  A triple surface treatment type paving (bituminous surface treatment) may be used in lieu of plant mix binder and seal when approved by the city engineer. The type and rate of application for the prime, seal and aggregate shall be approved by the city engineer and shall conform to the latest edition of Alabama State Highway Department Regulations and Specifications. 
(5)  Portland cement concrete paving. 
(a)  A minimum of six-inch Portland cement concrete pavement without reinforcement shall be constructed in one course on a prepared sub grade (and base if required) after approval by the city engineer. 
(b)  Installation shall meet the requirements for strength, surface finish and joints as determined by the city engineer. 
Sec. 5.13. - Curb and gutter, valley gutter, sidewalks. 
(1)  The city engineer shall approve the location of curb and gutter, valley gutter, and sidewalks. 
(2)  Curb and gutter, and valley gutter shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete constructed on a prepared sub grade and shall conform to the cross-sections depicted in appendix [1C]. 
(3)  Sidewalks, when required, shall be a minimum of four feet wide in residential and eight feet wide in commercial areas. The cross-section for a sidewalk is located in appendix [1C]. 
(4)  Installation of curb and gutter, valley gutter and sidewalks shall meet the requirements for strength, surface finish and joints as determined by the city engineer. 
(5)  Sidewalks shall meet the requirements of the latest ADA Laws. 
Sec. 5.14. - Driveway access. 
(1)  Applications for all new accesses to streets within the city shall be made to the city engineer. The proposed location, width, drainage structure, traffic condition, site distance and surfacing shall be included in the access application. 
(2)  Entrances shall be located at points affording maximum sight distances and minimum grades. Entrances shall not be less than 10 feet no more than 20 feet width, measured at the right-of-way line. Entrances shall be located so that the curb openings are a minimum of five feet from the nearest edge of a street drainage inlet and 50 feet from the corner radius. More restrictive requirements may be required by the city engineer for commercial and industrial entrances. The cross-section for a standard driveway turnout is included in appendix [1C]. 
(3)  Commercial and industrial entrances shall not be more than 35 feet or less than 24 feet in width measured at the right-of-way line. The radius to increase the opening shall not be less than 15 but not more than 25 feet. Larger radius to accommodate truck traffic may be required by the city engineer. The distance between openings shall be a minimum of 150 feet and the distance opening from corner radius shall be 50 feet. 
Sec. 5.15. - Street names and signs. 
(1)  Street names, subdivision names and apartment project names shall be sufficiently different I sound and in spelling from other street names in the city so as not to cause confusion. The building official shall consult the postmaster before approval is given by the planning and zoning commission. 
(2)  The subdivider shall deposit with the city at the time of final plat approval the cost of traffic control devices, and street signs as determined by city engineer and street department director. 
(3)  The city shall install all street signs before issuance of certificates of occupancy for any residences on the streets approved. 
Sec. 5.16. - Streetlights. 
    Streetlights may be required by the planning and zoning commission and shall be installed in accordance with design and specification standards approved by the city engineer and electric service manager. 
SECTION 6. - DESIGN STANDARDS FOR BLOCKS 

Sec. 6.1. - General. 
    The general length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due regard to the followings: 
(1)  Provision of adequate building sited suitable to the special needs of the type of use planned. 
(2)  Zoning ordinance and health department requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions. 
(3)  Need for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic. 
(4)  Limitations and opportunities of the topography and other physical features. 
Sec. 6.2. - Block width. 
    Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of appropriate depths. Exceptions to this prescribed block width shall be permitted in blocks adjacent to major streets, railroads, or waterways. 
Sec. 6.3. - Block length. 
    Block lengths shall not be less than 400 feet nor more than 1,600 feet in length. 
Sec. 6.4. - Pedestrian crosswalks. 
    Crosswalks, not less than 10 feet wide, may be required by the planning and zoning commission through the center of blocks more than 800 feet long where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation or other community facilities. All crossings shall meet the requirements of the latest version of the MUTCD. 
SECTION 7. - DESIGN STANDARDS FOR LOTS 

Sec. 7.1. - Lot dimensions. 
(1)  Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of the zoning ordinance and the health department. In cases where the requirements conflict, the more strict requirement shall be followed. 
(2)  Where lots are more than double the minimum required area for the zoning district, the planning and zoning commission may require that such lots be arranged so as to allow further subdivision and the opening of future streets where they would be necessary to serve such potential lots, all in compliance with the zoning ordinance and these regulations. 
(3)  Side lot lines shall normally be at right angles to streets, except on curves where they shall be redial. 
(4)  Additional depth may be required on lots which back up to railroads, major streets, or other conflicting land uses. 
Sec. 7.2. - Double and reverse frontage lots. 
    Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided, except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries, or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
Sec. 7.3. - Access. 
(1)  All lots for detached houses shall abut a public street. 
(2)  Where driveway access from an arterial street may be necessary for several adjoining lots, the planning and zoning commission may require that such lots be served by a combined access drive in order to limit the possible traffic hazard on such street. 
(3)  Where possible, driveways should be designed and arranged so as to avoid requiring vehicles to back into traffic on arterial streets. 
(4)  In special circumstances, a private access easement may be necessary to provide access to a parcel of commercial or industrial property that does not abut a public right-of-way (an "interior lot"). Access to commercial or industrial lots by private easement shall be approved only by specific action of the planning and zoning commission. In these special private access easement cases the following conditions shall apply: 
(A)  A single private access easement shall provide access for no more than eight lots. 
(B)  The property owner seeking access shall provide the planning and zoning commission a valid legal instrument, recorded in the office of the judge of probate, indicating ownership of the access easement a minimum of 20 feet in width or as required by the fire marshall and city engineer in cases where easement width may exceed the 20-foot minimum. 
(C)  The property owner shall provide a title insurance binder or commitment for title insurance from an insuring company within the State of Alabama for the property as described in the easement. 
(D)  The private access easement must be in a suitable form as approved by the city attorney. 
(E)  A statement on the filed record plat shall state the recorded access easement recording numbers, that the City of Bessemer has no obligation to repair or maintain the access in a suitable condition and that the City of Bessemer or agents shall not be liable for injuries to person or damage to property resulting from the site's lack of direct access to a public road. 
(Ord. No. 3526, § II, 10-21-2014) 
Sec. 7.4. - Property markers. 
(1)  A monument shall be placed at all lot corners and at all changes of direction of public right-of-way, including the beginning and end of a curve or radius. 
(2)  Monuments shall be of iron pipe not less than three-fourths inches in diameter and 24 inches long and driven so as to be flush with the finished grade. 
(3)  All markers shall be established on the ground prior to approval of the final plat. 
(4)  All markers shall be verified before issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
SECTION 8. - DESIGN STANDARDS FOR WATER AND SANITARY SEWER SYSTEMS 

Sec. 8.1. - Water system. 
(1)  The design and specifications of the distribution system shall meet the requirements of the Bessemer Fire Department and the Bessemer Water Service. 
(2)  Fire hydrants shall be located within 1,000 feet of any structure in residential districts and within 500 feet of any structure in commercial districts. Location and specifications are subject to the approval of the Bessemer Fire Department. 
(3)  The responsibility for purchase and installation of fire hydrants shall be by agreement between the applicant and the Bessemer Water Service. 
(4)  Water mains and fire hydrants shall be installed as necessary to prevent the future cutting of the pavement of any street, sidewalk or other public improvement. 
Sec. 8.2. - Sanitary sewers. 
(1)  Sanitary sewers shall be installed in each subdivision as approved by the city and/or the Jefferson County Environmental Services Department. Septic tanks may be permitted in lieu of sewer lines, upon approval by the health department. 
(2)  Lot size shall not be less than the minimum standard and of satisfactory size for the proper installation of an on-site sewerage disposal system if required by the health department. No building permit shall be issued until written approval has been given by the health department. 
(3)  The sanitary sewer system shall be separate and independent of any storm water drainage system. 
(4)  Sanitary sewers and laterals shall be installed as necessary to prevent the future cutting of the pavement of any street, sidewalk, or other public improvement. 
Sec. 8.3. - Electric system. 
(1)  The design and specifications of the distribution system shall meet the requirements of Bessemer Electric Service. 
(2)  Location of electric service shall be determined by Bessemer Electric Service. 
(3)  The Bessemer Electric Service shall determine if underground or overhead service is required. The installation cost to the owner shall be determined by Bessemer Electric Service. 
SECTION 9. - DESIGN STANDARDS FOR DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWERS 

Sec. 9.1. - General requirements. 
(1)  A drainage plan shall be made for each subdivision by the owner's engineer, which plan shall take into consideration the ultimate or saturated development of the tributary area in which the proposed subdivision is located. The drainage plan shall show contours and pipe shall be submitted for approval as part of the preliminary plat along with the profile grades and typical roadway section. 
(2)  On-site storm water retention measures may be required by the city engineer. 
(3)  An erosion and sedimentation plan will be required as stipulated in section 10 of these regulations. Plans are required to comply with the latest version of the Alabama Manual of Sediment and Erosion Control Devices. 
(4)  The storm and sanitary sewer plans shall be worked out prior to the development of the other utility plans. Engineering considerations shall give preferential treatment to these gravity flow improvements, as opposed to other utilities and improvements. 
(5)  Drainage area and peak flow estimates must be provided for each drainage facility, as well as profiles for all new storm sewers and open ditches, with outlets velocities. 
(6)  Structural capabilities for all new culverts and storm sewers shall be provided. 
(7)  Typical sections of all open ditches and swales shall be provided. 
(8)  Any new culvert or storm sewer pipe under the jurisdiction of the Alabama Department of Transportation or the Jefferson County Roads and Transportation Department must be approved by that authority. Copies of this approval shall be provided at the time of submittal of the preliminary plat. 
(9)  Catch basins and droop inlets shall be constructed if deemed necessary by the city engineer. 
(10)  The city engineer may require whatever additional engineering information it deems necessary to make a decision on subdivisions and other development which contains an area of questionable drainage. Lakes, ponds, and similar areas will be accepted for maintenance only if sufficient land is dedicated as a public recreation area, or if such area constitutes a necessary part of the drainage control system. 
(11)  Storm drainage facilities shall be designed by a qualified registered professional engineer, in the State of Alabama. The engineer's seal shall be on all drawings. 
Sec. 9.2. - Inspection. 
(1)  Before construction of drainage facilities, the city engineer shall be notified no less than 24 hours in advance of any phase of operation to be started. 
(2)  No drainage structure will be covered up until approval is given by the city engineer. 
Sec. 9.3. - Accommodation of upstream and adjacent property drainage. 
(1)  The City of Bessemer will not allow development of one site to cause an adverse effect on adjacent property. In some cases, storm water retention or improvement of existing downstream drainage facilities may be required. 
(2)  All off project drainage, draining onto the subdivision, shall be shown on contour maps showing the areas in across that the subdivision will have to accommodate. 
(3)  A culvert or other drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area. 
Sec. 9.4. - Flood plain district. 
    All development in the city shall be in compliance with the Bessemer Flood Plain Ordinance. 
Sec. 9.5. - Drainage easements. 
(1)  Where a subdivision is traversed by an existing of [or] proposed watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm drainage easement or right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such existing or planned drainage way. The width of such drainage easement or right-of-way shall be sufficient to contain the ultimate channel and maintenance way for the tributary area upstream. 
(2)  Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within road right-of-way, perpetual unobstructed easements at least 15 feet in width for such drainage facilities shall be provided across property outside the road lines and with satisfactory access to the road. 
Sec. 9.6. - General design requirements. 
(1)  Under no conditions shall storm drainage be emptied into the sanitary sewer system or vice-versa. 
(2)  Combination curb and gutter shall be constructed on grades over 12 percent, or on long unbroken grades, where no cross drains are feasible to divert the flow of water from the street, at the discretion of the city engineer. 
(3)  Water will not be permitted to run down the street more than 500 feet without proper drainage structures to intercept surface water. 
(4)  Drainage facilities shall be designed for a minimum of a 10-year rainfall event, except that the city engineer may require a more restrictive design (i.e., 25 or 100 year design) for such facilities as major drainage ways. Design calculations shall be based on future probable development of the entire drainage area to be served or developed. 
(5)  If outlet velocities are greater than five feet per second, some type of energy dissipation will be required. It riprap is used, the minimum weight shall be 50 pounds per stone. 
(6)  All roadway cross drain pipe shall be a minimum size of 18 inches and all side drain pipe shall be a minimum size of 18 inches. 
SECTION 10. - EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION REGULATIONS 

Sec. 10.1. - General. 
(1)  Erosion and sedimentation can be somewhat effectively controlled, but cannot be completely eliminated, either during active construction or after stabilization, from both a technical and an economic standpoint. 
(2)  Natural erosion during storm water runoff has always occurred and will continue at low rates from well stabilized areas. It may cause stream turbidity, scour and sedimentation regardless of the control measures applied. During construction accelerated erosion will occur during storm water runoff with a proportionate increase in visible erosion, scour and siltation both within and outside of the construction site. 
(3)  The following provisions impose requirement on persons engaged in land disturbing activities which require planning and implementation of effective sedimentation controls for subdivision development sites. 
(4)  The following provisions and requirements do not apply to silviculture, agriculture, and horticulture activities. 
Sec. 10.2. - Construction requirements. 
    An erosion and sedimentation control plan may be a part of the construction plans and filed with the City of Bessemer prior to the commencement of any land disturbing activity. Determination of the requirement for an erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be made by the city engineer. 
Sec. 10.3. - Protection of property. 
    Persons engaged in land-disturbing activities shall take all reasonable measures to protect all public and private property, including roadways, from damage by such activities. 
Sec. 10.4. - More restrictive rules shall apply. 
    Whenever there is a conflict between federal, state or local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, orders, and decrees, the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
Sec. 10.5. - Basic control objectives. 
(1)  Identify critical areas. On-site areas which are subject to severe erosion, and off-site areas which are especially vulnerable to damage from erosion and/or sedimentation, are to be identified and receive special attention. 
(2)  Limit exposed areas. All land-disturbing activities should be planned and conducted to minimize the size of the area to be exposed at any one time. 
(3)  Limit time of exposure. All land-disturbing activities should be planned and conducted to limit exposure to the shortest feasible time. 
(4)  Control surface water. Surface water runoff originating upgrade of exposed areas should be controlled to reduce erosion and sediment loss during the period of exposure. 
(5)  Control sedimentation. All land-disturbing activities should be planned and conducted so as to minimize off-site sedimentation damage. 
(6)  Manage storm water runoff. When the increase in the peak rates and velocity of storm water runoff resulting from a land-disturbing activity is sufficient to cause damage accelerated erosion of the receiving ditch or channel stream, plans should include measures to accelerated erosion and increased sedimentation of the ditch or stream channel. 
Sec. 10.6. - Mandatory standards. 
(1)  No land-disturbing activity shall be permitted in proximity to a lake, natural watercourse, or adjacent property where applicable, unless a buffer zone is provided along the boundary, of sufficient width to confine visible siltation and/or prevent erosion, provided that the land-disturbing activity is not in connection with the construction of the facilities to be located on, over, or under a lake, natural watercourse, or adjacent property. 
(2)  The angle for graded slopes shall be no greater than the angle which can be retained by vegetative cover or other adequate erosion control devices or structures. In any event, slopes left exposed will, within the shortest feasible time of final grading, be planted or otherwise provided with ground cover, devices, or structures sufficient to restrain erosion. 
(3)  Whenever land-disturbing activity is undertaken on a tract comprising more than one acre, if more than one contiguous acre is uncovered, a ground cover sufficient to restrain erosion should be planted or otherwise provided within 30 days on that portion of the tract upon which further active construction is not being undertaken, provided, that this activity shall not apply to cleared land forming the basin of reservoir later to be inundated 
Sec. 10.7. - Design and performance standards. 
    Erosion and sedimentation control measures, structures, and devices shall be so planted, designed and constructed as to provide control from the calculated peak rates of runoff from ten-year frequency storm. Runoff rates may be calculated using the procedures in the USDA, Soil Conservation Service's "National Engineering Field Manual for Conservation Practices", or other accepted calculation procedures. Runoff computations shall be based on rainfall data published by this National Weather Service for the area. 
Sec. 10.8. - Permanent downstream protection of stream banks and channels. 
(1)  A combination of storage and controlled release of storm water runoff may be required for highway construction; commercial, industrial, educational, and institutional developments of one acre or more; for multi-family residential developments of five acres or more; and, for single-family development of ten acres or more. 
(2)  Detention storage and controlled release will not be required in those instances where the person planning to conduct the activity can demonstrate that the storm water release will not cause an increase in accelerated erosion or sedimentation of the receiving ditch, stream channel, or other drainage facility, taking into consideration any anticipated development of the watershed in question. 
Sec. 10.9. - Borrow and waste areas. 
    When the person conducting the land-disturbing activity is also the person conducting the borrow or waste disposal activity, areas from which borrow is obtained shall be considered part of the land-disturbing activity where the borrow material is being used or from which the waste material originated. When the person conducting the land-disturbing activity is not the person obtaining the borrow and/or disposing of the waste, these acres shall be considered a separate land-disturbing activity. 
Sec. 10.10. - Access and haul roads. 
    Temporary access and haul roads, other than public roads, constructed or used in connection with any land-disturbing activity shall be considered a part of such activity. 
Sec. 10.11. - Operations in lakes or natural watercourses. 
    Land-disturbing activity in connection with construction, in, on, over, or under a lake or natural watercourse shall be planned and conducted in such a manner as to minimize the extent and duration of disturbance of the stream channel. The relocation of a stream, where relocation is an essential part of the proposed activity, shall be planned and executed so as to minimize changes in the stream flow characteristics, except when justification for significant alteration to flow characteristics is provided. 
Sec. 10.12. - Resonsibility for maintenance. 
    The person engaged in or conducting the land-disturbing activity shall be responsible for maintaining all temporary and permanent erosion and sedimentation measures and facilities during the development of a site. The responsibility for maintaining all permanent erosion and sedimentation control measure and facilities, after site development is completed, shall lie with the landowner, until such time adequate vegetative cover and site stabilization is achieved by the building inspector. 
Sec. 10.13. - Standards for erosion and sediment control practices. 
    Persons engaged in planning, designing, installing and maintaining sedimentation control measures may use generally accepted references on the subject following standard engineering and/or agricultural practices. All plans will be subject to review by city engineer. 
Sec. 10.14. - Additional measures. 
    Whenever the building inspector determines that significant sedimentation is occurring as a result of land-disturbing activity, despite application and maintenance of protective practice, the person conducting the land-disturbing activity or the person responsible for maintenance will be required to take additional protective action. 
Sec. 10.15. - Plan requirement. 
(1)  Whenever the area to be disturbed comprises more than one acre, a copy of the plan shall be filed with the building inspector a minimum of 30 days prior to beginning any land-disturbing activity. A copy of the plans shall also be on file at the job site. If the building official determines, either upon review of such plan or on inspection of the job site, that a significant risk of off-site sedimentation of erosion exists, it will require a revised plan prepared. Pending the preparation of the revised plan, the work shall be either suspended or continued under conditions outlined by the building inspector. 
(2)  Erosion and sediment control plans shall contain architectural and engineering drawings, maps, assumptions, calculations, and narrative statements as needed to describe adequately the proposed development of the site and the measures planned to meet the basic control objectives. Plan content may vary to meet the need of specific site conditions. 
APPENDIX [1A]. - RE-SURVEY PLAT CHECKLIST[2] 
BESSEMER RE-SURVEY PLAT CHECKLIST 
____________ Name of re-survey/re-subdivision 
____________ Scale (min. 1"=100') with graphic scale 
____________ Paper size (not larger than 24"×36") 
____________ Paper type - cloth or plastic film 
____________ Location of re-survey (section, township, and range) 
____________ Purpose of re-survey 
____________ Name, address, phone number, and fax number of owner (lending institution if applicable) 
____________ Name, address, phone number, and fax number of surveyor 
____________ North arrow 
____________ Date prepared 
____________ Zoning classification and zoning of all adjacent properties with use 
____________ Public areas to be dedicated 
____________ Name & location of existing & resurveyed streets and alleys 
____________ R.O.W. dimensions for existing & proposed streets and alleys 
____________ Horizontal curve data for resurveyed 
____________ Original lot numbers, lot lines, lot size, and streets (dashed) 
____________ Original deed reference 
____________ Location of existing & proposed easements 
____________ Dimensions of proposed easements (if applicable) 
____________ Lot numbers, lot lines, & building lines of adjoining property (dashed) 
____________ Boundaries of resurveyed property (bearings/angles & distances)-accurate survey in the field 
____________ Subdivision name with map book & page and/or tax parcel I.D. of adjoining property 
____________ Location & description of all permanent monuments 
____________ Lot numbers, lot lines & building lines of resurveyed lots (heavy continuous line) 
____________ Dimensions of resurveyed lot lines, and building lines (with angles or bearings) 
SIGNATURES & CERTIFICATIONS 
____________ Owner certification with street, easement & R.O.W. dedication (if applicable)(*) 
____________ Land surveyor certification statement, signature, and seal(*) 
____________ Jefferson County Dept. of Health Certification (if applicable) 
____________ City engineer certification 
____________ City mayor certification 
____________ City building certification 
____________ Commissioner of planning & zoning certification 
____________ Approval from applicable easement holders 
____________ Certification concerning bond (if applicable) 
;le=2; (*)Notary required-Make seal/stamp legible. 
    Note- See City of Bessemer Subdivision Regulations for requirements and certifications. The City of Bessemer Subdivision Regulations apply to all recorded plats; however, the record plat does not take precedence over deed covenants, restrictions, or other zoning ordinance requirements. The City of Bessemer enforces Subdivision and Zoning Regulations; however, deed covenants and local restrictions may be more restrictive (i.e., local homeowners association). 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Appendix A within the subdivision regulations as adopted by the city council on June 16, 1983 has been renumbered to Appendix 1A. This change is indicated in brackets for clarity. 

APPENDIX [1B]. - REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL SITE PLANS[3] 
CITY OF BESSEMER 
MINIMUM PLAN REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL SITE PLANS 
E.E.F.S. JOB NO.: DATE: 
REVIEW NO.: 
TITLE SHEET 
____________ Project name and street address 
____________ Owner/developer name, address, phone number (including cell and fax) 
____________ Vicinity map with location to 1/4, 1/4, section, township, range 
____________ Engineer's name, address, phone number (including cell and fax) 
____________ Plans on 24 × 36 sheets only 
BOUNDARY SURVEY/EXISTING CONDITIONS 
____________ Topographic tie to USGS Datum - note tie location 
____________ Existing public roads with right-of-way width and paving width 
____________ Utilities - water, sewer, electric power, phone, natural gas, other 
____________ Easements 
____________ Zoning classification and zoning of all adjacent property 
____________ Fire hydrant nearest to proposed development with color of top noted on drawing 
____________ Drainage structures (size and type) 
____________ Property boundary with marker and boundary tie 
____________ Legal description and deed reference 
____________ Parcel identification number 
PROPOSED SITE PLAN 
____________ Proposed use 
____________ Property boundary 
____________ Building location (existing and proposed) 
____________ Setback requirements 
____________ All adjacent buildings within 50 feet of boundary and use 
____________ Street names, alleys and private roads 
____________ Easements 
____________ Sight distance to public access 
____________ Detailed parking lot plan 
____________ Parking lot calculations on required spaces 
____________ Driveways with width and radius 
____________ Loading zones 
____________ Buffer zones 
____________ Variances (supply copy if previously approved) 
GRADING AND DRAINAGE PLAN 
____________ Topography tied to USGS 
____________ Existing and proposed contours 
____________ Existing and proposed drainage structures - pipes (headwater - hydraulic grade lines - Q(CFS) - V(FPS)) 
____________ Design data used (25 year) 
____________ Headwater on all entry pipes 
____________ Inlet D.A., CFS 
____________ Drainage profiles as necessary 
____________ Floodprone areas (firm number and panel) 
____________ Drainage channels - channel lining type - flow level velocity 
____________ Drainage report 
____________ Non-adverse effects letters 
____________ All sheets stamped with signature from authority of record 
EROSION CONTROL PLAN - AS SUBMITTED TO ADEM AND SWM 
____________ Design to comply with Alabama Handbook of Erosion Control 
____________ Copy of ADEM permit 
____________ Copy of Jefferson County Stormwater Permit 
SANITARY SEWER OR ON-SITE SEWER DISPOSAL SYSTEM 
____________ Approved plans from Jefferson County Environmental Services or Jefferson County Health Department 
____________ Sanitary sewer impact number 
ACCESS PERMIT TO STATE OR COUNTY ROADS 
All plans (6 sets) must be prepared by a registered engineer, architect or appropriate professional in accordance with state law. 
The engineer must check and sign this form before plans will be accepted for review. 
I certify that the preceding information is complete and true to the best of my knowledge. 
____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
 Engineer ____________ / ____________ / ____________ ____________ 
 Date  
The above information is complete enough to begin the plans review process. 
____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
 City Engineering Office ____________ / ____________ / ____________ ____________ 
 Date  
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Appendix B within the subdivision regulations as adopted by the city council on June 16, 1983 has been renumbered to Appendix 1B. This change is indicated in brackets for clarity. 

APPENDIX [1C]. - REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBDIVISION[4] 
CITY OF BESSEMER 
MINIMUM PLAN REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBDIVISION SITE PLANS 
E.E.F.S. JOB NO.: DATE: 
REVIEW NO.: 
The information within this checklist is a minimum for obtaining approval. The plans must contain the following sheets, with the information as stated, in order to be reviewed. Submit plans with appropriate fees, applications, permits, drainage info, and non-adverse effects letter. 
____________ All sheets stamped with signature from authority of record 
TITLE SHEET 
____________ Project name and street address 
____________ Owner/developer name, address, phone number (including cell and fax) 
____________ Vicinity map with location to 1/4/1/4, section, township, range 
____________ Engineer's name, address, phone number (including cell and fax) 
____________ Plans on 24" × 36" sheets only 
BOUNDARY SURVEY/EXISTING CONDITIONS 
____________ Topographic tie to USGS Datum - note tie location 
____________ Existing public roads with right-of-way width and paving width 
____________ Utilities - water, sewer, electric power, phone, natural gas, other 
____________ Easements 
____________ Zoning classification and zoning of all adjacent property 
____________ Fire hydrant nearest to proposed development with color of top noted on drawing 
____________ Drainage structures (size and type) 
____________ Property boundary with marker and boundary tie 
____________ Legal description and deed reference 
____________ Parcel identification number 
PROPOSED SITE PLAN 
____________ Proposed use 
____________ Property boundary 
____________ Building location (existing and proposed) 
____________ Setback requirements 
____________ All adjacent buildings within 50 feet of boundary and use 
____________ Street names, alleys and private roads 
____________ Easements 
____________ Sight distance to public access 
____________ Driveways with width and location 
____________ Buffer zones 
____________ Variances (supply copy if previously approved) 
____________ Minimum lot size/dimensions 
____________ Fire hydrant minimum spacing 
GRADING AND DRAINAGE PLAN 
____________ Topography tied to USGS 
____________ Existing and proposed contours 
____________ Existing and proposed drainage structures - pipes (headwater - hydraulic grade lines - Q(CFS) - V(FPS)) 
____________ Design data used (25 Year) 
____________ Headwater on all entry pipes 
____________ Inlet D.A., CFS (Maximum 600' Spacing) 
____________ Drainage profiles as necessary 
____________ Floodprone areas (firm number and panel) 
____________ Drainage channels - channel lining type - flow level velocity 
____________ Outlet velocities greater than 5fps require energy dissipation 
____________ Drainage report 
____________ Non-adverse effects letters 
____________ Max grades 3:1 (or written statement from geotech engineer assuring slope stability) 
ROADS AND STREETS PLAN AND PROFILES 
____________ Name and location of existing and proposed streets 
____________ Minimum ROW width 50' (50' radius at cul-de-sacs) 
____________ Plan and profiles on all proposed streets 
____________ Typical roadway sections including curb and gutter (C/G 2' V/G 2.5') 
____________ Typical road buildup (11/2" binder 1" seal 8" base) 
____________ Complete horizontal and vertical curve data 
____________ Intersections separation not less than 150' 
____________ Cul-de-sac (or temporary turnabout at dead ends) minimum paving radius 40' 
____________ Maximum grades not exceeded, including 50' of 3.0% at intersections 
____________ Block length 400'-1600' 
____________ Inlet maximum 600' spacing 
Notify engineer 24 hrs before any phase of operation is started 
EROSION CONTROL PLAN - AS SUBMITTED TO ADEM AND SWM 
____________ Design to comply with Alabama Handbook of Erosion Control 
____________ Copy of ADEM permit 
____________ Copy of Jefferson County Stormwater Permit 
SANITARY SEWER OR ON-SITE SEWER DISPOSAL SYSTEM 
____________ Approved plans from Jefferson County Environmental Services or Jefferson County Health Department 
____________ Sanitary sewer impact number 
ACCESS PERMIT TO STATE OR COUNTY ROADS 
All plans (6 sets) must be prepared by a registered engineer, architect or appropriate professional in accordance with state law. 
The engineer must check and sign this form before plans will be accepted for review. 
I certify that the preceding information is complete and true to the best of my knowledge. 
____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
 Engineer ____________ / ____________ / ____________ ____________ 
 Date  
The above information is complete enough to begin the plans review process. 
____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
 City Engineering Office ____________ / ____________ / ____________ ____________ 
 Date  
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Appendix C within the subdivision regulations as adopted by the city council on June 16, 1983 has been renumbered to Appendix 1C. This change is indicated in brackets for clarity. 

APPENDIX [1D]. - FINAL PLAT[5] 
BESSEMER FINAL PLAT CHECKLIST 
ITEMS TO BE ON THE PLAT 
____________ Name of plat 
____________ Scale (min. 1"=100') with graphic scale 
____________ Paper size 24" × 36" 
____________ Paper type -Mylar sheet (3 mils) 
____________ Location of plat (1/4/1/4 section, township, and range) 
____________ Name, address, phone number, and fax number of owner (lending institution if applicable) 
____________ Name, address, phone number, and fax number of surveyor 
____________ North arrow 
____________ Date prepared 
____________ Public areas to be dedicated 
____________ Name & location of streets and alleys 
____________ R.O.W. dimensions for streets and alleys 
____________ Horizontal curve data 
____________ Original lot numbers, lot lines, lot size, and streets (dashed) 
____________ Original deed reference or plat map book & page number 
____________ Location of existing & proposed easements with use 
____________ Dimensions and purpose of easements (if applicable) 
____________ Lot numbers, lot lines, & building lines of adjoining property with plat reference (dashed) 
____________ Boundaries of resurveyed property with tie to control points 
____________ Dimensions of resurveyed lot lines, and building lines (with angles/bearings & distances) 
____________ Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land 
____________ Subdivision name with map book & page and/or parcel I.D. of meets and bounds property with deed reference 
____________ Location & description of all permanent monuments 
____________ Lot numbers, lot lines of resurveyed lots (heavy continuous line) 
____________ Minimum building setback lines of resurveyed lots (dashed line) 
____________ Stamped and signed by an Alabama registered surveyor 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION TO BE SUBMITTED, NOT ON PLAT 
____________ Copy of existing record plat (full map, partial copies not accepted) 
a)  Including map book and page number 
b)  Copies of all subsequent resurveys 
____________ Tax map with: 
a)  Zoning classification of said parcel 
b)  Zoning of all adjoining parcels 
____________ Survey of property with all improvements (existing and proposed) 
a)  If property is vacant state so 
b)  Show zoning setbacks 
____________ Street paving widths 
____________ Flood information (FEMA map and panel number with zone) 
SIGNATURES & CERTIFICATIONS 
____________ Owners (with easement or ROW dedication statement if applicable)(*) 
____________ Surveyor/engineer(*) 
____________ City engineer certification 
____________ Chairman of planning & zoning commission certification 
____________ Building official certification concerning bond (if applicable) 
____________ Mayor certification 
____________ Jefferson County Health or Environmental Services 
____________ Approval from applicable easement holders (if changed) 
;le=2; (*) Notary required-Make seal/stamp legible. 
    Note- See the City of Bessemer Subdivision Regulations for requirements and certifications. The City of Bessemer Subdivision Regulations apply to all recorded plats; however, the record plat does not take precedence over deed covenants, restrictions, or other zoning ordinance requirements. The City of Bessemer enforces subdivision and zoning regulations; however, deed covenants and local restrictions may be more restrictive (i.e., local homeowners association). 
____________ Owner certification of title with street, easement & R.O.W. dedication (if applicable)(*) 
**Banker, mortgage company, and/or lien holders must sign plat. 
Owner's certification and dedication. We, the undersigned (name of owner) do hereby certify that we are the owners of and the only person having any right, title, or interest in the land shown on the plat of (name of subdivision), and that the plat represents a correct survey of the above described property made with our consent, and that we hereby dedicate to the public use all the streets as shown on said plat. The easements as shown on the plat are created for the installation and maintenance of public utilities. We hereby guarantee a clear title to all lands so dedicated from ourselves and our heirs or assigns forever, and have cause the same to be released from all encumbrances so that the title is clear, except as shown in the abstractor's certificate. 
____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
 Owner(*) 
____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
 Date 
____________ Land Surveyor (of Engineer) Certification Statement, Signature, and Seal(*) 
Surveyor's certificate. I, ____________ the undersigned, do hereby certify that I am a Professional Land Surveyor and/or Civil Engineer and that the annexed map of (name of subdivision) consisting of ____________ streets, currently represents a survey made under my supervision on the ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ ; and that all the monuments shown hereon actually exist and their positions are correctly shown. I hereby certify that all parts of this survey and drawing have been completed in accordance with the requirements of the Minimum Technical Standards for the Practice of Land Surveying in Alabama. 
____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
 Surveyor(*) 
____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
 Registration number 
____________ City Officials 
I hereby certify that the subdivision plat for ____________ subdivision has been found to comply with the Subdivision Regulation for Bessemer, Alabama, with the exception of such variances, if any, as are noted in the minutes of the Planning and Zoning Commission and that it has been approved for recording in the Office of the Probate Judge of Jefferson County, Alabama. 
____________ ____________ ____________     ____________ ____________ ____________ 
Chairman, Planning and Zoning Commission     City Engineer, City of Bessemer 
____________ ____________ ____________     ____________ ____________ ____________ 
Building Official, City of Bessemer   Mayor, City of Bessemer 
____________ Jefferson County Dept. of Health Certification (if applicable) 
I hereby certify that the water supply and sewage disposal utility systems installed or proposed for installation in the subdivision plat entitled ____________ fully meet the requirements of the Alabama State Health Department, and are hereby approved as shown. 
____________ ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Jefferson County Health Department 
____________ 
Date 
____________ Jefferson County Environmental Services Sanitary Sewer Certification (if applicable) 
Environmental Services Department approval indicates that easements have been dedicated for future Jefferson County sanitary sewers however this does not mean sanitary sewers have been built or will be built in the future. Any change in the right-of-way or easement after this date may void this approval. 
____________ ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________     Date ____________ 
Director of Environmental Services 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Appendix D within the subdivision regulations as adopted by the city council on June 16, 1983 has been renumbered to Appendix 1D. This change is indicated in brackets for clarity. 

APPENDIX [1E]. - STANDARD DRAWINGS[6] 
1.  Residential street curb & gutter section 
2.  Industrial streets & main thoroughfares 
3.  Residential street valley gutter section 
4.  Service and rural development subdivision roads 
5.  Type 1 Private Entrances (residential) 
6.  Type 2 Special Commercial Entrances 
7.  Type 1 Special Commercial Entrances 
8.  Standard driveway residential 
9.  Parking table 
10.  Industrial streets repair section 
11.  Headwall inlets 
12.  Headwalls 
13.  Typical ditch sections 
14.  Standard typical road section with valley gutter 
15.  Standard typical road section no curb & gutter 
16.  Standard typical road section with curb & gutter 
17.  Dissipater headwall 
18.  Driveway turnout detail 
19.  Curb & gutter detail/valley gutter detail 



















Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Appendix E within the subdivision regulations as adopted by the city council on June 16, 1983 has been renumbered to Appendix 1E. This change is indicated in brackets for clarity. 

Appendix B - ZONING[1] 
CITY OF BESSEMER ZONING ORDINANCE 
Adopted By 
THE CITY COUNCIL FOR THE CITY OF BESSEMER 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the zoning ordinance, as adopted by the city council in Ordinance No. 3391, adopted September 16, 2008. Amendments to Ordinance No. 3391 are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Additions made for purposes of clarity are indicated by brackets. 

SECTION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1.1. - Title. 
(1)  This ordinance shall be known, cited and referred to as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of Bessemer, Alabama." 
Sec. 1.2. - Authority. 
(1)  Authority for this ordinance is provided under the provisions of volume 10, title 11, chapter 52, article 4, Code of Alabama, 1975 (Code of Ala. 1975, vol. 10, tit. 11, ch. 52, art. 4 [Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-70 et seq.]), as amended and supplemented by all applicable laws and said regulations governing: 
(a)  The establishment of districts within the corporate limits of Bessemer, Alabama, and; 
(b)  The regulation within such districts of the height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lots that may be occupied, the size of yards and other open spaces, the density of population and the use of buildings, structures and land, and; 
(c)  The replacement of all existing zoning ordinances, and; 
(d)  The provision of methods for administration of this ordinance and penalties thereof, as hereby adopted by the city council of the City of Bessemer. 
Sec. 1.3. - Purpose. 
(1)  To promote public health, safety, morals and general welfare. 
(2)  To provide for the orderly development and growth of Bessemer. 
(3)  To avoid congestion on the public roads and streets. 
(4)  To conserve life, property and natural resources and the expenditure of funds for public improvements and services. 
(5)  To enhance the quality of life to benefit the general public. 
(6)  To promote economic development that is essential to the city's growth. 
(7)  To continually improve the appearance/environment of the city, consistent with the city's growth and economic development. 
Sec. 1.4. - Zoning districts. 
(1)  For the purposes herein stated, the City of Bessemer is divided into districts of such number, shape and area, and of such common unity of purpose, adaptability or use, which are deemed most suitable to provide for the best general civic use, protect the common rights and interests within each district, preserve the general rights, and interests of all; and by further regulations to limit the location, uses and occupancy of buildings, structures and land to be used for trade, industry, residence or other structures, including the ratio of lot occupancy and coverage, street setback lines, sizes of yards, and other open spaces, signage and displays. 
(2)  For the purpose of this ordinance, the City of Bessemer is hereby divided into the following districts: 
(a)  Residential districts 
1.  R-1 Single-family district 
2.  R-2 Single-family residential district 
3.  R-3 Single-family/two-family residential district 
4.  R-3A Patio home/garden home district 
5.  R-3B Townhouse district 
6.  R-4 Multi-family residential low density 
7.  R-5 Multi-family residential medium density 
8.  R-6 Planned residential district 
9.  R-7 Estate residential district 
10.  R-8 Rural residential district 
(b)  Commercial districts 
1.  O-1 Office services district 
2.  C-1 Neighborhood commercial district 
3.  SC-1 Neighborhood shopping center district 
4.  C-2 Central business district 
5.  C-3 Community business district 
6.  C-4 Arterial services district 
7.  C-5 General business district 
8.  C-6 Planned shopping district 
9.  C-7 Health and institutional district 
(c)  Industrial districts 
1.  I-1 Light industrial district 
2.  I-2 Heavy industrial district 
3.  I-2-A Industrial district 
4.  I-3 Industrial district 
5.  I-3-S Strip mining district 
6.  I-4 Industrial park district 
7.  I-5 Sanitary sewage disposal district 
8.  I-5-A Waster water treatment district (private) 
9.  I-0 Obnoxious odors district 
10.  HW-1 Hazardous waste district 
11.  I-6 Planned industrial district 
(d)  Specialty districts 
1.  A-1 Agricultural district 
2.  MXD Mixed-use district 
3.  PRD Planned recreational district 
4.  INST-1 Institutional district 
5.  INST-2 Institutional district 
6.  INST-3 Institutional district 
7.  U-1 Utilities district 
8.  AP Airport district 
9.  MS Mobile home subdivision district 
10.  MP Mobile home park district 
11.  AE Adult entertainment district 
12.  OA Outdoor amusement district 
13.  CEM-1 Cemetery district 
14.  CEM-2 Pet cemetery district 
15.  HZ Holding zone 
Sec. 1.5. - Zoning map. 
(1)  The map referred to herein shall be identified by the title Zoning Map of Bessemer, Alabama, and is hereby adopted and made a part of this ordinance. 
(2)  The zoning map will be dated and further identified by the signature of the mayor of Bessemer and attested by the city clerk. 
(3)  The zoning map shall apply only to land within the City of Bessemer. 
(4)  Unless otherwise shown on said zoning map, the boundaries of districts are lot lines, the center lines, of streets or alleys or such lines extended, railroad right-of-way lines, or the corporate limit lines as they exist at the time of enactment of this ordinance. When establishing new zoning district boundaries, a parcel of land must be of one zoning classification unless subdivided into separate lots/tracts and zoned by individual tracts. 
(5)  The zoning map shall be kept and maintained by the building and inspection service department and will be available for inspection and examination by members of the public at all reasonable times as any other public record. 
Sec. 1.6. - Application of ordinance. 
(1)  No structure shall be constructed, erected, placed or maintained and no land use commenced or continued within the City of Bessemer except as specifically or by necessary implication, authorized by this ordinance. 
(2)  No land or structure may be used except for a purpose permitted in the district in which it is located. 
(3)  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered except in conformity with the area and height regulations of the district in which the building is located. 
(4)  The minimum building lines, parking spaces, open spaces and lot areas required by this ordinance for each existing building or for any building hereafter erected, shall not be encroached upon nor reduced. 
(5)  Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot as herein defined and in no case shall there be more than one main building and one main use on one lot. Accessory structures shall not include living quarters; neither will sanitary facilities or separate electrical services be permitted in accessory structures without the approval of the Bessemer Board of Zoning Adjustment. 
(6)  Temporary structures important to construction work may be permitted for use in any district during the period that construction work is in progress, but such temporary buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work. 
(7)  Utility structures including, but not limited to, poles, wires, cross arms, transformers attached to poles, guy wires, insulators, conduits and other facilities necessary for the transmission or distribution of electric power or to provide telephone or telegraph service and pipe lines, vents, valves, hydrants, regulators, meters and other facilities necessary for the transmission or distribution of gas, oil, water or other utilities may be constructed, erected, repaired, maintained or replaced within any district within the city. This is not to be construed to include the erection or construction of buildings, nor the erection or construction of radio, television, cellular communication towers, all of which are permitted in any non-residential or central business zone district subject to the approval of the board of adjustment. 
Sec. 1.7. - Nonconforming uses of land and buildings. 
(1)  Intent. 
(a)  Within the districts established by this ordinance or amendments that may later be adopted, there exist lots, structures and uses of land and be structures, which were lawful when established, but which would be prohibited or restricted under the terms of this ordinance or future amendment. It is the intent of this ordinance to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. Nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
(2)  Continuance. 
(a)  A nonconforming use lawfully existing at the effective date of this ordinance may be continued, except as hereafter provided, although such use does not conform with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(3)  Restoration of safe condition. 
(a)  Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent the restoration of any building or structure to a safe or sanitary condition when required by the proper authorities. 
(4)  Restoration after damages. 
(a)  Other than detached single family dwellings, no nonconforming building or structure which has been damaged by fire or other causes to the extent of more than 50 percent of its current replacement value prior to the time of such damage, shall be rebuilt or restored except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(5)  Abandonment. 
(a)  A nonconforming use which has been discontinued for a continuous period of one year shall not be reestablished, and any future use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(6)  Change in use. 
(a)  A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. A nonconforming use which is changed to a conforming use shall not be permitted to revert to a nonconforming use. 
(7)  Nonconforming residential lots. 
(a)  Where a lot of record at the time of the effective date of this ordinance has less area or less width than herein required for the district in which it is located, said lot may nevertheless be used as a building site upon the approval by the building and inspections department provided that the side yard requirements are met. 
Sec. 1.8. - Annexed property. 
(1)  Property annexed by the City of Bessemer shall be zoned by the city council prior to the issuance of a building permit. A temporary holding zone (HZ) classification may be established for this purpose. Should such zoning not be established by the city council, the property shall be considered as if zoned in accordance with its previous county zoning. Annexed property shall have a permanent zoning classification within 180 days of the annexation date. 
(2)  The planning and zoning commission shall recommend the type of zoning for annexed property in accordance with the provisions of section 2.11. 
Sec. 1.9. - Abandoned right-of-way. 
(1)  Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated or abandoned by official action of the City of Bessemer, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center-line of same street, alley or public way and all area included therein shall then be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended district. 
SECTION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 2.1. - Administrative officer. 
(1)  The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the chief officer of the department of buildings and inspections. 
(2)  Said official shall also: 
(a)  Issue all building permits and maintain records of the building permits. 
(b)  Issue all certificates of occupancy and maintain records of the certificates of occupancy. 
(c)  Issue and renew, where applicable, all temporary use permits and maintain records of the temporary use permits. 
(d)  Maintain current zoning maps and records of amendments to the zoning maps. 
(e)  Have the right to enter upon any premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections of land or structures necessary to carry out the enforcement of this ordinance. 
Sec. 2.2. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
    The chief building and inspection department official shall make interpretations of the "Bessemer Zoning Map" upon request of any person. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any district shown on said maps the following rules shall apply: 
(a)  Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following street and alley lines or land lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(b)  Zoning lines shall follow legal lots and blocks or the centerlines of public streets or alleys. 
(c)  Where boundaries are approximately parallel to public right-of-way lines, such boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto. 
Sec. 2.3. - Board of adjustment. 
(1)  Legal establishment. 
(a)  The City of Bessemer Zoning Board of Adjustment is established, and members of the board of adjustment shall be appointed, pursuant to the terms and provisions of section II[11]-52-80, Code of Alabama, 1975 (Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-80); said board shall have only those powers specifically delegated to it by said Code. 
(2)  Powers. 
(a)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this ordinance. 
(b)  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this ordinance upon which the board is required to pass under this ordinance. 
(c)  To review and approve or deny uses permitted upon review. 
(d)  To authorize upon appeal, in specific cases, such variances from the terms of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of this ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice served. 
(3)  Guidelines for variances. Variances may be granted in individual cases of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the board of adjustment that the conditions outlined below do, in fact, exist. In no case shall the board grant a variance that permits the permanent use of land, building or structure for a use not permitted within the district in which the land, building or structure is located. Nor shall the board grant a variance which permits the extension or addition of a nonconforming use or in any way makes a nonconforming use more permanent. Before any variance is granted, the board shall consider the following factors. 
(a)  If there are extraordinary and exceptional conditions which are peculiar to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography that are not applicable to other lands or structures in the same district. 
(b)  If granting the variance requested will not confer upon the applicant any special privileges that are denied to other residents of the district in which the property is located. 
(c)  If a literal interpretation of the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other residents of the district in which the property is located. 
(d)  If the requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this ordinance and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or to the general welfare. 
(e)  If the special circumstances are not the intended result of the actions of the applicant (i.e., self-imposed hardship). 
(f)  That the variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the land, building or structure. 
(g)  No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district, and no permitted or nonconforming use of lands, structures, or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance. 
(h)  That the variance will not allow the permanent establishment of a use not permissible under the terms of this ordinance in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this ordinance in said district. 
(i)  That in proving that a hardship has been imposed on the property as a result of the strict interpretation of the ordinance, the following conditions cannot be considered pertinent to the determination of a hardship: 
1.  That a variance would increase the financial return from the land. 
2.  Personal hardship. 
3.  Self-imposed hardship. 
(4)  Variance application procedure. 
(a)  An application for a variance shall be filed on a form available from department of building inspections. 
(b)  A fee of $100.00 shall accompany the application. 
(5)  Uses permitted on review. 
(a)  A use permitted on review is a use which is compatible with the permitted district uses but, because of its nature, must be reviewed and approved by the board of adjustment, prior to issuance of a building permit. Such uses fall into two separate categories: (1) uses which are specifically mentioned in the ordinance as requiring board of adjustment approval; and (2) uses which are not specifically listed in the ordinance. 
(b)  Uses listed in the ordinance as permitted upon review shall be reviewed by the board of adjustment and approved if determined consistent with the provisions of the ordinance. 
(c)  Uses which are not listed in this ordinance, may be permitted in a district which permits similar uses, upon approval of the board of adjustment. The board shall not grant approval of a use which would constitute a rezoning of the property or permitting a use not similar in its nature to those uses listed as permitted uses in a district. 
(d)  A fee of $100.00 shall be charged for an application for a use permitted on review. 
(6)  Public hearing. 
(a)  At least 15 days prior to the board of adjustment meeting at which a variance, appeal, or use permitted on review is initially considered, the department of buildings and inspections shall give written notice to all owners of property located in whole or in part within 500 feet of the boundaries of the subject property. For this purpose, the owner of said properties to be notified will be identified as those shown by the records of the office of the tax assessor of Jefferson County, Bessemer Division, on a date not more than one year prior to the date of such notice. The notice shall state: 
1.  The location of request for variance, appeal or use permitted on review (by mailing address and legal description). 
2.  The nature of the request. 
3.  The time, date and location of the board of adjustment meeting at which the request is to be reviewed. 
4.  That a protest may be filed with respect to the application. 
(b)  Such notice shall be deemed given when deposited in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to such property owners at their addresses as shown on the records of the office of the tax assessor. Any error in the address of any such notice shall not invalidate the giving of notice provided that no more than five percent of the total number of notices given contain any such error. 
(c)  Any property owners to whom the above stated notice is given may protest the application before the board of adjustment in person or by filing with the buildings and inspections department a written protest signed by such property owner. 
(d)  The board of adjustment shall hold a public hearing on a request at the first regularly scheduled meeting after compliance with notice provisions as set forth herein. The board of adjustment shall render a decision on the application before the next regularly scheduled meeting unless additional information is required. If additional information is required, the board of adjustment shall have 30 days from the date of submittal of this additional information to the buildings and inspections department, in which to make a decision. 
(e)  Request for hearings before the board of adjustment, if denied on the first presentation, will only be accepted for re-hearing after a waiting period of six months unless there are changes which would warrant another hearing as determined by the board of adjustment. 
(7)  Appeals from the board of adjustment. 
(a)  Any party aggrieved by any final judgment or decision of the board of adjustment may, within 15 days thereafter, appeal there from to the circuit court by filing with the board a written notice of appeal specifying the judgment or decision from which the appeal is taken. Such appeals shall be in conformity and subject to the provisions of section 11-52-81, Code of Alabama (Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-81). 
Sec. 2.4. - Relating to standard building code. 
    The City of Bessemer has adopted the International Building Code as developed by the International Building Code Congress International [International Code Council], Inc. The enforcement of this code provides minimum requirements to safeguard life, health and public welfare and the protection of property as it relates to these safeguards by regulating and controlling the design, construction, alteration, repair equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of all buildings or structures and appurtenances thereto. 
Sec. 2.5. - Issuance of building permit. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to: 
(a)  Commence earthwork, 
(b)  Commence construction of any building or other structure, including accessory structures or signs, 
(c)  Store building materials or erect temporary field offices, 
(d)  Commence the moving, alteration or repair of any structure, until the building inspection officer has issued a building permit for such work. 
(2)  A building permit shall be required for any excavation, construction or alteration the cost of which is one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for the department of building and inspections to issue a building permit until an inspection officer has inspected the proposed plans in detail and found them in conformity with this ordinance. An application for a building permit shall include: 
(a)  Location, size, and dimensions of the site and mailing address. 
(b)  The use, location, size, and height of all existing and proposed structures on the site. 
(c)  The location and number of parking spaces. 
(d)  All easements and rights-of-way. 
(e)  The setback and side lines of buildings on adjoining property, may be submitted along with other information concerning the lot or adjacent property and may be required for determining conformance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(f)  The location and dimensions of all exterior graphic displays. 
(g)  Buffers. (See section 8.10.) 
(h)  Topography at 2-foot intervals, along with a drainage plan and an erosion control plan are required in all non-residential zones. 
(i)  Any development plan required under the provisions of this ordinance, bearing certificate of approval by planning and zoning commission. 
(4)  The fee for submission of a building permit application is one dollar ($1.00) plus one percent of the estimated cost for excavation, building, construction or alteration. Minimum permit: $25.00. Initial plans review fee of $200.00 will be charged and will be deducted from the building permit fee when issued. Two plans reviews will be included in the building permit fee, any additional plan review, a fee will be charged at the present approved hourly rate. 
(5)  Any permit under which no work has been done above the foundation walls or other foundation support within ninety days from the date of issuance shall expire by limitation, but shall upon reapplication be renewable, subject, however, to the provisions of all ordinances enforced at the time of said renewal. In no event shall any permit be renewed more than one time. 
Sec. 2.6. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  No land, building or other structure or part thereof hereafter erected, moved or altered in its use shall be used or occupied until the department of buildings and inspections has issued a certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy is required before issuance of a business license on new or remodeled buildings. 
(2)  Within three days after the owner or his agent has notified the buildings and inspection that a building or premises or part thereof is ready for occupancy or use, it shall be the duty of the building inspection officer to make a final inspection thereof, to issue a certificate of occupancy if the building or premises is found to conform with the provisions of this ordinance or, if such certificate is refused, to notify such applicant in writing of the refusal and the cause or causes therefore. Appeals from the decision of the chief buildings and inspections department official shall be heard by the building board of appeals. 
Sec. 2.7. - Unlawful structure. 
    Any use of land or a structure, or construction or alteration of a structure in violation of this ordinance, is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se. Whenever the building inspection officer declares that the use of land or a structure is in violation of this ordinance, the owner or occupant shall, within seventy-two hours from the issue of a notice from the building inspection officer to vacate such premises, accomplish the vacation of such land or structure until said use be made to conform to the provisions of this ordinance. 
Sec. 2.8. - Proper utilization and maintenance of properties. 
    All residential, commercial, industrial, and specialty premises shall be maintained at all times in a clean and orderly condition. The responsibility for compliance with this provision shall lie with all parties individually and/or collectively having a lease or ownership interest in the service station and said parties shall be separately and severally liable for the maintenance thereof. 
Sec. 2.9. - Penalties. 
    Any person, firm, corporation, or other organization which violates this ordinance shall be fined upon conviction not less than $100 nor more than $500 or imprisonment of not more than 6 months or both and cost of court for each offense. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
Sec. 2.10. - Remedies. 
    When any building or other structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained; or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the chief building and inspections department official or any other appropriate authority or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be damaged or caused hardship by such violation, may bring an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding, to correct or abate such violation or to prevent occupancy of such building structure, or land. 
Sec. 2.11. - Zoning amendments by property owner. 
(1)  A proposed change of the zoning district boundaries or of the regulations as they pertain to a piece of property may be initiated by the city council, the planning and zoning commission, or at the request of the owner, owners or authorized agents of the property to be rezoned. When a rezoning request is made by a petition of or on the behalf of the property owner the following procedure shall be followed: 
(2)  Application procedure. 
(a)  The application for rezoning shall be made on a form available from the department of buildings and inspections. 
(b)  The application shall contain the following information: 
1.  Name and address of the applicant. 
2.  Address and legal description of the property under consideration. 
3.  Present zoning of the property under consideration. 
4.  Requested zoning. 
5.  Reason for the rezoning request. 
6.  Availability of required utilities. 
7.  A map, drawn to scale, indicating: the dimension and exact location of the site in relation to the vicinity in which it is located; location of all public rights-of-way; location and dimension of all existing and proposed buildings and structures on the site and adjacent sites and the nature and location of all existing and proposed facilities for the disposal of storm water drainage. 
8.  Copies of any development plans required elsewhere in this ordinance. 
(c)  The application shall be submitted to the department of buildings and inspections at least thirty days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the planning and zoning commission, if said meeting is the hearing date for a request. A fee of $100.00 is due at the time of submission. 
(3)  Public hearing by planning and zoning commission. 
(a)  At least 15 days prior to the planning and zoning commission meeting at which the rezoning request is initially considered, the department of buildings and inspections shall give written notice to all owners of property located in whole or in part within 500 feet of the boundaries of the subject property as shown by the records of the office of the tax assessor of Jefferson County, Bessemer Division, on a date not more than one year prior to the date of such notice. The notice shall state: 
1.  The location of rezoning request (by mailing address and legal description). 
2.  The nature of the rezoning request (indicating the current zoning of the site and the proposed rezoning classification). 
3.  The time, date and location of the planning and zoning commission meeting at which the rezoning request is to be reviewed. 
4.  That a protest may be filed with respect to the application. 
(b)  Such notice shall be deemed given when deposited in the United States Mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to such property owners at their addresses as shown on the records of the office of the tax assessor. Any error in the address of any such notice shall not invalidate the giving of notice provided that no more than five percent of the total number of notices given contain any such error. 
(c)  Any property owners to whom the above-stated notice is given may protest the application before the planning and zoning commission in person or by filing with the department of buildings and inspections a written protest signed by such property owner. 
(d)  The planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing at the first regularly scheduled meeting after compliance with notice provisions as set forth herein. The planning and zoning commission shall render a decision on the application before or at the next regularly scheduled meeting unless additional information is required. If additional information is required, the planning and zoning commission shall have 30 days from the date of submittal of this additional information to the city, in which to make a recommendation on the request to the city council. 
(4)  Public hearing by city council. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission of a proposed zoning amendment, the city council shall consider the proposed amendment at a public hearing to be held on the 2nd regular voting city council meeting of the following month. 
(b)  The city shall publish the proposed rezoning request once a week for two consecutive weeks in advance of its passage in a newspaper of general circulation throughout the city. Said advertisement shall contain the information set forth in section 2.10(2)(a) of this ordinance. 
(c)  At the time and place scheduled for the public hearing of the proposed amendment, the city council shall hear the presentation of the applicant, review the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, and hear any arguments in opposition and support by the general public of the proposal. 
(d)  Upon receipt of a negative recommendation from the planning and zoning commission on a proposed zoning amendment, the city council shall follow the review procedures as set forth in paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of this subsection. 
(e)  The city council may adopt amendments to the zoning ordinance by a majority vote. 
(5)  Limit on rezoning requests. When the city council denies a rezoning request, the planning and zoning commission shall not reconsider the same request for a period of six months. Each time the city considers the zoning request, the $100 administrative fee must be paid. 
Sec. 2.12. - Zoning amendments by City of Bessemer. 
(1)  The planning and zoning commission and/or the city council, may, upon its own initiative, hold public hearings for the consideration of any proposed amendment to the provisions of this ordinance or to the zoning district boundaries after notice thereof in accordance with the provisions of section 2.11(3)(b) of this ordinance. The planning and zoning commission shall report its recommendations to the city council. 
(2)  The city council shall adhere to the procedure for adoption of zoning ordinance amendments set forth in section 2.10 of this ordinance. 
(3)  The city council may adopt amendments to the zoning ordinance and map by a majority vote of the council. 
Sec. 2.13. - Development plans. 
(1)  Required development plans. 
(a)  Submission of a preliminary development plan is required prior to zoning property in any of the districts so specified in the ordinance. 
(b)  A final development plan is required prior to the issuance of a building permit for all developments in all but single family residence districts. Approval if such plans by the planning and zoning commission is required in conjunction with rezoning an in accordance with planned district requirements. 
(2)  Preliminary development plans. 
(a)  Contents. A person or firm applying for a zoning amendment to establish a district, shall submit a preliminary development plan to the planning and zoning commission consisting of a minimum of: 
1.  Site plan, showing: 
a.  Direction of north, appropriate scale and topography. 
b.  Location of subject property in relation to the city. 
c.  Use of property adjacent to the site. 
d.  Proposed use of land and density of development for the site. 
e.  Proposed access to and traffic circulation within the site. 
2.  Proposed development schedule for the project. 
3.  Certification of provisions of adequate public facilities and services. 
(b)  Review process. The planning and zoning commission shall review and dispose of the proposed zoning amendment in accordance with the provisions of section 2. In any case, a amendment to the zoning ordinance may be submitted to the city council only upon the approval of the preliminary development plan or upon disapproval, with a report from the planning and zoning commission. 
(c)  The preliminary development plan may be approved as part of a zoning amendment. 
(d)  Mode detailed site development plans may be required subject to specific zone districts if determined necessary by the planning and zoning commission. In such cases plan contents shall include all or some of the following: 
(3)  Final development plan. 
(a)  Applicability. Prior to the removal of natural vegetation, restructuring of land, or construction of any improvements, an approved final development plan for all development as stipulated is required. 
(b)  Contents. A final development plan shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission in conjunction with rezonings (other than single-family residential) or as part of planned district requirements. It shall be consistent with the preliminary development plan and consist of: 
1.  A site plan, showing: 
a.  The direction of north, appropriate scale and topography at two foot contour intervals. 
b.  The proposed location and height of all structures. 
c.  The use of structures and land. 
d.  The location and use of structures adjacent to the site. 
e.  The location, area and number of parking spaces and maneuvering areas. 
f.  The location and dimensions of streets, driveways and walks on and off the site. 
g.  All service and loading spaces. 
h.  The location, size, number and character of all exterior signs and lighting. 
i.  The location, character and extent of existing vegetation, landscaping, retaining and screen walls and other treatment for the protection of adjoining property. 
j.  The facilities for surface drainage of the premises. 
k.  Location and character of all public improvements including utilities. 
2.  A public improvement plan consistent with the Bessemer subdivision regulations. 
3.  Any and all deed restrictions to be recorded. 
4.  Traffic analysis or statement of traffic impact indicating the probable effect of the proposed development on traffic patterns and capacities of adjacent streets in the immediate area, prepared by a registered professional engineer. 
5.  Development schedule indicating the approximate date when construction of the development or stages thereof can be expected to begin and be completed. 
6.  Fire protection approved by the Bessemer fire chief indicating the location and size of all proposed water mains, fire hydrants, and fire access lanes, as well as a description of all fire protection measures and devices for structures. 
7.  Other information necessary to establish compliance with this and other ordinances or the availability of adequate utility capacity. 
(c)  Additional requirements. 
1.  The applicant shall provide for and establish an organization or other legal entity for the control and maintenance of any common open space designated on the final development plan. Such organizations shall be created by covenants running with the land, and such covenants shall be included as part of final development plans. 
2.  Structure and open space shall be arranged in such a way as best to serve the needs of residents and commercial users and to minimize any adverse effects on neighboring districts. 
3.  Scenic assets and natural features, such as trees, streams, and topographic features, shall be protected and preserved to the fullest extent possible. 
4.  Adequate screening and separation between different land uses shall be provided by means of buffers or other acceptable methods. 
5.  Vehicular access to a site shall be from streets capable of supporting existing and projected traffic. No streets or roads within the development plan shall connect to the public street system in such a way as to encourage use of minor streets as collector or arterial streets. 
6.  Development plans shall make provisions for safe and convenient pedestrian access and circulation. 
(d)  Review process. 
1.  Upon receipt of an applicant's final development plan, the planning and zoning commission shall transmit a copy of the plan to the city engineer and such agencies as the planning and zoning commission may deem appropriate for their review, report, and recommendation. Such officials and agencies shall each furnish to the planning and zoning commission a report pertinent to their respective jurisdiction and concerns. 
2.  The planning and zoning commission shall review the applicant's final development plan and within 30 days from following the applicant's submission of the plan to the planning and zoning commission, the planning and zoning commission shall approve or disapprove the plan. If disapproved, the planning and zoning commission shall also prepare a written report stating clearly the reasons and justification therefore, and identify what changes are necessary in order for the plan to be approved. Said written disapproval shall be transmitted to the applicant. 
3.  If a determination is made that a plan is not consistent with the preliminary plan, a plan may not be approved. 
(e)  Amendment of final development plan. 
1.  The final development plan may be amended by the planning and zoning commission, provided the procedure specified for review and approval is followed and determination that the plan is consistent with the preliminary plan approved as part of rezoning. 
2.  Minor changes in the location, siting, or character of buildings and structures as shown on the final development plan may be authorized by the chief department of buildings and inspections official. No change authorized by said official under this section may increase the size of any building or structure by more than 10 percent, nor change the location of any building, or structure by more than 10 feet in any direction; notwithstanding anything in the foregoing, the chief official of buildings and inspections may not permit changes beyond the minimum or maximum requirements set forth in this ordinance. All other changes in the final development plan, including changes in the site plan and in the development schedule, must be made under the procedures that are applicable to the initial approval of a final development plan. 
3.  In a planned development district, if a determination is made that plan is not consistent with preliminary plan, the plan must be revised or an amendment may be submitted to city council, and processed as if a new zoning case. 
4.  The building inspection officer must certify approval of development plan prior to issuance of building permit. Said approval may include minor variations or provisions included herein for minor changes. 
5.  This section notwithstanding, additional development plan requirements may be specified for certain planned district classifications as specified in those district use regulations. 
SECTION 3. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 3.1. - Usage. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided herein, all words shall have the customary dictionary meaning. 
(2)  When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, the singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
(3)  The word "building" shall encompass the word "structure" and the word "shall" is construed as mandatory. 
Sec. 3.2. - Specific definitions. 
(1)  Accessory structure. A structure detached from a principal building on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or use. 
(2)  Accessory use. A use of land or of a building or portion thereof customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and located on the same lot with such principal use. 
(3)  Adult establishment. 
(a)  Adult establishment. Any adult book store, adult mini motion picture theater, adult motion picture theater, adult cabaret or dancing establishment or combination thereof. 
(b)  Adult bookstore. An establishment having, as a substantial of significant portion of its stock in trade available for purchase or rental, books, magazines, and other periodicals, cassette tapes, videotapes or films which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined in this subsection, or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale, rental, or display of such material. 
(c)  Adult cabaret or dancing establishment: A cabaret or dancing establishment which features topless or bottomless dances, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers. 
(4)  Alley. A service way providing a secondary means of public access to adjacent property. 
(5)  Alteration. Any change or rearrangement in the supporting members of an existing building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or any enlargement to or diminution of a building or structure, whether horizontally or vertically, or the moving of a building or structure from one location to another. 
(6)  Animal hospital. A place where small household pets are given medical or surgical treatment and short term boarding of pets within an enclosed building. 
(7)  Amortization. The process by which non conforming uses and structures must be discontinued or made to conform to requirements of the zoning ordinance at the end of a specified period of time. 
(8)  Apartment building. See " Dwelling, multiple ." 
(9)  Assisted-living facilities. Homes for the aged, intermediate institutions, and related institutions, whose primary purpose is to furnish room, board, laundry, personal care, and other non-medical services, regardless of what it may be named or called, for not less than twenty-four (24) hours in any week, to individuals not related by blood or marriage to the owner and/or administrator. This kind of care implies sheltered protection and a supervised environment for persons, who because of age or disabilities, are incapable of living independently in their own homes or a commercial board and room situation, yet who do not require the medical and nursing services provided in a nursing home. In these facilities, there might be available temporarily and incidentally the same type of limited medical attention as an individual would receive if he or she were living in their own home. (See also Communal living facilities .) 
(10)  Automobile sales. The use of any building, land area or other premise[s] for the display and sale of new or used automobiles, panel trucks or vans, trailers, or recreation vehicles on a site that is minimum size of 10,000 square feet and limited to 1 car per 400 square feet; any warranty repair work and other repair service conducted in conjunction with sales shall be considered as an accessory use. 
(11)  Automotive parts store. A retail store that sells new or factory rebuilt automotive parts, tools, and accessories but has no installation of automotive parts on site and provides no automobile repairs and/or storage. 
(12)  Automotive repair - minor. A place of business engaged in sales, installation and servicing of mechanical equipment and parts, including audio equipment and electrical work, lubrication, tune-ups, front end alignment, tire balancing, brake and muffler work, battery recharging and/or replacement, and similar activities, and in which all work is performed entirely within an enclosed building. This excludes any servicing of trucks or heavy equipment. Parking on the site of such a facility shall be restricted to 2.5 spaces per repair bay. 
(13)  Automotive repair - major. A place of business engaged in the repair and maintenance of vehicles including painting, body work, rebuilding of engines or transmissions upholstery work, installation and repair of automotive glass, fabrication of parts, and similar activities in which all work is performed entirely within an enclosed building; includes paint and body shop. This excludes any servicing of trucks or heavy equipment. Parking on the site of such a facility shall be restricted to 2.5 spaces per repair bay. 
(14)  Bank or financial service. A business engaged in providing banking or financial services, including a finance company and similar business. 
(15)  Basement. A story partly or wholly underground. For purposes of height measurement a basement shall be counted as a story when one half or more of its floor-to-ceiling height is above the average level of the adjoining ground and when its floor-to-ceiling height is not less than 61/2 feet. 
(16)  Block. All land fronting one side of a street between the nearest intersecting streets, roads, railroad rights-of-way and waterways, meeting or crossing the aforesaid street and bounding such land. 
(17)  Boarding house. A dwelling or part thereof, in which lodging is provided by the owner or operator for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods for more than three but not more than twelve boarders. Each unit intended to be rented does not constitute a dwelling unit as defined in this ordinance. (See Communal living facilities .) 
(18)  Buffer strip. A planted strip for the purpose of providing visual or physical separation of adjacent land uses. 
(19)  Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns, or by walls, including tents, lunch wagons, dining cars, trailers, and similar structures whether stationary or moving. Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosures of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind which has enclosing walls for fifty (50) percent of its perimeter. The term "building" shall be as if followed by the words "or part thereof". (For the purpose of this Code each portion of a building separated from other portions by a fire wall shall be red considered as a separate building). For the purpose of area and height limitations, this definition shall be applicable to sheds and open sheds. An open shed is any structure that has no enclosing walls. 
(20)  Building, main or principal. The principal building on a lot, including an attached garage, carport, porte-cochere, porch or part thereof, in which the principal use of the property is conducted. 
(21)  Building area. The portion of the lot occupied by the main building, including porches, carports, accessory buildings, and other structures. 
(22)  Building height. The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the finished grade to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line for mansard roofs, and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 
(23)  Building setback line. A line showing the nearest distance to the street right of way line or property lines that it is permissible to building a structure either in compliance with this ordinance or in following a plat, deed, or private contract. 
(24)  Buildable area. The area of a lot remaining after the minimum yard and open space requirements of the zoning ordinance have been met. 
(25)  Building, accessory. A subordinate structure on the same or adjoining lot as the principal or main building or use occupied or devoted to a use incidental to the principal use. 
(26)  Business services. Establishments primarily engaged in rendering services to business establishments on a fee or contract basis, such as advertising and mailing; building maintenance; employment service; management and consulting services; protective services; equipment rental and leasing; commercial research; development and testing; photo finishing; and personal supplies. 
(27)  Car wash. A commercial establishment used for the washing or cleaning of automobiles and light vehicles, including an unenclosed outdoor concrete slab. 
(28)  Carport. An accessory structure attached to a principal building for storage of vehicles, not enclosed by solid walls or garage door. 
(29)  Cemetery. Human burial grounds. 
(30)  Cemetery for pets. Animal burial grounds 
(31)  Cellar. That portion of a building between floor and ceiling which is or partly below grade, and having more than one half of its height below grade. A cellar is not counted as a story for the purpose of height regulations. 
(32)  Cellular communication towers. Towers constructed for receiving and transmission for cellular devices. 
(33)  Child care center. A private establishment enrolling six or more children between two and five years of age and where tuition, fees, or other forms of compensation for the care of the children is charged, and which is licensed or approved to operate as a child care center under the laws and regulations of the city and state authorities. 
(34)  Child care home. A child care facility which is a family home and which receives no more than six children for care. 
(35)  Church. A building or structure, or groups of buildings or structures, which by design and constructions are intended for conducting of organized religious services and accessory uses associated therewith. 
(36)  Clinic. An establishment where patients are admitted for examination and treatment by one or more physicians, dentists, psychologists or social workers and where patients are not usually lodged overnight. 
(37)  Club. A group of people organized for a common purpose to pursue common goals, interests or activities and usually characterized by certain membership qualifications, payment of fees, and dues, regular meetings, with a constitution and bylaws. 
(37A)  Commercial recreation facility. A facility for the purpose of uses such as indoor and outdoor sports and amusement facilities including but not limited to go kart racetracks, miniature golf courses, fitness facilities or gymnasiums, and other recreational facilities. 
(38)  Community/service club. Buildings arranged for the gathering of private club members and their guests, including social club, professional organization, fraternal club or lodge, union hall, civic association and similar uses. 
(39)  Country club. Land and buildings containing recreational facilities and club house for private club members and their guests. 
(40)  Condominium. A building, or a group of buildings, in which units are owned individually, and the structure, common areas and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis. 
(41)  Communal living facility. A facility in which 3 or more unrelated families live in group living arrangements, including group home, halfway house, fraternity house, etc., and further defined as follows: 
    Adult foster care homes. Foster care homes are for three or more unrelated adults who are in need of institutional care. These adults are unable to live in their own homes because of physical, mental or emotional limitations and cannot live with their families because of distance, ill health or estrangement, or family's inability to provide adequate care. 
    Boarding house. A dwelling other than a hotel, where for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals, or lodging and meals, are provided for three or more persons, up to 12 persons. 
    Domiciliary care facility. Homes for the aged, intermediate institutions, and related institutions, whose primary purpose is to furnish room, board, laundry, personal care, and other nonmedical services, regardless of what it may be named or called, for not less than twenty-four hours in any week, to three or more individuals not related by blood or marriage to the owner and/or administrator. 
    This kind of care implies sheltered protection and a supervised environment for persons, who because of age or disabilities, are incapable of living independently in their own homes or a commercial room and board situation, yet who do not require the medical and nursing services provided in a nursing home. In these facilities, there might be available temporarily and incidentally the same type of limited medical attention as an individual would receive if he or she were living in his or her own home. 
    Family care home. A group care home servicing up to ten individuals, unrelated by blood or marriage, living together as a single housekeeping unit, under the supervision of one or two resident mangers. The home serves socially, physically, mentally, or developmentally impaired children in a family-type living arrangement, including child care homes for orphans or neglected children, and handicapped or infirm home for the mentally retarded or mentally ill. The requirements of section 11-52-75-1 of the Alabama State Code (Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-75-1), Regulations as to housing of mentally retarded or mentally ill persons in multi-family zones, Code of Alabama, 1975 as amended, shall apply. 
    Fraternity/sorority facility. A home for three or more unrelated male or female students who are house members of a social organization related to a college campus or similar organization. 
    Maternity facility. An institution operated solely for the care and treatment of women during pregnancy, delivery, and/or within ten days subsequent to delivery. The term shall include any individual or institution providing such services within a period of one year to one or more women not related by blood or marriage to persons living in or operating such building or institution. 
    Nursing home. A home for the aged or infirm in which three or more persons not of the immediate family are received, kept or provided with food and shelter or care for compensation; but not including hospitals, clinics or similar establishments devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured. 
    Rooming house. A building other than a hotel where lodging for three or more persons (up to 12 persons) not of the immediate family is provided for definite periods and for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods. 
    Sorority house. A home for three or more unrelated female students who are members of a social organization related to a college campus or similar organization. 
    Transitional home. Any dwelling or similar facility operated for the provision of room and board in the rehabilitation, resocialization and/or adjustment of three or more individuals, patients or clients, excluding jails, prisons, and other correctional institutions. 
    Other similar buildings, facilities, homes or structures. Any home or facility similar in function to those listed above shall be deemed a communal living facility. 
(42)  Convenience store. A one story, retail store containing less than 2,000 square feet of gross floor area that is designed and stocked to sell primarily food, beverages, and other household supplies to customers who purchase only a relatively few items at a time, (in contrast to a supermarket) including, not more than one (1) automobile fuel service islands containing two (2) pumps. 
(43)  Craft or hobby shop. A commercial establishment which sells or offers for sale materials and/or supplies related to art, flower arranging, ceramics, needlepoint, woodcraft, related books and instructional materials and similar activities. 
(44)  Covenant. A written agreement between two or more parties for the performance of some action. When used in relation to property or real estate, it is generally an agreement executed between the buyer and seller of such real estate, and should be enforced by private landowners and not be the municipality ordinance. This term shall also include deed restrictions. 
(45)  Cul-de-sac. A dead-end street terminated by a vehicle turn-around having a minimum right-of-way radius of fifty (50) feet. 
(46)  District. A part, zone or geographic area within the CIty in which certain zoning or development regulations apply. 
(47)  Dormitory. A building used as group living quarters for a student body or religious order as an accessory use for a college, university, boarding school, orphanage, convent, monastery or other similar institutional use. 
(48)  Dump/landfill. A land site used primarily for the disposal by dumping, burial, burning or other means and for whatever purposes, of garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, junk, discarded machinery, vehicles or parts thereof, and other waste, scrap or discarded material of any kind. (See also Landfill ) 
(49)  Dwelling. A structure or portion thereof which is used exclusively for residential purposes. 
(50)  Dwelling, single-family. A building designed for or used by one family. 
(51)  Dwelling, single-family detached. A dwelling which is designed for and occupied by not more than one family and surrounded by open space or yards and which is not attached to any other dwelling by any means. 
(52)  Dwelling, single-family attached. A single family dwelling on its own lot attached to two other single-family dwellings connected by common vertical walls. 
(53)  Dwelling, single-family semi-attached. A one-family dwelling attached to one other one-family dwelling by a common vertical wall, and each dwelling located on a separate lot. 
(54)  Dwelling, garden home/patio home. A building containing one family dwelling unit with no side yard requirement on one side. 
(55)  Dwelling, townhouse. A single-family dwelling in a row of at least three such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to outside; no unit is located over another unit; each unit is separated from any other unit by not more than two more common fire resistant walls; each dwelling of which shall be platted on individual lots. 
(56)  Dwelling, two family/duplex. A structure on a single lot designed for or occupied by two families, is totally separated from each other by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof or an unpierced ceiling and floor extending from exterior wall to exterior wall, except for a common stairwell exterior to both dwelling units. 
(57)  Dwelling, multi-family. A dwelling designed for or occupied by three or more families or unrelated individuals. 
(58)  Dwelling unit. One or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single family maintaining a household. 
(59)  Existing use. The use of a lot or structure at the time of the enactment of this ordinance. 
(60)  Family. One or more persons, all but two of whom are related by blood, marriage, or adoption, or a group of not to exceed five persons not all related by blood or marriage, occupying the premises and living as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding or lodging house, hotel, club, or similar communal living facility dwelling for group use. 
(61)  Farm support business. A commercial establishment engaged in the sale of farm support goods and services, including the sale of feed, grain, fertilizers, pesticides and similar goods; the provision of warehousing and storage facilities for raw farm products; and the provision of veterinary services to farm animals. 
(62)  Farm. A three acre or larger tract of land used for the production, keeping or maintenance, for sale or lease of plants and animals useful to man. 
(63)  Fence. An artificially constructed barrier or any material or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land. 
(64)  Flea market. An occasional or periodic market held in an approved structure on location where groups or individual sellers offer goods for sale to the public. 
(65)  Floor area. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floors of a building measured from the exterior face or exterior walls, or from the centerline of a wall separating two buildings, but not including interior parking spaces, loading space for motor vehicles, or any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six feet. 
(66)  Fraternal organization. A group of people formally organized for a common interest, usually cultural, religious or entertainment, with regular meetings, rituals and formal written membership requirements. 
(67)  Frontage. That length of a lot abutting on a street; along the front lot line. 
(68)  Frontage, street. All the property on one side of a street between two streets which intersects such street (crossing or termination), measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead ended, then all the property abutting on one side between a street which intersects such street and the dead end of the street. 
(69)  Garage. A deck, building or structure, or part thereof, used or intended to be used for the parking and storage of vehicles, wholly or partly enclosed. 
(70)  Garage, municipal. A structure owned or operated by the City of Bessemer and used primarily for the parking and storing of vehicles owned by the general public. 
(71)  Garage, private customer and employee. A structure which is accessory to a non-retail commercial or manufacturing establishment, building or use and is primarily used for the parking and storage of vehicles operated by the customers, visitors and employees of such building, and which is not available to the general public. 
(72)  Garage, private residential. A structure which is accessory to a residential building and which is used for the parking and storage of vehicles owned and operated by the residents thereof, and which is not a separate commercial enterprise now available to the general public. The garage shall have storage for no more than two automobiles or a number of automobiles which does not exceed twice the number of dwelling units. Residential garages shall be restricted to 14 feet in height. 
(73)  Garage, public. A building, or portion thereof, other than a private customer and employee garage or private residential garage, used primarily for the parking and storage of vehicles and available to the general public. 
(74)  Grade. The average level of the finished ground surface adjacent to the exterior walls of the building. 
(75)  Grade, finished. The final elevation of the ground surface after development. 
(76)  Health care facility. A facility or institution, whether public or private, principally engaged in providing services for health maintenance, diagnosis or treatment of human disease, pain, injury, deformity or physical condition, including, but not limited to, a general hospital, special hospital, mental hospital, public health center, extended care facility, skilled nursing home, nursing home, intermediate care facility, tuberculosis hospital, chronic disease hospital, maternity hospital, outpatient clinic, dispensary, home health care agency, boarding home or other home for sheltered care and bioanalytical laboratory or central services facility serving one or more such institutions but excluding institutions that provide healing solely by prayer. 
(77)  Heavy equipment and specialized vehicle sales, rental, and service establishment. Building and premises for the sale, rental, and servicing of trucks, buses, boas, mobile homes, trailers, and farm and construction machinery or equipment, not including any vehicles designed primarily for the transportation of fifteen or fewer passengers. For the purpose of this zoning ordinance, heavy equipment and specialized vehicle sales, rental, and service establishments shall not be deemed to include vehicle rental and ancillary service establishments; however vans and recreational vehicles may be sold rented, and serviced. 
(78)  Home occupation. Any occupation or activity which is clearly incidental to the use of the premises for dwelling purposes and which is carried on wholly within a main building or accessory building by a member of a family residing on the premises, in connection with which there is no advertising other than an identification sign of not more than one square foot in area which is neither illuminated or animated, and no other display or storage of materials or exterior identification of the home occupation or variation from the residential character of the premises; and in connection with which no person outside the family is employed and no equipment used other than that normally used in connection with a residence. Home occupation shall not include doctors' or dentists' offices for the treatment of patients. 
(79)  Hospital. An institution providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, whom are suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity and other abnormal physical or mental conditions, and including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient facilities or training facilities. 
(80)  Home improvement center. A place of business providing building, appliance, yard and garden materials, tools, and supplies at retail and wholesale. 
(81)  Hotel. A building in which lodging, or boarding and lodging, are provided and offered to the public in return for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms are made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. A hotel is open to the transient public in contrast to a boardinghouse, or a rooming house which are herein separately defined. 
(82)  Institution. The structure or land occupied by a group, cooperative, board, agency or organization created for the purpose of carrying on nonprofit functions of a public or semi-public nature, including but not limited to hospitals, schools, churches, fraternal orders and also including residential accessory uses, limited to rectories, parsonages, dormitories and dwellings for resident administrators, watchmen, custodians or caretakers. 
(83)  Junkyard, general. A parcel and/or lot used for the outside storage or placement of used and/or damaged materials and items. 
(84)  Junkyard, vehicular. A parcel and/or lot used for the outside placement, storage, parking, dismantling, or disassembling of any disabled or inoperable vehicles, or parts thereof, including, but not limited to motors, tires, wheels, axles, transmissions and other accessories. 
(85)  Kennel. Any building(s) or land designated or arranged for the care of 5 or more dogs or cats belonging to the owner of the principal use kept for purposes of show, hunting, or as pets. A commercial kennel shall be defined as an establishment for the housing, grooming, breeding, boarding, training, or selling of animals, primarily, but not limited to domesticated dogs and cats. This definition shall not be applicable to veterinarians operating under license from the State of Alabama who board dogs or other pets in an enclosed structure. 
(86)  Loading space. A space having a minimum dimension of twelve by thirty-five feet and a vertical clearance of at least fourteen feet within the main building or on the same lot, providing for the standing, loading, or unloading of trucks. 
(87)  Lodge. A building or group of buildings under single management, containing both rooms and dwelling units available for temporary rental to transient individuals or families; or the place where members of a local chapter of an association hold their meetings; and, the local chapter itself. 
(88)  Lot. A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be used, developed or built upon as a unit, having principal frontage upon a street. 
(89)  Lot area. The total area within the established property lines of a lot, excluding any street rights-of-way. 
(90)  Lot, corner. A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection, or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
(91)  Lot coverage. That portion of the lot that is covered by buildings and structures. 
(92)  Lot depth. The distance measured from the front lot line to the rear lot line. For lots where the front and rear lot lines are not parallel, the lot depth should be measured by drawing lines from the front to rear lot lines, at right angles to the front lot line, every ten feet and averaging the length of these lines. 
(93)  Lot, double frontage. A lot which fronts upon two parallel streets, or which fronts upon two streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. 
(94)  Lot frontage. The length of the front lot line measured at the street right-of-way line. 
(95)  Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot. 
(96)  Lot line. A line of record bounding a lot which divides one lot from another lot or from a public or private street or any other public space. 
(97)  Lot line, front. The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way. 
(98)  Lot line, rear. The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line; or in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, a line at least ten feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line. 
(99)  Lot line, side. Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. 
(100)  Lot of record. A lot which exists as shown or described on a recorded subdivision plat or deed in the records of the office of Judge of Probate, Jefferson County. 
(101)  Lot width. The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot measured at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required building setback line. 
(102)  Mini-warehouse. A building or structure which is designed or used for the storage of goods, wares or merchandise, provided no display, sale or such storage does not include perishable items or other items that may cause a health hazard or highly combustible, flammable or explosive products or materials; said building or structure shall be limited to a maximum size of 20,000 square feet and be designed with cubicles or separate storage areas having a maximum size of 1,000 square feet and a maximum width of 25 feet. 
(103)  Mobile home or manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode, is no more than eight (8) body feet in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is no more than three hundred and twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit with or without permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems continued therein. The structure, if constructed on or after June 15, 1976, meets or exceeds the manufactured home construction and safety standards of the US Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
(104)  Mobile home space. A plot of land for placement of a single mobile home within a mobile home park. 
(105)  Mobile home subdivision/mobile home park. A subdivision containing two or more mobile homes used as living quarters, in which the mobile homes are situated on individually owned lots. A park under one ownership where mobile home sites are leased, etc. 
(106)  Modular home. A dwelling constructed on-site in accordance with the International Standard Building Code. It is composed of components substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and transported to the building site for final assembly on a permanent foundation. A modular home is not a mobile home in that the latter is constructed in a plant in accordance with the manufactured home construction and safety standards of the US Department of Housing and Urban Development and does not meet the construction standards of the International Building Code. 
(107)  Motel. An establishment providing transient accommodations containing six or more rooms with at least 25 percent of all rooms having direct access to the outside without the necessity of passing through the main lobby of the building, having no provisions for cooking in the individual rooms. 
(108)  Nonconforming lot. A lot, the area, dimensions or location which was lawful prior to the revision of this ordinance, but which fails by reason of such revision to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. 
(109)  Nonconforming use. A use or activity which was lawful prior to the revision of this ordinance, but which fails, by reason of such revision, to conform to the requirements of the zoning district. 
(110)  Nursery school or kindergarten. Any premises or portion thereof used for educational work or parental care of children of less than the age required for enrollment in the public school system. 
(111)  Nursing home. An extended or intermediate care facility licensed or approved to provide full-time convalescent or chronic care to two or more individuals who are not related to the governing authority or its members by marriage, blood or adoption and who by reason of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves. (See Communal living facilities ) 
(112)  Office building. A building used primarily for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry, or government, or like activity. 
(113)  Office park. A development on a tract of land that contains a number of separate office buildings, supporting uses and open space designed, planned, constructed and managed on an integrated and coordinated basis. 
(114)  Offices. Space or room for professional, administrative, clerical, and similar uses. 
(115)  Open-air market. Retail sale of arts, crafts, produce, discount or used goods partially or fully outside of an enclosed building such as flea market, produce, market, craft market or farmers market. 
(116)  Open space. Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment, or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space. 
(117)  Outside storage. The keeping, in an unenclosed area of any goods, materials, products, merchandise or vehicles in the same place. Outdoor storage shall not include open retail display areas such as vehicle sales, nursery product sales, nursery product sales, furniture display areas, and similar activities. 
(118)  Park. Publicly owned and operated parks, playgrounds, recreation facilities and open space. 
(119)  Parking area. Land reserved for the parking of vehicles, including necessary maneuvering area. 
(120)  Parking lot. An open area used exclusively for the temporary storage of motor vehicles and within which motor fuels and oils may be sold and fees charged, but no vehicles are to be equipped, repaired, rented or sold. 
(121)  Parking space, off-street. An accessible space permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one vehicle, connected with a street by a driveway or an alley, having a minimum area of not less than one hundred sixty-two square feet, exclusive of driveways and maneuvering area. 
(122)  Buffers. An area, so planted that within one full year of the installation said planting shall provide a visually barrier as specified elsewhere in this ordinance. 
(123)  Planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission of Bessemer, Alabama. 
(124)  Planning and zoning administrator. Person is responsible for enforcing the zoning regulations, (i.e., building official or similar title). 
(125)  Premises. A lot, parcel, tract or plot of land together with the buildings and structures thereon. 
(126)  Principal building. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is located. In any residential district any dwelling shall be deemed to be the principal building. 
(127)  Principal use. The primary or predominant use of any lot. 
(128)  Public buildings. Buildings arranged for the purpose of providing public services, not otherwise listed in this section, including museums, government offices, post office, transit stations, police stations, fire stations, emergency medical service stations, civil defense operations, and similar towers. 
(129)  Public assembly center. buildings arranged for the general assembly of the public at-large for community events including civic centers, places of worship, schools, coliseums, stadiums and similar uses. 
(130)  Public utility/facilities. Telephone, electric and cable television lines, poles, equipment and structures; water or gas pipes, mains valves or structures; sewer pipes, valves or structures; pumping stations; telephone exchanges and repeater stations; and all other facilities, equipment and structures necessary for conducting a service by a government or a public utility; not to include radio, television, cellular communications towers. 
(131)  Public utility service. Essential utility services which are necessary to support development and which involve only minor structures such as lines and poles. 
(132)  Rehabilitation facility. An institutional facility providing residential and custodial care for the rehabilitation of socially impaired individuals who are indigent, recovering from addition to drugs or alcohol. 
(133)  Quarry. A place where rock, ore, stone and similar materials are excavated for sale or for off-tract use. 
(134)  Restaurant - standard. An establishment where food and drink are prepared, served and primarily consumed within the building where guests are seated and served. 
(135)  Restaurant - fast food. An establishment where food and drink are rapidly prepared for carryout, fast delivery, drive-through, and may include standard sit-down consumption. 
(136)  Retail service. Establishments providing services or entertainment, as opposed to products, to the general public, including eating and drinking places, hotels and motels, finance, real estate and insurance, personal services, motion pictures, amusement and recreation services, health, educational and social services, museums and galleries. 
(137)  Retail trade. Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. 
(138)  Riding academy. An establishment where horses are boarded and cared for and where instruction in riding, jumping and showing is offered and the general public may, for a fee, hire horses for riding. 
(139)  Satellite dish antenna. A device or instrument, designed or used for the reception of television or other electronic communications signal broadcast or relayed from an earth satellite. It may be solid, open mesh, or a bar-configured structure, typically eight to twelve feet in diameter, in the shape of a shallow dish or parabola. 
(140)  School. Public or nonprofit school. 
(141)  School-commercial. Private, gainful business providing instructional service in arts, business, crafts, trades and professions. 
(142)  Self-storage structure. A building or structure which is designed or used for the storage of surplus personal property accumulated in the maintenance or operation of a home, apartment, or dwelling, provided no display or sale of such items are allowed on the premises and further provided such storage does not include highly combustible, flammable or explosive products or materials; said building or structure shall be limited to a maximum size of 10,000 square feet and shall be designed with cubicles or separate storage areas having a maximum size of 250 square feet and a maximum width of 10 feet. 
(143)  Service station, self-service. Any building, structure, or land used primarily for the dispensing, sale or offering for sale at retail of any automobile fuels, oils or accessories but not including any major or minor repair work. (See Automotive repair, major and minor .) 
(144)  Service station, full-service. Any building, structure, or land used primarily for the dispensing, or retail sale of any automobile fuels, oils, or accessories, and offering minor automotive repair limited to installation and servicing of mechanical equipment and parts, including audio equipment and electrical work, lubrication, tuneups, front end alignment, tire balancing, brake and muffler work, battery recharging and/or replacement, and similar activities, and in which all work is performed entirely within an enclosed building. This excludes any servicing of trucks or heavy equipment. 
(145)  Shopping center. A group of commercial establishments planned, constructed and managed as a total entity with customer and employee parking provided on-site, provision for goods delivery separated from customer access, aesthetic considerations and protection from the elements. 
(146)  Sign. A name, identification, description, display or illustration which is affixed to, painted, or represented, directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, parcel or lot and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business. The term "sign" shall not include official court or government notices nor the flag, emblem, or insignia of a nation, political unit, school, or religion. (See also, Separate sign provisions for sign definitions.) 
(147)  Sign, billboard/off-premise[s] advertising. A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located. 
(148)  Sign, changeable/message board. A sign which identifies an institution or organization on the premises of which it is located and which contains the name of the institution or organization, the names of individuals connected with it, and general announcements of events or activities occurring at the institution or similar messages. 
(149)  Sign, business. A sign which directs attention to a business or profession conducted, or to a commodity or service sold, offered or manufactured, or to an entertainment offered on the premises where the sign is located. 
(150)  Sign, free standing or ground. A sign securely affixed to a substantial support structure which is attached to the ground and wholly independent of any building for support. 
(151)  Sign, identification. A sign giving the nature, logo, trademark or other identifying symbol; address; or any combination of the name, symbol and address of a building, business, development or establishment on the premises where it is located. 
(152)  Sign, illuminated. A sign lighted by or exposed to artificial lighting either by lights on or in the sign or directed towards the sign. 
(153)  Sign, portable. A sign that is not permanent, affixed to a building, structure or the ground. 
(154)  Sign, projecting. A sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a building for support and which projects more than 12 inches from such building. 
(155)  Sign, roof. A sign that is mounted on the roof of a building or which is wholly dependent upon a building for support and which projects above the point of a building with a flat roof, the eave line of a building with a gambrel, gable or hip roof or the deck line of a building with a mansard roof. 
(156)  Sign, temporary. A sign or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, plywood or other light material and designed or intended to be displayed for 60 days or less. 
(157)  Sign, wall. A sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a building or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for, or forms the background surface of the sign and which does not project more than 12 inches from such building or structure. 
(158)  Special exception. A variation in the terms of the zoning ordinance where permission is given to establish a use normally associated with the applicable district but which requires special permission from the zoning board of adjustment for its creation. 
(159)  Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it and including those basements used for the principal use. 
(160)  Story, half. A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of the roof and wall face not more than three feet above the floor level, and in which space the possible floor area with head room of five feet or less occupies at least 40 percent of the total floor area of the story directly. 
(161)  Street. A public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
(162)  Street line. A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street. 
(163)  Structural alterations. Any change in the supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders; provided, however, that the application of any exterior modernizing shall not be considered a structural alteration. 
(164)  Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which required a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground, including but not limited to buildings, signs, billboards, backstops for tennis courts, fences or radio towers. 
(165)  Structure, temporary/modular. A modular building installed on foundation, connected to utilities as temporary and incidental to another business. 
(166)  Tourist home. A dwelling in which accommodations are provided or offered for one or more transient guests for compensation. 
(167)  Travel trailer. Any enclosure used for living, sleeping, business or storage purposes, having no foundation other than wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, horses, or skirtings and which has been, or reasonably may be, equipped with wheels or other devices for transporting the enclosure from place to place, whether by motor power or other means. The term "trailer" shall include camp car, house car; not a mobile home. 
(168)  Travel trailer park/campground. A plot of ground upon which two or more campsites are located, established or maintained for occupancy by camping units or travel trailers as temporary living quarters for recreation, education or vacation purposes. 
(169)  Use. The purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed, arranged, or intended, or for which land or buildings are occupied or maintained. 
(170)  Use permitted upon review or appeal. A use permitted in a particular zoning district only upon showing that such use in a specified location will comply with all the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as specified in this ordinance and authorized by the board of adjustment. 
(171)  Variance. A modification of the terms of the zoning ordinance, where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to the conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the zoning ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. as used in this zoning ordinance, a variance is authorized only for height, area, and size of structure or size of yards and open spaces; establishment or expansion of a permanent use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the zoning district or adjoining zoning districts. 
(172)  Wrecker service yard. A parcel and/or lot used for the outside placement and/or storage of vehicles awaiting final disposition. Disabled vehicles may not be placed or stored on this lot unless the property is properly zoned and all pertinent licenses maintained. This definition shall not be applicable to junkyards as defined herein. 
(173)  Yard. An open space that lies between the principal or accessory building or buildings and the nearest lot line. Such yard is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be specifically provided in this ordinance. 
(174)  Yard, front. A yard, or yards in the case of a corner lot, extending across the full width of the lot between the front lot line(s) and the nearest line of the main building. On corner lots the front yard can face either street as long as the setback requirements are met. 
(175)  Yard, rear. A yard extending across the rear of a lot between the side lot lines. On all lots the rear yard shall be in the rear of the front yard. 
(176)  Yard, side. A yard between the main building and the side lot line and extending from the required front yard to the required rear yard. 
(177)  Zone map. The map referred to as part of this ordinance, see zoning districts and boundaries. 
(178)  Zoning district map. The zone map. 
(Ord. No. 3529, § I, 12-16-2014) 
SECTION 4. - USE REGULATIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 4.1. - R-1 Single-family district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for low density single-family housing free from other uses which are incompatible with the character of this district. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Detached single family dwellings and accessory structures. 
(3)  Uses permitted on review. 
(a)  Child-care center. 
(b)  Church. 
(c)  Community Center, YMCA, YWCA. 
(d)  Fire station, police station. 
(e)  Home occupation. 
(f)  Outdoor recreation facilities such as park, golf course, tennis courts, swimming pool for private residences. 
(g)  Public elementary or high school, or parochial or private school having comparable curriculum, not including dormitories. 
(h)  Clubhouse, support and maintenance buildings as part of an overall planned development. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See off-street parking and loading requirements section. 
(c)  See sign regulations section. 
Sec. 4.2. - R-2 Single-family residential district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for single-family housing free from uses which are incompatible with the character of this district. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Detached single-family dwellings and accessory structures. 
(3)  Uses permitted on review. 
(a)  Any use permitted on review in an R-1, Single-family district. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See off-street parking and loading requirements section. 
(c)  See sign regulations section. 
Sec. 4.3. - R-3 Single-family/two-family residential district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for single-family housing and two family housing free from uses incompatible with the character of this district. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Detached single-family dwellings and accessory structures. 
(3)  Uses permitted on review. 
(a)  Any use permitted on review in an R-2, Single-family district. 
(b)  Duplex residential units. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See off-street parking and loading requirements section. 
(c)  See sign regulation section. 
Sec. 4.4. - R-3-A Patio home/garden home district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for smaller lot single/family residential uses, free from incompatible non-residential uses. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Any use permitted in the R-2 Estate district. 
(b)  Two-family dwellings. 
(c)  Semi-attached dwellings. 
(d)  Garden homes/zero lot line patio homes. 
(3)  Uses permitted on review. 
(a)  Any use permitted on review in R-1 Residential district. 
(b)  Townhouses. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See off-street parking and loading section. 
(c)  See sign regulations section. 
Sec. 4.5. - R-3-B Townhouse district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for townhouse development. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Any use permitted in R-3-A. 
(b)  Townhouses. 
(3)  Uses permitted on review. 
(a)  Any use permitted on review in R-1 district. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria. 
(b)  See off-street parking and loading requirements section. 
(c)  See sign regulations section. 
Sec. 4.6. - R-4 Multi-family residential district - low density. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for low density, multi-family residential areas in which open space and compatibility with single-family neighborhoods are considerations, permitting selected non-residential uses which are compatible with the character of this district. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Multi-family dwelling units and accessory structures. 
(b)  Detached single-family dwellings. 
(c)  Two-family dwellings. 
(d)  Condominium. 
(e)  Townhouses. 
(f)  Garden homes. 
(3)  Uses permitted on review. 
(a)  Any use permitted on review in an R-3 district. 
(b)  Communal living facility. 
(c)  Accessory or commercial/special facilities if compatible with overall development plan. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See off-street parking and loading requirements section. 
(c)  See sign regulations section. 
Sec. 4.7. - R-5 Multi-family district - medium density. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for medium density, multi-family residential areas in which open space and compatibility with single-family neighborhoods are considerations, permitting selected non-residential uses which are compatible with the character of this district. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Multi-family dwelling units and accessory structures. 
(b)  Detached single-family dwellings. 
(c)  Two family dwellings. 
(d)  Condominium. 
(e)  Townhouses. 
(f)  Garden homes. 
(3)  Uses permitted on review. 
(a)  Any use permitted on review in an R-3. 
(b)  Lodge, fraternal organizations, non-commercial club not operated for a profit. 
(c)  Communal living facility. 
(d)  Accessory or commercial/special use if compatible with overall development plan. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See off-street parking and loading requirements section. 
(c)  See sign regulations section. 
Sec. 4.8. - R-6 Planned residential district. 
(1)  Generally. The purpose of this district is to provide for the flexible and orderly arrangement of large planned residential areas designed as a single unit in a manner consistent with the provisions of this section. The owner or owners of a tract of land may submit a petition for the establishment of such a district provided the tract of land is five or more acres in area, or less than five acres as a special exception, shall submit a plan for the development of the tract to the Bessemer Planning and Zoning Commission for review and approval in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Permitted uses. The use of each building and/or premises shall be in accordance with the development plan referred to in subsection 1 [(1)], and shall be limited to the following: 
(a)  Any use allowed in the R-1 district. 
(b)  Two-family dwelling. 
(c)  Multiple family dwelling; provided, however, that no building or accessory structure shall be located closer than twenty-five feet to any single family residence district boundary. 
(d)  Attached and semi-attached single family dwellings. 
(e)  Condominiums (residential). 
(f)  Townhouses. 
(g)  Garden homes. 
(3)  Uses permitted on review. 
(a)  Any use permitted on review in an R-3, Single-family district. 
(b)  Health care facility. 
(c)  Lodge, fraternal organizations, non-commercial club not operated for a profit. 
(d)  Boarding house. 
(e)  Accessory commercial/office uses compatible with overall development plan. 
(4)  District regulations. The area and dimensional regulations set forth in this section shall be observed as well as: 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See district parking and loading requirements section. 
(c)  See sign regulation section. 
(5)  Development plan requirements. In order to prevent adverse environmental impacts and to achieve a compatible relation among uses covered in subsection 2 [(2)] above and with the land use suitability of surrounding properties and nearby zone districts, as well as the surrounding transportation network, any owners of lands included in this district shall concur in an overall site development plan to be reviewed and considered for approval by the Bessemer Planning and Zoning Commission prior to any grading, clearing, site improvements or issuance of related permits. All owners of property petitioning for establishment of a new R-6 district shall submit an acceptable development plan for Bessemer Planning and Zoning Commission approval prior to adoption by the City of Bessemer. Any district may be phased over a reasonable period of time. Final site development plans may be postponed for portions of the parcel scheduled for completion after the first five acres. However when phased, the whole district must be covered by a more generalized conceptual design for ultimate development which may be tentative, but must include a viable timetable for completion of each sector, with sufficient information to judge internal and external impacts. The site development plan shall include: 
(a)  Maps indicating: 
1.  The direction of north, appropriate scale and topography in not greater than two foot contour intervals. 
2.  The proposed locations and heights of all structures and site improvements. 
3.  The use of all structures and premises. 
4.  The areas and proportionate amount of parking to be developed. 
5.  The location of streets, driveways and walks, including all points of ingress and egress and access streets. 
6.  All service areas and loading spaces. 
7.  Location and areas of illumination of all exterior lighting. 
8.  The location, size, number and character of all exterior signs. 
9.  The location, character and extent of all recreation, open spaces, beautification features, and landscaping, fences, retaining and screen walls and other treatment for the protection of adjoining property. 
10.  The facilities planned for sanitary sewers or treatment and surface drainage of the premises. 
11.  A grading plan showing original and finished slopes, means of stabilization and relation to flood plains, drainage ways, wetlands, subsurface conditions and soil suitability. 
(b)  A traffic analysis indicating that the proposed development will be so related to streets and arteries that the traffic generated can be accommodated without causing excessive congestion or hazards or objectionable volumes of traffic on residential streets. 
(c)  A comprehensive independent market analysis, if requested by the City of Bessemer or Bessemer Planning and Zoning Commission, on the needs to be served and the general economic justification. 
(d)  A copy of any proposed subdivision plats, new streets, other easements, and deed restrictions including any third party covenants to be recorded, and the legal treatment and responsibility for maintenance of any public or common grounds or spaces. 
(6)  Review and approval of plans. The Bessemer Planning and Zoning Commission shall review, approve in part or whole, or disapprove, setting forth its reasons therefor, all conceptual designs and any site development plans for R-6 districts initiated or recommended for adoption by the City of Bessemer without an original plan, in the case of initial zoning of annexed territory. The Bessemer Planning and Zoning Commission shall also review, and approve or disapprove all other site development plans involved in rezoning requests or subsequent plan amendments. After due notice and hearing of all interested parties, and consideration of analyses or recommendations by its staff, the Bessemer Planning and Zoning Commission shall judge the acceptability of varied elements of the plan in close conformity with the following criteria to: 
(a)  Minimize traffic congestion, conflicting movements, hazards, clutter or glare interfering with drivers' visibility of streets, drives and sight lines around corners, also accommodating emergency vehicles, and protecting pedestrian ways and avoiding the attraction of customer or truce traffic through local residential frontage streets; 
(b)  Ensure longterm adequacy of grading, storm drainage, sanitary sewers, other utilities and improvements, particularly preventing landslides, erosion, sedimentation, flooding and similar problems on subject property and nearby parcels of land in accordance with the City of Bessemer; 
(c)  Minimize activity conflicts, and environmental degradation, while maximizing a compatible interrelating of uses and economical development through shared access, parking, utility easements, service areas, clustering, etc.; 
(d)  Preserve historic or significant places, scenic features, steep slopes, or drainageways, and create effective natural, planted and man-made buffers of sufficient height, density and width to screen objectionable on-site noise, vibration, smoke, dust, fumes, odor, heat, glare or visibility from adjacent, less intensive uses and particularly residential development and zones. Once a site development plan has been approved, no work shall be done and no permits shall be issued except in accordance with said plan. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all site improvements as required by an approved site development plan are completed. 
(7)  Delay in construction. In the event that construction in accordance with the originally approved development plan has not begun within two years from the date of its approval, the development plan shall expire and become null and void. If less than 25% of the site improvements have been installed within 18 months after issuance of a permit to begin construction, the site development plan shall expire and become null and void. 
Sec. 4.9. - R-7 Estate residential district. 
(1)  Generally. 
(a)  To provide for large lot single-family uses. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Single family residences and accessory uses. 
(3)  Uses permitted upon review. 
(a)  Farm structures. 
(b)  Riding academies. 
(c)  Churches. 
(d)  Home occupations. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See parking and loading requirements section. 
(c)  See signage regulations section. 
Sec. 4.10. - R-8 Rural residential district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for unique development equal in density to R-2 but which retain rural landscape. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Single family residences and accessory structures, provided overall density of development is no greater than R-2. 
(3)  Uses permitted on review. 
(a)  Garden homes. 
(b)  Townhouses. 
(c)  Condominiums. 
(d)  Uses permitted in R-3. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See parking and loading requirements section. 
(c)  See signage regulations section. 
(5)  Development plan requirements. 
(a)  A development shall be approved as prescribed elsewhere in the ordinance. 
SECTION 5. - USE REGULATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 5.1. - O-1. Office, services district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide centralized, compact areas for professional and business offices and related activities including separate buildings and building groups designed with landscaped yards and open areas provided as appropriate. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Business, professional or public office building in which retail trade with the general public is not conducted. Office buildings in excess of 2,500 square feet of floor area may use ten percent of the floor area for retail and service establishments such as restaurants, opticians, gift shops, barber and beauty shops, quick copy services, specialty shops, banks, pharmacies, and other commercial uses, appropriate to the professional office environment. 
(b)  Bank, financial institution. 
(c)  Business, vocational school. 
(d)  College, university. 
(e)  Community center. 
(f)  Optician. 
(g)  Post office. 
(h)  Public elementary or high school, or parochial or private school having comparable curriculum; can include dormitories. 
(i)  Funeral home. 
(j)  Health care facility. 
(3)  Uses permitted on review. 
(a)  Child care center. 
(b)  Communal living facility. 
(c)  Photographic studio. 
(d)  Drug store. 
(e)  Optician. 
(f)  Lodge, fraternal organization, non-commercial club not operated for a profit. 
(g)  Church. 
(h)  Hotel, motel. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See off-street parking and loading requirement section. 
(c)  See sign regulations section. 
(5)  Development plan requirements. 
(a)  Development shall be plan approved in accordance with procedures prescribed elsewhere in the ordinance. 
Sec. 5.2. - C-1 Neighborhood commercial district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide areas for retail and service establishments convenient and compatible with the character of adjacent residential neighborhood. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Appliance, small repair. 
(b)  Art supply and frame shop. 
(c)  Auto parts store; no service, installation, repair, or dismantling. 
(d)  Bank, financial institution, neighborhood in nature. 
(e)  Barber[shops] and beauty shops. 
(f)  Bicycle shop. 
(g)  Car wash. 
(h)  Card, book and gift shops. 
(i)  Child & adult day care center. 
(j)  Clothing store. 
(k)  Convenience store. 
(l)  Dance studio. 
(m)  Drug store. 
(n)  Duplicating service. 
(o)  Florist/excluding greenhouse. 
(p)  Grocery store. 
(q)  Hardware store. 
(r)  Jewelry store. 
(s)  Laundromat, dry-cleaning pick-up or plant. 
(t)  Office building; business, public or professional in nature less than 5,000 square feet of floor area. 
(u)  Paint and wallpaper stores. 
(v)  Pet shop. 
(w)  Photographic studio. 
(x)  Restaurant. 
(y)  Shoe store and repair. 
(z)  Sporting goods store. 
(aa)  Tailor shop. 
(bb)  Transit station, taxi station. 
(cc)  Other neighborhood retail and service establishments in accord with the intent of this district. 
(3)  Uses permitted on review. 
(a)  Fire station, police station. 
(b)  Automobile service station. 
(c)  Commercial parking lot. 
(d)  Lounges/bars. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See off-street parking and loading requirements section. 
(c)  See sign regulations section. 
(5)  Development plan requirements. 
(a)  Development shall be approved in accordance with procedures prescribed elsewhere in the ordinance. 
Sec. 5.3. - SC-1 Neighborhood shopping center district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for a unified grouping, in one or more buildings, of retail shops and stores that provide for the regular needs and are for the convenience of the people residing in the adjacent residential neighborhoods. It is intended that the neighborhood shopping center be developed as a unit, with adequate off-street parking space for customers and employees, and with appropriate landscaping and screening materials. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Any use permitted in the C-1, Neighborhood commercial district. 
(b)  Office uses; provided, however, that the total gross floor area of all office uses, exclusive of those listed above, shall not exceed 20 percent of the gross floor area of the shopping center. 
(c)  Gasoline service station provided that it is designed as an integral part of the shopping center building group. 
(d)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses. 
(e)  Material or goods which is actively being offered for sale may be temporarily displayed outside of a building, provided that it shall not be displayed on a public street or right-of-way. 
(3)  Uses permitted on review. 
(a)  Lounge, bar. 
(b)  Game room. 
(c)  Other uses permitted upon review in C-1. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See off-street parking and loading requirements section. 
(c)  See sign regulations section. 
(5)  Development plans requirements. 
(a)  A neighborhood shopping center district shall be developed in compliance with an approved development plan as described elsewhere in the ordinance. 
Sec. 5.4. - C-2 Central business district. 
(1)  Generally. To encourage complementary retail uses; government offices; service uses; professional, cultural, recreational and entertainment establishments and uses; hotels and motels and transportation facilities in an are which are primary in function. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Any use permitted in the O-1 Office, medical and related services district or C-1 Neighborhood shopping district. 
(b)  Bars, taverns, lounges and night clubs. 
(c)  Department store. 
(d)  Indoor sports facilities such as bowling, health club, skating, racquet sports. 
(e)  Liquor store. 
(f)  Municipal or public garage. 
(g)  Restaurant, including fast food. 
(h)  Rent-all store. 
(i)  Showrooms for the sale of such items as appliances, carpet, furniture, home furnishings, medical and office equipment, pianos and organs, light fixtures, not including yards for storage of building materials. 
(j)  Theaters, indoor. 
(k)  Veterinarian, no kennels. 
(3)  Uses permitted on review. 
(a)  Single- and multi- family residential units on floors above the 1st floor. 
(b)  Game room. 
(c)  Churches. 
(d)  Other uses permitted upon review in C-1. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See off-street parking and loading requirements section. 
(c)  See sign regulation section. 
(5)  Development plan requirements. 
(a)  Development shall be in accord with approved development plan as described elsewhere in the ordinance. 
Sec. 5.5. - C-3 Community business district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide concentrated areas for general and community business activities 
(a)  Any use permitted in the C-1 Neighborhood shopping district, or the C-2 Central business district. 
(b)  Retail establishments such as furniture; jewelry; cosmetics; candy; medical, dental or drafting instruments; optical equipment, clocks, etc.; that include manufacturing that does not exceed 20 percent of the gross floor area. 
(c)  Automobile parts store, including service, installation or repair. 
(d)  Automobile repair services and garages. 
(e)  Automobile sales and rental. 
(f)  Boat sales, rental, storage and services. 
(g)  Building contractor yard. 
(h)  Building material sales and home improvement centers. 
(i)  Pest control company. 
(j)  Plumbing, heating and cooling, electrical and other wholesale supply and service facilities with not over 5,000 square feet of storage, nor any delivery vehicle more than 1.5 ton capacity, nor a total of more than five delivery vehicles, all processing and storage completely enclosed in the building. 
(k)  Veterinarian, no kennels. 
(l)  Convenience store/gas station. 
(2)  Uses permitted on review. 
(a)  Uses permitted on review in C-1. 
(3)  District regulations. 
(a)  District development criteria section. 
(b)  See off-street parking and loading requirements section. 
(c)  Sign regulations section. 
(4)  Development plan requirements. 
(a)  Development shall be in accord with approved development plan as prescribed elsewhere in the ordinance. 
Sec. 5.6. - C-4 Arterial services district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide areas for community-wide and regional retail shopping establishments which are located along major traffic arteries. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Any use permitted in the C-1 Neighborhood district; C-2 Central business district; or the C-3 Community business district. 
(b)  Fruit, vegetable, roadside stand. 
(c)  Janitorial and maintenance services. 
(d)  Metal and wood fencing, and ornamental grillwork. 
(e)  Mini-warehouse. 
(f)  Motorcycle sales, repair and services. 
(g)  Outdoor amusements and commercial recreation such as carpet golf, par 3 golf, go-cart track, water slide, skate-board course, batting cage. 
(h)  Pest-control company. 
(i)  Prefabricated and mobile home sales and service. 
(j)  Plant nursery. 
(k)  Theaters, including outdoor. 
(l)  Truck and heavy equipment sales and rental. 
(m)  Veterinarian, animal hospital; including outside kennels. 
(n)  Warehouse, not to exceed 5,000 sq. ft. 
(o)  Flea market. 
(3)  Uses permitted on review. 
(a)  Adult establishment facility. 
(b)  Game room. 
(c)  Other uses permitted on review in C-1. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See off-street parking and loading requirements section. 
(c)  See sign regulations section. 
(5)  Development plan requirements. 
(a)  Development shall be in accord with approved development plan as prescribed elsewhere in the ordinance. 
Sec. 5.7. - C-5 General business district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for general business locations. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Any use permitted in C-1 or C-3 district. 
(3)  Uses permitted on review. 
(a)  Uses permitted in C-4 District. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See parking and loading requirements section. 
(c)  See sign regulations section. 
(5)  Development plan requirements. 
(a)  Development shall be in accordance with approved development plan as prescribed elsewhere in the ordinance. 
Sec. 5.8. - C-6 Planned shopping district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for the orderly and convenient concentration of retail, business and higher density residential complexes in highly accessible locations appropriate to the character of surrounding property and its future development. This district shall not be created on less than two acres or at least a half block containing all lot frontage on the same side of a street situated between two intersecting streets. 
(2)  Permitted uses. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes as designated on the approved development plan, including: 
(a)  Retail sales. 
(b)  Business or personal services. 
(c)  Restaurants, cafeterias. 
(d)  Service station, and automotive repair, but excluding truck stops, vehicle sales, outside repairs or storage of inoperable vehicles or other equipment. 
(e)  Movie theatre. 
(f)  General shops and businesses similar to those above or ordinarily conducted in a shopping center or mall. 
(g)  Hotels, motels. 
(h)  Recreation, amusement or entertainment (excluding adult establishments). 
(3)  Uses permitted on review. 
(a)  Multiple dwellings, attached and semi-attached dwellings and condominiums. 
(b)  Other uses which are similar to those above or whose effects on surrounding areas are consistent with them. 
(c)  Uses permitted upon review in C-1. 
(4)  District regulations. Regulations as specified as herein and in sections. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See parking and loading section. 
(c)  See sign regulation section. 
(5)  Development plan requirements. In order to prevent adverse environmental impacts and to achieve a compatible relation among uses and with the land use suitability of surrounding properties and nearby zone districts, as well as the surrounding transportation network, any owners of lands included in this district shall concur in an overall site development plan to be reviewed and considered for approval by the Bessemer Planning and Zoning Commission prior to any grading, clearing, site improvements or issuance of related permits. All owners of property petitioning for establishment of a new C-6 district shall submit an acceptable development plan for the Bessemer Planning and Zoning Commission approval prior to adoption by the City of Bessemer. Any district may be phased over a reasonable period of time. Final site development plans may be postponed for portions of the parcel scheduled for completion after the first two acres. However when phased, the whole district must be covered by a more generalized conceptual design for ultimate development which may be tentative, but must include a viable timetable for completion of each sector, with sufficient information to judge internal and external impacts. The site development plan shall include: 
(a)  Maps indicating: 
1.  The direction of north, appropriate scale and topography in not greater than two-foot contour intervals. 
2.  The proposed locations and heights of all structures and site improvements. 
3.  The use of all structures and premises. 
4.  The areas and proportionate amount of parking to be developed. 
5.  The location of streets, driveways and walks, including all points of ingress and egress and access streets. 
6.  All service areas and loading spaces. 
7.  Location and areas of illumination of all exterior lighting. 
8.  The location, size, number and character of all exterior signs. 
9.  The location, character and extent of all recreation, open spaces, beautification features, and landscaping, fences, retaining and screen walls and other treatment for the protection of adjoining property. 
10.  The facilities planned for sanitary sewers or treatment and surface drainage of the premises. 
11.  A grading plan showing original and finished slopes, means of stabilization and relation to flood plains, drainageways, wetlands, subsurface conditions and soil suitability. 
(b)  A traffic analysis indicating that the proposed development will be so related to streets and arteries that the traffic generated can be accommodated without causing excessive congestion or hazards or objectionable volumes of traffic on residential streets. 
(c)  A comprehensive independent market analysis, if requested by the City of Bessemer or Bessemer Planning and Zoning Commission, on the needs to be served and the general economic justification. 
(d)  A copy of any proposed subdivision plats, new streets, other easements, and deed restrictions including any third party covenants to be recorded, and the legal treatment and responsibility for maintenance of any public or common grounds or spaces. 
(6)  Review and approval of plans. The Bessemer Planning and Zoning Commission shall review, approve in part or whole, or disapprove, setting forth its reasons therefor, all conceptual designs and any site development plans for C-6 districts initiated or recommended for adoption by the City of Bessemer without an original plan, in the case of initial zoning of annexed territory. The Bessemer Planning and Zoning Commission shall also review, and approve or disapprove all other site development plans involved in rezoning requests or subsequent plan amendments. After due notice and hearing of all interested parties, and consideration of analyses or recommendations by its staff, the Bessemer Planning and Zoning Commission shall judge the acceptability of varied elements of the plan in close conformity with the following criteria to: 
(a)  Minimize traffic congestion, conflicting movements, hazards, clutter or glare interfering with drivers' visibility of streets, drives and sight lines around corners, also accommodating emergency vehicles, and protecting pedestrian ways and avoiding the attraction of customer or truck traffic through local residential frontage streets; 
(b)  Assure longterm adequacy of grading, storm drainage, sanitary sewers, other utilities and improvements, particularly preventing landslides, erosion, sedimentation, flooding and similar problems on subject property and nearby parcels of land in accordance with the City of Bessemer Code; 
(c)  Minimize activity conflicts, and environmental degradation, while maximizing a compatible interrelating of uses and economical development through shared access, parking, utility easements, service areas, clustering, etc.; 
(d)  Preserve historic or significant places, scenic features, steep slopes, or drainageways, and create effective natural, planted and manmade buffers of sufficient height, density and width to screen objectionable on-site noise, vibration, smoke, dust, fumes, odor, heat, glare or visibility from adjacent, less intensive uses and particularly residential development and zones; 
Once a site development plan has been approved, no work shall be done and/or permits shall be issued except in accordance with said plan. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all site improvements as required by an approved site development plan are completed. 
(7)  Delay in construction. In the event that construction in accordance with the originally approved development plan has not begun within two years from the date of its approval, the development plan shall expire and become null and void. If less than 25% of the site improvements have been installed within 18 months after issuance of a permit to begin construction, the site development plan shall expire and become null and void. 
Sec. 5.9. - C-7 Health and institutional district. 
(1)  General[ly]. To provide for major health, institutional or similar institutional uses. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Hospital. 
(b)  Professional office buildings. 
(c)  College, technical, school facilities. 
(d)  Public and private academies. 
(e)  Nursing Home. 
(3)  Uses permitted upon appeal. 
(a)  Uses permitted in O-I district. 
(4)  Other regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See parking and loading requirements section. 
(c)  See signage standards section. 
(5)  Development plan requirements. 
(a)  Development shall be in accord with an approved development plan as prescribed elsewhere in the ordinance. 
SECTION 6. - USE REGULATIONS FOR INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 6.1. - I-1 Light industrial district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for light industrial facilities, distribution, warehousing, etc. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Light industrial, fabricating, processing, assembling and manufacturing uses, but expressly prohibiting uses which are in lower class districts and those uses which are especially detrimental to property or to the health and safety beyond the district by reason of the emission of odor, dust, gas, fumes, smoke, noise, vibration or waste material. 
(b)  Bottling and distribution plant. 
(c)  Distribution yards for gasoline and fuel oil tank trucks, provided that all bulk storage tanks and loading platforms shall be set back from the adjoining property lines a distance of not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(e)[(d)]  Heavy equipment sales and services. 
(f)[(e)]  Highway maintenance yards and buildings. 
(g)[(f)]  Helistops (permitted on review only). 
(h)[(g)]  Laundry and dry cleaning plants. 
(i)[(h)]  Service of agricultural machinery, automobiles, buses, trucks, boats, boat trailers, pre-fabricated structures, and mobile homes. 
(j)[(i)]  Service stations with garages. 
(k)[(j)]  Signs and billboards, provided that such uses meet the requirements of [the] signs and use regulations of [this] section. 
(l)[(k)]  Truck or bus terminal facilities. 
(m)[(l)]  Wholesaling, warehousing, lumber yards storage and those businesses which are incidental thereto, including building materials yards, provided that the operation does not involve the storage of any materials of an explosive nature and provided that there is no open storage of junk or salvage materials of any type in connection with the operation. 
(n)[(m)]  Commercial recreation facilities and uses such as indoor and outdoor sports and amusement facilities including but not limited to go kart racetracks, miniature golf courses, fitness facilities or gymnasiums, and other recreational facilities. 
(o)[(n)]  Any use permitted under C-1 Commercial. 
(3)  Uses permitted upon review. 
(a)  Uses permitted in C-1 through C-4 Business districts. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See off-street parking and loading requirements section. 
(c)  See sign regulations section. 
(5)  Development plan requirements. 
(a)  Development shall be in accord with approved development plan as described elsewhere in the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 3529, § II, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 6.2. - I-2 Heavy industrial district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for heavy industrial facilities and manufacturing, etc. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Any use permitted in an I-1 Light industrial district. 
(b)  Cement plants. 
(c)  Fixed plants for processing stone, chert, gravel, clay, slag, coal or iron ore. 
(d)  Iron and steel mills. 
(e)  Other heavy industrial manufacturing uses. 
(f)  Railroad shops, round-houses and yards. 
(g)  Saw mills for the purpose of cutting, sawing, milling, drying, treating and processing timber (logs) into lumber for building purposes. The refuse, sawdust and slabs, of such saw mills shall be kept at a minimum and the method of disposal of such must be made as to preclude any fire hazard. 
(3)  Uses permitted upon review. 
(a)  Uses permitted in I-1, I-2-A, I-3, I-4. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  District development criteria section. 
(b)  Off-street parking and loading requirements section. 
(c)  Sign regulations section. 
(5)  Development plan requirements. 
(a)  Development shall be in accord with a development plan approved as prescribed elsewhere in the ordinance. 
Sec. 6.3. - I-2-A Industrial district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for general industrial uses, primarily for auto salvage operations. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Auto dismantling, junk yards and salvage yards with the following restrictions: A minimum eight (8)-foot-high wall or suitable screen will be required that will obstruct from view all wrecked cars and other junk. All wrecked cars and other junk will be stored to the rear of (behind) said wall or suitable screen. Said wall and/or suitable screen and location thereof shall be approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(3)  Uses permitted upon review. 
(a)  Uses permitted in I-1, I-4. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See off-street parking and loading requirements section. 
(c)  See sign regulations section. 
(5)  Development plan requirements. 
(a)  Development shall be in accord with approved development plan as prescribed elsewhere in the ordinance. 
Sec. 6.4. - I-3 Industrial district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for general industrial uses dealing with timbering and land filling operations. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Timbering, logging, saw milling, extraction of timber products; and processing, distilling, manufacturing and treating of all such products. 
(b)  The right to erect, maintain, alter, enlarge, use and operate structures, buildings, machinery, housing, roads, railroads, transmission lines, right-of-way, and all other facilities of every kind accessory or appropriate to the conduct of such above permitted uses. 
(c)  The right to dump soil, tailings, and other waste and to use so much of said district as may be required for such purposes, and such other rights as may be incidental or accessory to such permitted uses. 
(d)  Quarries, drilling, & blasting 
(3)  Uses permitted upon review. 
(a)  Uses permitted in I-1, I-2, I-2A and I-4. 
(b)  Truck wash facility. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See off-street parking and loading requirements section. 
(c)  See sign regulations section. 
(5)  Development plan requirements. 
(a)  Development shall be in accordance with approved development plan as prescribed elsewhere in the ordinance. 
Sec. 6.5. - I-3-S Strip mining district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for general industrial uses having to do with strip mining or mineral extraction operations. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Extracting minerals, coal, ore, etc. by the surface stripping method. 
(b)  The right to erect, maintain, alter, enlarge, use and operate a structure, building, machinery, housing, roads, railroads, transmission lines, right-of-way, and other facilities accessory to strip mining. 
(c)  Any use permitted in I-3. 
(3)  Uses permitted upon review. 
(a)  Uses permitted in I-1, I-4, I-3. 
(4)  District regulations. In the above permitted uses, the area and dimensional regulations above set forth in the following: 
(a)  The extraction of minerals, coal, ore, etc. by the surface stripping method will not be permitted within 200 feet of any property line or public road right-of-way within this zoning district. Provided, however: (1) The foregoing 200 feet property line setback requirement may be reduced in whole or in part with the written consent of the owner(s) of the adjacent property and the approval of the zoning administration; (2) The foregoing 200-foot public road right-of-way setback requirement may be reduced in whole or in part with the written consent of the Bessemer City Council. 
(b)  The right to erect, maintain, alter, enlarge, use and operate a structure, building, machinery, housing, road railroad, transmission lines, right-of-way and other facilities accessory to strip mining will not be permitted within 50 feet of any property line or public road right-of way line within this zoning district, except where mine access roads or haulage roads join such right-of-way line and except that the council or governmental body having jurisdiction over such roads may permit such roads to be relocated or the area affected to lie within 50 feet of such road. 
(c)  Exception to the setback requirement for the adjoining property line as stated in 1 [(1)] and 2 [(2)] above will be made where the adjoining property is also zoned I-3-S, in which case no setback from the adjoining property line will be necessary. 
(5)  Development plan requirements. 
(a)  Prior to the use of the land for such purposes, the applicant shall submit a plan showing an informal sketch as to the locations of the coal seam, estimated number of tons, approximate time required to strip and reclaim a general expression of subsequent use of property. This is the only district in which strip mining shall be permitted. 
Sec. 6.6. - I-4 Industrial park district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for development of an industrial park, emphasizing architectural control, landscaping and comprehensive signage, etc. 
(2)  Uses permitted. 
(a)  Light industrial, manufacturing, fabricating, wholesale, warehousing, distribution, storage or similar uses provided that such uses be conducted within an enclosed building. Those uses which are especially detrimental to property or to the health and safety beyond the district by reason of the emission of odor, dust, gas, fumes, smoke, noise, vibration or waste material are expressly prohibited. 
(b)  Banks. 
(c)  Office buildings. 
(d)  Research or testing laboratories. 
(f)[(e)]  Restaurants. 
(g)[(f)]  Retail sales outlets related to the products manufactured or stored by the principal use. 
(h)[(g)]  Service stations provided that there is no open storage of any type and no repair work. 
(i)[(h)]  Commercial recreation facilities and uses such as indoor and outdoor sports and amusement facilities including but not limited to go kart racetracks, miniature golf courses, fitness facilities or gymnasiums, and other recreational facilities. 
(3)  Uses permitted upon review. 
(a)  Uses permitted in I-1. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See off-street parking and loading requirements section. 
(c)  See sign regulations section. 
(5)  Development plan requirements. 
(a)  Prior to issuance of building permits, a development plan shall be approved as described elsewhere in the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 3529, § III, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 6.7. - I-5 Sanitary sewage disposal district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for industrial use related to sanitary sewer disposal facility. 
(2)  Uses permitted. 
(a)  Sanitary sewage disposal plant. 
(3)  Uses permitted upon review. 
(a)  Uses permitted in I-1. 
(4)  Other regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See off-street parking and loading requirements section. 
(c)  See sign regulations section. 
Sec. 6.8. - I-5-A Waste-water treatment (private) district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide private waste water treatment facilities. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Sanitary sewage disposal plant. 
(3)  Uses permitted upon review. 
(a)  Uses permitted in I-1. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See parking and loading requirements section. 
(c)  See signage regulations section. 
Sec. 6.9. - I-0 Obnoxious odors district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for industrial uses which may cause, by their nature, obnoxious odors. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Fertilizer plants. 
(b)  Glue factories. 
(c)  Incinerators. 
(d)  Oil refineries. 
(e)  Other establishments and/or plants giving off obnoxious odors, fumes and gases. 
(f)  Other garbage disposal plants, landfills, and/or areas. 
(g)  Paper and/or pulp wood plants. 
(h)  Rendering plants. 
(i)  Slaughter houses. 
(j)  Tanneries. 
(3)  Uses permitted upon review. 
(a)  Uses permitted in I-1, I-4. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  District development criteria section. 
(b)  Off-street parking and loading requirements section. 
(c)  Sign regulations section. 
Sec. 6.10. - HW-1 Hazardous waste disposal district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for industrial uses related to the specific purpose of solid waste disposal. 
(2)  Uses permitted. Any use herein permitted (allowed) shall have approval of the Alabama Department of Public Health Environmental Health Administration Division of Solid and Hazardous Waste or equivalent governmental agency before any rezoning becomes final. Within a HW-1 Hazardous waste district a building or land shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(a)  Facilities for storing, treating or disposing of hazardous waste. 
(b)  Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to aforesaid uses. 
(3)  Uses permitted upon review. 
(a)  Uses permitted in I-1. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See off-street parking and loading requirements section. 
(c)  See sign regulations section. 
Sec. 6.11. - I-6 Planned industrial district. 
(1)  Generally. 
(a)  To provide for industrial development which permits a tract of land to be developed as one large tract, rather than separate lots with standards comparable to an industrial park. The technique is designed to encourage coordinated development; to permit higher densities in conjunction with functional open space; to promote efficient use of land; to promote preservation and enhancement of existing natural landscape features; and to be developed in compliance with an approved development plan. 
(2)  Uses permitted. 
(a)  Light industrial, manufacturing, fabricating, wholesale, warehousing, distribution, storage or similar uses provided that such uses be conducted within an enclosed building. Those uses which are especially detrimental to property or to the health and safety beyond the district by reason of the emission of odor, dust, gas fumes, smoke, noise, vibration or waste material are expressly prohibited. 
(b)  Bank. 
(c)  Office building. 
(d)  Research or testing laboratory. 
(e)  Restaurant. 
(f)  Retail sales outlet related to the products manufactured or stored by the principal use. 
(g)  Service stations provided that there is no open storage of any type and no repair work. 
(3)  Uses permitted upon review. 
(a)  Uses permitted in I-1 and I-4. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See off-street parking and loading requirements section. 
(c)  See sign regulations section. 
(5)  Development plan requirements. 
(a)  Development shall be in accordance with an approved development plan as prescribed elsewhere in the ordinance. 
SECTION 7. - USE REGULATIONS FOR SPECIALTY DISTRICTS 

Sec. 7.1. - A-1 Agricultural district. 
(1)  Generally. 
(a)  To reserve areas for agriculture, low density residential and other recreational uses without permitting an intensity of development which would require the provision of urban facilities and services. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Single-family dwelling unit. 
(b)  Raising of crops, plants, flowers and trees. 
(3)  Uses permitted on review. 
(a)  Mobile home park, subject to the provisions of section. 
(b)  Mobile home subdivision, subject to the provisions of section. 
(c)  Travel trailer park/campground. 
(d)  Airport. 
(e)  Botanical gardens. 
(f)  Cemetery, subject to the provisions of section. 
(g)  Church. 
(h)  Community center, YMCA YWCA. 
(i)  Fire station, police station. 
(j)  Health care facility. 
(k)  Outdoor recreation facilities such as park, golf course, tennis courts, swimming pool, and camps. 
(l)  Public elementary or high school, or parochial or private school having comparable curriculum, not including dormitories. 
(m)  Automobile, motorcycle or other tracks used for competitive racing. 
(n)  Commercial livestock feed and sales yard. 
(o)  Home occupation, subject to the provisions of section. 
(p)  Livery stable or riding academy, fish raising and the breeding of fur-bearing animals. 
(q)  Lodge, fraternal organizations, non-commercial club not operated for a profit. 
(r)  Plant nursery. 
(s)  Roadside stand for the sale only of products produced on the same lot, not to exceed 200 square feet in area or be located nearer than 35 feet from a street. 
(t)  Veterinarian or dog kennel operations. 
(u)  Extraction or storage of natural mineral resources. 
(v)  Sawmill for the purpose of cutting, sawing, milling, drying, treating and processing timber (logs) into lumber for building purposes. 
(w)  Fowl and livestock, which is permitted only in an A-1 district, shall conform to the following provisions: 
1.  Horses, cows, sheep and goats shall be housed not less than 150 feet from any use permitted in any residence or business district, other than the residence of owner, with at least 15,000 square feet of lot area for each animal. 
2.  Fowl, rabbits and other small animals shall be housed not less than 100 feet from any use permitted in any residence or business district, other than the residence of the owner, with a maximum of 20 such fowl or animals for every 7,000 square feet of lot area. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See off-street parking and loading requirements section. 
(c)  See sign regulations section. 
Sec. 7.2. - MXD-Mixed use district. 
(1)  Generally. 
(a)  To provide for a compatible and complementary mixture of residential, office, commercial, cultural, institutional, governmental, and industrial uses. The purpose of this section is: (1) to encourage flexible, creative and imaginative approaches to a range of urban development opportunities; (2) to provide flexible and creative solutions to transportation and parking problems, public or private, motorized and pedestrian; (3) to promote citizen interaction and a sense of community; (4) to provide opportunities for affordable housing; (5) to provide economic, convenient and efficient provision of sufficient public services; (6) to ensure the provision of public spaces and activities; (7) to preserve significant natural features of the land; and (8) to develop in a manner complementary with other land in the vicinity. 
(2)  Mixed use district definitions. For the purposes of this section the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them as specified herein. 
(a)  Civic use areas - Land areas intended to contain public/quasi-public buildings and uses (such as churches, schools, libraries, fire stations, and other similar uses) for the use, enjoyment and benefit of the public. 
(b)  Common open space - The land area which is accessible and available to all occupants of specific dwellings or subdivisions for whose use the space is intended and reserved. This space is owned and managed by a property owners association. 
(c)  Conceptual plan - A plan consisting of several maps and narratives laying out existing conditions and proposing MXD subareas and a general land use group plan for an MXD or phase thereof. 
(d)  Development guidelines - Regulations for development within an MXD which are established by the developer and approved by the planning committee that govern location, character, and extent of proposed site plans and design features. 
(e)  Development plans - Detailed maps and narratives, based on approved conceptual plans and development guidelines, delineating a proposed development or phrase of development and providing the basis for a preliminary subdivision. 
(f)  Golf courses, private - Golf courses privately owned and not open to the general public. 
(g)  Golf courses, public - Golf courses owned by a government agency or privately owned but open to the general public on a daily fee basis. 
(h)  Gross land area - Total land area of a site of district inclusive of dedicated street rights-of-way, civic use area and open space area. 
(i)  Land use groups - Uses permitted in varying proportions under the MXD subarea plans. 
(j)  Mixed use district (MXD) - A mixed use district is a zone district wherein a compatible mixture of office, commercial, residential, industrial and civic uses and open space may be combined. 
(k)  MXD subareas - Areas enumerated below which may be developed under an MXD zoning classification. The boundaries of these areas are required to be delineated on conceptual plans. 
(l)  Mixed use district/residential (MXD/R) - A mixed use development subarea comprehensively planned for residential community development. 
(m)  Mixed use district/employment (MXD/E) - A mixed use development subarea comprehensively planned for employment based development. 
(n)  Mixed use district/community center (MXD/CC) - A mixed use development subarea comprehensively planned to concentrate civic, cultural, commercial, residential and employment activities into a cohesive center. 
(o)  Net acres - The total land area of a site less proposed public rights-of-way, easements, required civic use areas and required open space. 
(p)  Performance bonus - A method for allowing additional land use options and/or densities when the development plan's net acres establish additional open space beyond that required. 
(q)  Property owner's association - A private corporation or other legal entity established by the developer to provide for the ownership, maintenance, and management of the common open space areas, and other community area improvements of a development, as well as enforcement of its covenants. 
(r)  Public open space - Land dedicated for leisure and/or recreation, including but not limited to: pedestrian paths, parks, athletic fields and courts assigned to a public agency which is responsible for its operation and maintenance. 
(s)  Required open space - Percentage of a proposed development that must be restricted to common and/or public open space as specified in the area, dimensional, and design requirements. 
(t)  Steering committee - A committee which may include private sector and governmental representatives which may be formed to provide oversight to a development. 
(u)  Required civic use space - Percentage of a proposed development that must be dedicated to publicly owned civic use activities as specified in the area, dimensional and design requirements. 
(3)  [Submittal requirements.] Submittal requirements for MXD Zoning and Conceptual Plan Approval. 
(a)  Process for rezoning to MXD (owner/developer initiated). 
1.  The minimum gross land area required for an application for rezoning to MXD is 10 acres. Smaller areas my be considered for rezoning to MXD when contiguous to a larger tract of land that is already zoned MXD and is under the same ownership as the larger tract and using the same development guidelines. 
2.  The applicant shall submit six (6) copies of a "draft" conceptual plan, with payment of the rezoning fee. The building at inspections department shall schedule a pre-application conference within fifteen (15) days to review the draft proposal. This informal conference may include the applicant, city engineer, community development department, buildings and inspections department, and other private and public entities which may have interests in the vicinity of the project. 
3.  The applicant should incorporate staff recommended changes to the "draft" conceptual plan. Upon the applicant submitting six (6) copies of a completed conceptual plan, the zoning official shall process a rezoning case and request the planning and zoning commission to hold a public hearing at their next meeting. 
4.  After the planning and zoning commission public hearing, the building and inspections department will set a public hearing for rezoning with the city council. 
(b)  Process for conceptual plan approval in an existing MXD zone (where zoning has been established by the city). 
1.  Six (6) copies of a "draft" conceptual plan shall be submitted to the building and inspections department which will convene a pre-application conference within fifteen (15) days. This conference will be lead by the chairman of the steering committee, should one exist, for the area in which the MXD zone is being implemented, or by the building and inspections department where such a steering committee is not in place. 
2.  After the pre-application conference, the applicant should incorporate staff recommended changes to the "draft" conceptual plan. upon applicant submitting six (6) copies of a completed conceptual plan, the building and inspections department shall process public hearings before the planning and zoning commission and city council. 
(c)  Requirements for a conceptual plan submittal - The conceptual plan submittal shall consist of maps and written material as detailed below. Maps should include title block and include date, north arrow, legend, and scale. Scale should be compatible between comparable maps and large enough to fully understand the proposed development concept. 
1.  Existing environmental features map: 
a.  Geologic features; 
b.  Soils map; 
c.  Topographic features (with contour intervals not greater than five (5) feet); 
d.  Flood maps (showing Federal Emergency Management Act floodways and 100 year flood plains); 
e.  Wetlands identification where US Army Corps of Engineers approvals are required; 
f.  Large tree stands, water features, significant scenic areas or identified endangered species habitat. 
2.  Existing manmade features map: 
a.  Location of existing land uses on site and within 500 feet of the site boundaries; 
b.  Location of existing roads and rights-of-way and the volume/capacity ratios of existing contiguous freeways, arterial, and major collector roadways; 
c.  Location and size of existing accessible water lines and sanitary sewer lines, their rights-of-way or easements and their capacities and current demand; 
d.  Location of other utilities and their rights-of-way or easements such as natural gas, electrical, telephone, and cable television; 
e.  Historical sites listed or eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places. 
3.  Existing legal features map: 
a.  Existing zoning on-site and within 500 feet of site boundaries; 
b.  Property lines and dimensions of site; 
c.  Municipal and county jurisdictional boundaries, where applicable. 
4.  Conceptual plan map: 
a.  Boundaries of the proposed MXD zone and proposed boundaries of MXD subareas; 
b.  Proposed on-site arterial and collector street system showing approximate locations and access to off-site roadways; 
c.  General location and size of projected water lines and sanitary sewer lines, their rights-of-way or easements and their capacities and point of connection; 
d.  Generalized location of proposed land use groups including required open space and required civic use areas. 
5.  Conceptual plan written submittal: 
a.  A narrative discussing how the proposed project addresses the eight purposes of an MXD zone outlines in subsection 1 of this section; 
b.  Projected built-out resident population and employment population; 
c.  Quantitative geographic data in acres: (1) gross land area; (2) net land area; (3) approximate acreage of areas dedicated to various land use groups within each proposed MXD Subarea including approximate percentages of each; (4) approximate acreage of open space area, (including acres for public or private golf courses, public open space, common open space), including approximate percentages of each (5) approximate acreage of civic uses areas, including approximate percentages; 
d.  Estimates of demands and provisions for supplying adequate drinking water and sanitary sewage disposal to meet the needs of a projected built-out population per phase; 
e.  A traffic impact analysis indicating that the traffic generated when each phase of the proposed project is built out can be accommodated without causing excessive congestion or safety hazards on existing or proposed roads. 
6.  Minor amendments to conceptual plans: 
a.  Any minor or non-substantive change in the approved conceptual plan may be made after approval of such change by the building and inspections department. Any proposed change in an approved conceptual plan shall be clearly portrayed on all copies of the approved plan and submitted to the building and inspections department for review and determination. The proposed change may be referred to a steering committee for review or to the planning and zoning commission and city council for a public hearing and action. No amendment shall be made without public hearings which would cause any of the following to occur: 
1.  Proposed changes in MXD subarea boundaries which increase the acreage of more intense subareas by more than five percent (5%) of the council approved conceptual plan. 
2.  Proposed land use group changes which could increase the overall densities or intensity of uses by more than ten percent (10%) of the council approved conceptual plan. 
3.  Proposed land use group changes which could alter the MXD's relationships to adjacent developed property or relationships to planned uses. 
4.  Any reduction in the total acreage of required open space or required civic use space or any reduction of 10% or more of the total acreage of open space or civic use areas in the city council approved conceptual plan. 
5.  Major realignment of arterial or collector streets. 
(4)  Development requirements. 
(a)  Development guidelines. The applicant shall submit six (6) draft copies of development guidelines to the building and inspections department for review. Within thirty (30) days after receiving said documents, the building and inspections department shall call a meeting with the applicant and a steering committee, where applicable, to discuss staff comments. If agreement cannot be reached on the sufficiency of this submittal, appeals may be filed with the zoning board of adjustment. proposed development guidelines shall include minimum standards for site and project development and amendment procedures, subject to the approval of the building and inspections department and a steering committee, where applicable. These guidelines shall include but are not limited to the following: 
1.  Area, dimensional, and design requirements of this ordinance as baseline standards. 
2.  Building materials and colors and architectural features. 
3.  Buffers and screening requirements between different land use groups and between different land use groups and existing residentially zoned districts. 
4.  Landscaping for off-street parking lots, solid waste and recycling containers, utility equipment, and for the development as a whole. 
5.  Pedestrian amenities and pedestrian circulation plans and requirements, such as for bike lanes, equestrian trails, sidewalks or pedestrian paths as appropriate. 
6.  Building and parking lot set back lines. 
7.  Methods to limit the number of parking lot access points to public streets and to link parking areas with adjacent properties. 
8.  Fences and walls including size, material and placement. 
9.  Public right-of-way amenity plans, including street trees, street furniture, lighting and landscaping. 
10.  Overhead utility location and height. 
11.  Site clearing and preservation procedures for trees and other natural vegetation. 
12.  Signs. 
13.  Exterior lighting. 
14.  Zero lot line housing layout and design features. 
15.  Design guidelines for MXD/CC subareas, in addition to the above, shall address the following design features: 
a.  Vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems that promote a comfortable and pleasant walkway environment, including materials, landscaping, lighting, street furniture, and permitted parking lot layouts and location. 
b.  Open space plan, showing how required open space amenities relate to other activities to promote an appropriate atmosphere. 
c.  Building placement, facade design, entrance and window location and placement, provisions for any visible utilities or accessory structures, heights, materials, colors, signage and lighting. 
16.  Right-of-way improvement standards where not in compliance with City of Bessemer Subdivision Regulations and where modification of these Regulations are expected to be requested of the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)  Development plans. Development plans in an approved MXD subarea must be: (1) submitted to the building and inspections department and (2) conform to the approved conceptual plan and development guidelines and (3) consist of mapped or plotted information and written information. 
The building and inspections department and other city staff as well as a project steering committee, where applicable, shall review these plans and respond to the applicant within fifteen (15) days with comments. The applicant, after consideration of staff comments, will make appropriate revisions, if necessary, and submit the development plans for the approval of the building and inspections department. Appeals of any provisions on the development plan approval may be filed with the zoning board of adjustment. 
1.  Development plan maps. Detailed development plans shall be prepared at a scale sufficient for detailed review and delineate: (1) MXD subareas for the development; (2) land use groups for all parcels; (3) required open space and civic use area; (4) additional open space which is proposed, if applicable; (5) phasing of development. In addition, data should be submitted delineating conformance with the development guidelines as well as the following: 
a.  Topographic contours not greater than two (2) foot intervals. 
b.  Approximate height of all buildings. 
c.  Use(s) of all buildings. 
d.  Approximate location of all utilities. 
e.  Approximate total site acreage. 
f.  Approximate total site impervious (manmade) surfaces. 
g.  Lot lines within 100 feet of development site boundaries. 
h.  Location of all structures within 100 feet of site, their use and heights. 
i.  Location of all private roads, drives, and parking lots within 100 feet. 
j.  Buffer and screening provisions. 
k.  Parking lot design specifying layout and landscaping in detail. 
l.  All walls and fences. 
m.  Lighting plan. 
2.  Development plan written submittal: 
a.  Legal description of project property. 
b.  Quantitative geographic data in acres: (1) gross land area; (2) net land area; (3) areas dedicated to various land use groups within each proposed MXD subarea including percentages of each; (4) open space area, (including acres for public or private golf courses, public open space, common open space, and required open space including percentages of each); (5) civic uses areas, including percentages. 
c.  Documentation from developer committing provision of adequate drinking water and sanitary sewage disposal to meet the need of the projected built-out population. 
d.  A traffic impact analysis indicating how each phase of the proposed development will relate to streets and roadways and that the traffic generated when built out can be accommodated without causing excessive congestion, hazards, or objectionable volumes of traffic on existing or proposed roads. 
(c)  Preliminary subdivisions and draft covenants. 
Preliminary subdivisions in an approved MXD subarea must be submitted to the building and inspections department, conform to the approved conceptual plan, development guidelines and development plans and consist of mapped or plotted information and written information, including draft covenants, where applicable, governing relationships between the developer and property owners. 
The building and inspections department and other city staff as well as a project steering committee, where applicable, shall review these plans and respond to the applicant within fifteen (15) days with comments. The applicant, after consideration of staff comments, will make appropriate revisions, if necessary, and submit the following: 
1.  Preliminary subdivision plats: Preliminary subdivision plats shall be submitted as provided for in the city's subdivision regulations for planning and zoning commission review and action. 
2.  Covenants - Covenants shall be between applicant and deed holders of all property in the area covered by this application. Covenants shall include articles which include, but are not limited to the following: 
a.  Articles of incorporation and by-laws for a property owners association. 
b.  Provision for the establishing of a procedure for turning over management of open space and other amenities from applicant to the property owners association. 
c.  Provision for an account to fund maintenance and operational expenses of common or open public space. 
(d)  Covenants and final subdivision plat. 
After receiving approval of the development guidelines, the development plan and preliminary subdivision plat, the applicant shall submit final covenants and file an application with the planning and commission board for approval of a final subdivision plat. 
Upon approval of the final covenants by the building and inspections department, the final plat will be submitted as provided for in the city's subdivision regulations for planning and zoning commission review and action. 
After the final plat has been recorded, building permits may be applied for. A condition of building permit issuance is review and approval by the building and inspections department for compliance with the approved plans. Appeals of the decision on compliance by the building inspections officers are to the zoning board of adjustment. 
(6)[(5)]  Permitted uses, use groups, and use percentages. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Any use not specifically listed in these land use groups may be allowed in groups with similar uses as determined by the building and inspections department. uses specifically listed for the first time in a uses restrictive land use group cannot be interpreted to be allowed in a more restrictive land use group. 
(b)  Use groups. 
1.  Open space uses - except as noted these uses are allowed in all subareas. 
a.  Parks. 
b.  Athletic fields and courts. 
c.  Pedestrian paths (See Subsection 6, A, 3). 
d.  Golf courses, boat clubs, marinas, and swimming pools. 
e.  Natural undisturbed areas. 
f.  Public recreation centers. 
g.  Village greens and town squares. 
h.  Natatorium, gymnasium, velodrome. 
i.  Stadiums and athletic coliseums (permitted in MXD-E subareas only). 
j.  Other like uses. 
2.  Civic uses - Except as noted these uses are allowed in all subareas. 
a.  Library. 
b.  School, grades K-9. 
c.  Municipal services and buildings. 
d.  Police and fire stations. 
e.  Post offices. 
f.  Day care centers. 
g.  Non-profit civic or cultural societies (no office building). 
h.  Churches, synagogues, and other places of worship. 
i.  High schools, grades 9-12, colleges, and universities (not allowed in MXD/R). 
j.  Museums and art galleries (not allowed in MXD/R). 
k.  Music center, symphony halls, and amphitheater (not allowed in MXD/R). 
l.  Performing arts theater (not allowed in MXD/R). 
m.  Hospitals (not allowed in MXD/R). 
n.  Public conference center (not allowed in MXD/R). 
o.  Other like uses. 
3.  Residential use groups. 
a.  Residential use Group 1 Single-family detached dwelling units not to exceed seven (7) dwelling units per net acre. 
b.  Residential Use Group 2 All uses allowed in Residential Use Group 1 and single-family attached and semi-attached dwelling units, single family detached zero lot line dwellings and multi-family units not to exceed twelve (12) dwelling units per net acre. 
c.  Residential Use Group 3 All uses allowed in Residential Use Group 2 and multi-family dwelling units not to exceed 29 dwelling units per net acre and communal living facilities with zoning board of adjustment approval. 
4.  Commercial use groups. 
Commercial Use Group 1 - Neighborhood business users. 
a.  All uses allowed in Residential Use Group 2. 
b.  Residential uses in mixed use building. 
c.  Artist studio. 
d.  Greenhouse. 
e.  Restaurants without drive through or drive-in capabilities. 
f.  Offices not exceeding 5,000 square feet per building. 
g.  Neighborhood retail, sales and services of exceeding 5,000 square feet per building. 
h.  Auto service station limited to one (1) facility per intersection. 
i.  Private club or lodge. 
j.  Commercial health club, spa or recreation facility. 
k.  Tourist home. 
l.  Other like uses. 
Commercial Use Group 2 - General commercial users. 
a.  All uses allowed in Residential Use Group 3. 
b.  All uses allowed in Neighborhood Businesses, Commercial Use Group 1. 
c.  General office. 
d.  Retail sales and services. 
e.  Restaurants. 
f.  Hotels or motels. 
g.  Conference centers. 
h.  Non-industrial research and development. 
i.  Parking garages. 
j.  Cinemas. 
k.  Taverns. 
l.  Funeral homes. 
m.  Other like uses. 
Commercial Use Group 3 - Commercial/limited industrial use. 
a.  All uses allowed in Commercial Use Group 2, except residential uses. 
b.  Building contractors. 
c.  Light industrial use - provided uses do not create any danger to health or safety in surrounding areas and which do not create any objectionable noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat or glare, or release any pollutant which would require a permit from a state or federal agency. 
d.  Wholesale sales. 
e.  Shipping/receiving, warehousing and self storage. 
f.  Auto repair. 
g.  Auto sales, new or used. 
h.  Animal hospitals and veterinarians. 
i.  Broadcasting stations. 
j.  Other like uses. 
5.  Uses permitted upon review (with zoning board of adjustment approval). 
a.  Public utilities - (with adequate screening provision). 
b.  Outdoor storage - (in MXD/E only, finished or packaged goods only and with adequate screening provisions). 
c.  Horse stables, barns and corrals - (only when contiguous to equestrian trails, on ten (10) acre sites or larger and adequately buffered from neighboring uses). 
d.  Broadcasting and communication antennas (in MXD/E only). 
e.  Cemeteries. 
f.  Appeals for more intensive uses than are allowed under proposed land use groups. 
(c)  Mix of uses. The following sets forth the proportions of permitted uses for arranging acreage's of MXD subareas. Unless otherwise noted, all MXD zones have provisions for required open space and civic use areas. (See area, dimensional and design regulations). 
1.  MXD/R - Residential uses with complementing commercial uses. 
a.  Sites less than twenty (20) net acres. 
(1)  Allowed uses and proportions: 
Residential Use Group 1 - maximum 100% 
Residential Use Group 2 - maximum 10% 
(2)  Performance bonus: Allowed Uses and proportions: 
Residential Use Group 1 - maximum 100% 
Residential Use Group 2 - an additional 1.5% for every 1% of additional open space up to a maximum of 25% 
b.  Sites between twenty (20) to forty (40) net acres. 
(1)  Allowed uses and proportions: 
Residential Use Group 1 - maximum 90% 
Residential Use Group 2 - maximum 15% 
Commercial Group 1 - maximum 5% 
(2)  Performance bonus: allowed uses and proportions: 
Residential Use Group 1 - maximum 90% 
Residential Use Group 2 - an additional 1.5% for every 1% of additional open space up to a maximum of 30% 
Commercial Use Group 1 - maximum 5% 
c.  Sites over forty (40) net acres. 
(1)  Allowed uses and proportions: 
Residential Use Group 1 - maximum 80% 
Residential Use Group 2 - maximum 25% 
Residential Use Group 3 - maximum 5% 
Commercial Use Group 1 - maximum 5% 
Commercial Use Group 2 - maximum 2% 
(2)  Bonus: Allowed uses and proportions: 
Residential Use Group 1 - maximum 80% 
Residential Use Group 2 - an additional 1% for every 1% of additional open space up to a maximum of 35% 
Residential Use Group 3 - an additional 1/2% for every 1% of additional open space up to a maximum of 10% 
Commercial Use Group 1 - maximum 5% 
Commercial Use Group 2 - maximum 3% 
2.  MXD/E with complementary commercial and residential uses. 
a.  Allowed uses and proportions: 
Commercial Use Group 2 - maximum 90% 
Commercial Use Group 3 - maximum 40% 
b.  Bonus: Allowed uses and proportions: 
Commercial Use Group 2 - maximum 90% 
Commercial Use Group 3 - 2% for every 1% of additional open space up to a maximum of 60% 
3.  MXD Community Center uses with complementing residential and commercial uses arranged and located in a manner to provide a defined and pedestrian oriented business and service center for a larger MXD area. 
Application may be made for the MXD/CC subarea designation, where part of a larger MXD zoned property, for sites between 10 and 80 net acres. 
Allowed uses and proportions: 
Residential Use Group 1 - maximum 30% 
Residential Use Group 2 - maximum 30% 
Residential Use Group 3 - maximum 25% 
Commercial Use Group 1 - combined maximum 50% 
Commercial Use Group 2 - 
(6)  Other regulations. 
(a)  MXD overall minimum standards. 
1.  Required open space. 
The minimum requirement for open space in the conceptual plan shall be 15% of the gross land area. Each development plan submittal shall include a minimum of 5% of the gross area as open space or the amount of open space approved in the corresponding conceptual plan, whichever is greater. Not more than 75% of the required open space may be satisfied by the provision of public golf courses and not more than 50% of the required open space may be satisfied by the provision of private golf courses. All the listed public or common open space uses may count 100% toward satisfying this requirement. 
2.  Required civic uses. 
A minimum percentage depending on subarea designation of the proposed development uses shall be dedicated to listed publicly owned civic uses. This minimum requirement shall be 3% for MXD/R and MXD/E and 5% for MXD/CC. 
3.  Pedestrian paths. 
A pedestrian pathway system generally continuous throughout the district, is required and shall consist of dedicated public rights-of-way or easements, which may include bike lanes or equestrian trails. The path system specifications must be included as a part of the development guidelines submittal. 
(b)  Within MXD/R and MXD/E Subareas the following requirements shall apply: 
1.  Height. 
a.  Residential Use Groups 1 and 2 shall have a maximum height of 35 feet. 
b.  Residential Use Group 3 shall have a maximum height of 75 feet. 
c.  Commercial Use Group 1 shall have a maximum height of 35 feet in MXD/R and 75 feet in MXD/E. 
d.  Commercial Use Group 2 shall have a maximum height of 35 feet in MXD/R and 75 feet in MXD/E. 
e.  Commercial Use Group 3 shall have a maximum height of 75 feet. 
2.  Separation of residential buildings. 
Unless provided for in approved development guidelines, the minimum separation for residential buildings (except accessory structures) shall be: 
- 40 feet front of one building to back of another building 
- 25 feet front of one building to side of another building 
- 35 feet front of one building to front of another building 
- 30 feet back of one building to back of another building 
- 20 feet side of one building to back of another building 
- 15 feet side of one building to side of another building 
For all buildings exceeding 35 feet in height, the minimum separation between buildings shall increase 1 additional foot for each additional foot the building exceeds 35 feet in height. 
3.  Impervious surfaces. 
The maximum man made impervious surfaces (roof top, paved parking, and like surfaces) for parcels of property shall depend on its use as specified below. Interpretation of a use as it applies to impervious surface ratios shall be made by the director of urban planning with appeals of this decision to zoning board of adjustment. 
a.  Retail sales or services and light industrial or warehousing maximum 80%. 
b.  Office or Research maximum 65%. 
c.  All other uses maximum 50%. 
For attached single family dwellings this ration shall apply to the composite site, not each individual parcel. 
(c)  Within MXD/VC subareas the following requirements apply. 
1.  Height - the maximum height for all structures is 45 feet. 
2.  Open space - a minimum of one (1) village green or town square between one (1) and five (5) acres shall be provided. 
3.  All utilities shall be underground. 
4.  Off-street parking shall be prohibited at street intersections. 
5.  Off-street parking shall be in the rear or side of buildings unless special development guidelines are established. 
(7)  Parking requirements. 
(a)  Off-street parking requirements - Off street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in other Articles. 
(b)  On-street parking - Generally continuous parallel or angle parking shall be provided along streets where commercial uses are predominant. Except where narrower streets are provided through subdivision variance, parallel parking is permitted along all other neighborhood streets. 
Sec. 7.3. - PRD Planned recreational district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for the orderly arrangement of recreational facilities and associated commercial uses. 
(2)  Permitted uses. The use of each building and/or premises shall be in accordance with the plan referred to in subsection 7 of this section. The Bessemer Planning and Zoning Commission and the City of Bessemer shall determine that each approved use is compatible with other uses within, adjacent to and in the vicinity of the PRD Planned Recreational District. The uses listed below are permitted in this district only when approved, which uses shall be limited to: 
(a)  Archeries. 
(b)  Amusement Parks. 
(c)  Athletic fields and stadiums (baseball, football, tennis, etc.). 
(d)  Carnivals. 
(e)  Circuses. 
(f)  Drive-in or enclosed theater (excluding adult entertainment). 
(g)  Fairgrounds. 
(h)  Golf courses (full size, miniature and putting greens). 
(i)  Merry-go-rounds. 
(j)  Miniature railroads. 
(k)  Picnic or camp grounds including mobile home parks. All sanitary facilities must be in conformity with the City of Bessemer code, with the density and location subject to the approval of the Bessemer Planning and Zoning Board. 
(l)  Pony riding tracks. 
(m)  Practice golf driving range. 
(n)  Race tracks (automobile, stock cars, motorcycles, horses and dogs). 
(o)  Riding stables and trails. 
(p)  Roller and ice-skating rinks. 
(q)  Skeet, rifle or trap shooting ranges, provided that such use is not located nearer than 1,000 feet to any residence other than owner or lessor of the site or such facility is totally enclosed with materials to contain any munitions discharged therein. 
(r)  Sport arenas. 
(s)  Swimming pools, boating or water parks. 
(t)  Theme parks. 
(u)  Zoos & aquariums. 
(v)  Other similar recreational or tourist facilities. 
(w)  Accessory structures and uses, including but not limited to apartments and/or dormitories. 
(3)  Uses permitted upon review. Associated commercial activities excluding adult establishments, and including but not limited to, the following: 
(a)  Ambulance or helistops for emergency service only. 
(b)  Banks. 
(c)  Hotels-motels. 
(d)  Office buildings. 
(e)  Restaurants with or without tavern combinations. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  Maximum height of buildings shall be 40 feet, and no structure shall exceed two hundred (200) feet in height. 
(b)  Minimum structure setbacks. 
1.  Front yards. No building or structure shall be closer to any abutting street than fifty (50) feet. 
2.  Side yards. No building or structure shall be closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any adjoining side property line, except as provided in item "d [4]" below. 
3.  Rear yard. No building or structure shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to any rear property line, except as provided in item "d [4]" below. 
4.  District setback. No building or structure shall be closer than one hundred (100) feet to a PRD Planned recreational district boundary line. 
(c)  Open space between buildings. 
Open space between buildings, measured at the closest point, shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet for one-story buildings, thirty-five (35) feet when one or both are two story buildings, and fifty (50) feet when one or both are three-story or taller buildings. 
(d)  Buffers. 
Additional setbacks, buffers or restraints may be required where determined necessary. 
(5)  Development plan application-Review and approval. A petition for the establishment of a PRD Panned recreational district on a tract of land containing a minimum of twenty (20) acres may be submitted by: 
(a)  The owner(s) of the subject land, or 
(b)  The Bessemer Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Bessemer to assure the compatibility of uses within a PRD Planned recreational district. 
The petitioner shall submit a plan for the development of the property for review and approval in accordance with the provisions of subsection (7) of this section before any action is taken upon the petition. The Bessemer Planning and Zoning Commission or the City of Bessemer shall determine that each approved use is compatible with other uses within, adjacent to and in the vicinity of the PRD Planned recreational district. 
The development plan and application shall be submitted to the Bessemer Planning and Zoning Commission for rezoning considerations or to the City of Bessemer for initial zoning considerations. 
(6)  Development plan and other information-Contents. The development plan and application shall be submitted to the Bessemer Planning and Zoning Commission for rezoning considerations or to the City of Bessemer for initial zoning considerations, for review and approval in accordance with the provisions of this section before any action is taken upon the petition. Building permits will be issued only for structures which are in strict conformity with the development plan. Said plan shall comply with all requirements of this section and shall be accompanied by evidence concerning the feasibility of the project, the relationship of the proposed development on surrounding property and other physical conditions. When required by the City of Bessemer, said plan and supporting evidence may include each of the following: 
(a)  A site plan defining the areas wherein buildings may be constructed; the locations and extent of parking and the proportionate amount thereof; the location of all roads, driveways and walks and the points of ingress and egress, including access streets where required; the location, height and character of walls, fencing or other forms of screening; the space for loading; the location, size, character and number of signs excluding trailer or portable signs of any type; the location and character of exterior lighting; and the character and extent of landscaping, planting and other treatment for protection of adjoining properties. 
(b)  A drainage and grading plan including an environmental analysis of the site and its environs. 
(c)  A copy of any acceptable deed restrictions intended to be recorded. 
(d)  A professional economic analysis on the needs and extent of the market to be served and general economic justification and impact. 
(e)  A professional traffic analysis indicating the effect of the proposed development on existing adjacent streets specifying the direction and amount of traffic flow to and from the development. Said analysis of any project shall include: 
1.  Traffic congestion or causes; 
2.  Projected volumes of traffic in adjacent residential areas; and 
3.  Adequate improvements to accommodate the projected volumes, determined necessary by the City of Bessemer or the Bessemer Planning and Zoning Commission as part of the development plan required herein. 
(f)  A professional land use study of the existing and proposed land uses in the area surrounding the subject property and projection of the relationship of proposed development to existing and future uses. 
(g)  Schematic drawings of buildings and other improvements that illustrate the character of development shall be submitted for review and approval. The city or planning and zoning commission may request that said plans be reviewed. 
In addition to the above, the design and land development controls should be addressed by the plan in areas surrounding the proposed facility and particularly its major access ways to assure a high level of quality not just for the proposed facility but for the journey to and from the facility and for spin-off or associated development that the major facility spawns. 
(7)  Recommendation to City of Bessemer. 
(a)  The Bessemer Planning and Zoning Commission may approve the development plan and recommend to the City of Bessemer the rezoning based on conditions requiring the applicant to submit sufficient information addressing problems relative to requirement of subsection 7, subject to final approval by the City of Bessemer following the establishment of the district. 
(8)  Delay in construction. 
(a)  In the event that construction in accordance with the originally approved development plan has not begun within two years from the date of its approval, the development plan shall expire and become null and void. If less than 25% of the site improvements have been installed within 18 months after issuance of a permit to begin construction, the site development plan shall expire and become null and void. 
(9)  Amendments to plan. 
(a)  After adoption of a PRD Planned recreational district, amendments or changes to the development plan shall be submitted to the Bessemer Planning and Zoning Commission for approval or disapproval. Such submission shall include the same plans or studies required for the initial application. Any change in the development plan that includes changes in the approved uses of the district shall also be approved to assure the compatibility of the changed use with other uses within, adjacent to and in the vicinity of the PRD Planned recreational district. 
Sec. 7.4. - INST-1 Institutional district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for community facilities. 
(2)  Uses permitted. 
(a)  Churches, including all structures normal and incidental to such use. 
(b)  Public schools. 
(c)  Public playgrounds and parks. 
(d)  On premise[s] signs are permitted only in accordance with the regulations contained in the ordinance. 
(3)  Uses permitted upon review. 
(a)  Private or parochial schools having curricula approximately the same as ordinarily given in public schools. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section 
(b)  See parking and loading section. 
(c)  See signage regulation section. 
(5)  Other. 
(a)  Change of ownership. When land in an institutional district is sold or leased to a party other than a public institution, no construction, alteration, or change of use shall be permitted on said land until it shall have been reclassified in another zoning district. 
Sec. 7.5. - INST-2 Institutional district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for larger scale institutional uses. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
a)  Business colleges and trade schools, high schools. 
b)  Charitable and philanthropic organizations. 
c)  Colleges and universities. 
d)  Convalescent and nursing homes and homes for the aged. 
e)  Convents and monasteries. 
f)  Day nurseries and kindergartens. 
g)  Government buildings used exclusively by the federal, state, county, or municipal government for public purposes except for garages, repair or storage yards warehouses and buildings used or intended to be used as correctional or penal institutions for housing prisoners, for industrial type operations, or for operations requiring heavy and frequent movement of trucks. 
h)  Transitional homes. 
(3)  Uses permitted upon review. 
(a)  Hospitals. 
(b)  Libraries, community centers, private parks, museums, art galleries, legitimate theaters, etc. 
(c)  Lodges, fraternal and social organizations, headquarters for scout and other youth organizations, YMCA and YWCA facilities. 
(d)  Membership clubs not operated for profit. 
(e)  On-premise[s] signs are permitted only in accordance with the regulations contained in article 11, section 117 of the resolution. 
(f)  Stadiums, coliseums and assembly halls owned by non-profit organizations or by the state, county or municipal government. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See parking and loading section. 
(c)  See signage regulation section. 
(5)  Other. 
(a)  Change of ownership. When land in an institutional district is sold or leased to a party other than a public institution, no construction, alteration, or change of use shall be permitted on said land until it shall have been reclassified in another zoning district. 
Sec. 7.6. - INST-3 Institutional district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for major institutional uses. 
(2)  Uses permitted. 
(a)  Government buildings used exclusively by federal, state, county or municipal government for public purposes. 
(b)  Helistops. (permitted on appeal only) 
(c)  Mental health care or treatment facilities. 
(d)  Penal and correctional institutions. 
(3)  Uses permitted upon review. 
(a)  Uses permitted in INST-1 or INST-2 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See parking and loading requirements section. 
(c)  See signs requirements section. 
(5)  Other. 
(a)  Change of ownership. When land in an institutional district is sold or leased to a party other than a public institution, no construction, alteration, or change of use shall be permitted on said land until it shall have been reclassified in another zoning district. 
Sec. 7.7. - U-1 Utility/facility district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for major utility facilities such as substations, etc. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Public utilities such as sewage pumping or lift stations, power substations, gas peak shaving stations, and water pumping stations, etc. 
(3)  Uses permitted upon review. 
(a)  Radio, television stations and cellular towers, etc. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See parking and loading requirements section. 
(c)  See signage requirements section. 
Sec. 7.8. - AP Airport district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for municipal a private/airport or airstrip operations. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Airports, airport terminals and customary related facilities on airport property. 
(b)  Air freight and air cargo operations. 
(c)  Aircraft repair shops. 
(d)  Aerial survey companies. 
(e)  Automobile parking lots and garages. 
(f)  Automobile rental. 
(g)  Heliports. 
(h)  Warehousing, as related to air freight. 
(i)  Motels. 
(j)  Offices. 
(k)  Other accessory uses as may be related to airport operation. 
(3)  Uses permitted upon review. 
(a)  Industrial development allowed in I-1. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See parking and loading requirements. 
(c)  See signage requirements. 
Sec. 7.9. - MS Mobile home subdivision district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for development of individually owned mobile home sites. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Within a mobile home subdivisions district a building or land shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(a)  Mobile home subdivision. 
(b)  Customary accessory buildings or structures. 
(3)  Uses permitted upon review. 
(a)  Uses permitted in R-2 district. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See parking requirements section. 
(c)  See signage requirements section. 
(5)  Development plan required. 
(a)  Development shall be allowed within site of development plan approved as provided for essence in ordinance. 
Sec. 7.10. - MP Mobile home park district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for unified mobile home park with leased sites. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Within a mobile home park district a building or land shall be used only for the following purposed: 
(a)  Mobile home park provided that such mobile home park meets the following site standards and regulations. 
(b)  Customary accessory building or structures in accordance with article 1000 and 1001. 
(3)  Uses permitted upon review. 
(a)  Uses permitted in R-4 district. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  The minimum area for any mobile home park is five (5) acres. 
(b)  The maximum density is ten (10) mobile home sites per acre. 
(c)  The mobile home park site shall be designed and developed to be completely surrounded by a buffer strip having a width of thirty-five (35) feet which shall have the characteristics of a yard as defined in this resolution. The buffer strip shall be landscaped and maintained. 
(d)  Access points shall be controlled through review of plans submitted to the roads and transportation department on each mobile home park. 
(e)  All mobile home sites shall abut a roadway. All roadways shall be hard surfaced. 
(f)  The entire area shall be adequately served by water and sanitary facilities. 
(g)  No accessory buildings or structure shall be erected or maintained in the required buffer strip. 
(h)  Each mobile home park should be provided with a park and recreational area having a minimum are of one hundred (100) square feet per mobile home space. Such areas shall be consolidated into usable areas. 
(i)  The minimum mobile home space shall not be less the 3,600 square feet. 
(j)  The minimum front, side, and rear yard setbacks will be: 
Front Rear Side 15' 10' 10'  
(k)  All required yards should be permanently landscaped and maintained with ground cover, trees, and shrubs. 
(l)  Each mobile home space should be provided with a deck or patio of at least two hundred (200) square feet. 
(m)  Each mobile home space shall be provided with two (2) off-street parking spaces. 
(n)  All mobile home lots are to be leased or rented only and are not be sold individually. 
(o)  See also district development criteria, parking and loading and sign regulations sections. 
(5)  Development plan required. 
(a)  Prior to issuance of building permits, a development plan shall be required as prescribed in ordinance. The development plan should include the following: 
1.  The area and dimensions of the site. 
2.  Number, location, and dimensions of all mobile home lots. 
3.  The location and width of roadways, automobile parking facilities, and walkways. 
Sec. 7.11. - AE Adult entertainment district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for the orderly location and operation of adult entertainment facilities. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Within [a] commercial adult entertainment district, a building or land shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(a)  Adult establishments. 
(b)  Accessory structure and uses. 
(3)  Uses permitted upon review. 
(a)  Uses allowed in C-1. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  Adult entertainment establishment operating within this zoning district shall not be permitted within (1,500) feet of any religious institution, school and/or residential district, kindergarten or child-care facility, public or private park or playground, or other adult entertainment facility. The distance provided herein shall be measured from zoning district/line of the facility authorized to the nearest zoning district/line of the above listed use. 
(b)  No visible exposure to the general public of activities within the establishment (all windows and doors to be covered or blacked out). 
Sec. 7.12. - OA Outdoor amusement district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for varying types of private recreation/amusement facilities. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Within [the] outdoor amusement district, a building or land shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(a)  Archeries. 
(b)  Amusement parks. 
(c)  Athletic fields such as baseball, football, etc. 
(d)  Carnivals. 
(e)  Circuses. 
(f)  Drive-in theaters. 
(g)  Golf courses, both commercial and miniature. 
(h)  Merry-go-rounds. 
(i)  Miniature railroads. 
(j)  Other commercial amusement establishments. 
(k)  Picnic grounds or groves. 
(l)  Pony riding tracks provided. 
(m)  Practice golf driving tees. 
(n)  Public swimming pools. 
(o)  Riding stables. 
(p)  Roller and ice-skating rinks. 
(q)  Skeet, rifle or trap shooting range, provided that such use is not located nearer than 1,000 feet to any residence other than owner or lessor of the site. 
(r)  Shooting galleries. 
(3)  Uses permitted upon review. 
(a)  Uses allowed in C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4 districts. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See parking requirements section. 
(c)  See signage requirements section. 
Sec. 7.13. - CEM-1 Cemetery district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for orderly location and operation of cemetery. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Within a CEM-1 Cemetery district, a building or land shall be used only for a cemetery use provided that the site shall consist of not less than forty (40) acres, and that the following requirements are met: 
a)  No interments shall be made closer than 35 feet to any adjoining property lines; 
b)  No interments shall be made within 150 feet of any well used for drinking water purposes; 
c)  Building or structures, including materials, shall be set back from adjoining property lines a distance of thirty-five (35) feet; 
d)  No interments shall be made until paved streets have been completed, basic landscaping completed and all drainage problems eliminated; and 
e)  No approval for cemetery use will be issued until final approval has been obtained from the County Health Department. 
(3)  Uses permitted upon review. 
(a)  Accessory structure. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See parking requirements section. 
(c)  See signage requirements section. 
Sec. 7.14. - CEM-2 Pet cemetery district. 
(1)  Generally. To provide for proper location and operation of pet cemeteries. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Within CEM-Z district, A building or land shall be used only for a pet cemetery, provided that: 
(a)  The area of the pet cemetery site shall be a minimum of five (5) acres; 
(b)  All buildings and interments shall be located a minimum of 35 feet from all property lines; 
(c)  No well shall be within 150 feet of any interment; 
(d)  Twenty (20) feet wide roads, chert or gravel, shall be provided within the cemetery; 
(e)  Entrance roads and drainage shall be subject to approval of City Engineer; and 
(f)  The cemetery shall be subject to the approval of the county health department. 
(3)  Uses permitted upon review. 
(a)  Accessory uses. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See parking and loading requirements section. 
(c)  See sign regulations section. 
Sec. 7.15. - HZ Holding zone. 
(1)  Generally. To provide temporary zoning provisions for properties annexed to the city. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Uses allowed under previous existing county zoning. 
(3)  Uses permitted upon review. 
(a)  Uses which are similar to those allowed under county zoning. 
(4)  District regulations. 
(a)  See district development criteria section. 
(b)  See parking requirements section. 
(c)  See signage requirements section. 
DEVELOPMENT CRITERIA District Minimum Lot Area Minimum Lot Width in Feet at Front Building Line Yard 
Requirements Maximum Area of Ground 
Coverage 
(Building) Maximum Height Front Yard Rear Yard Side Yard R-1 Single family 12,500 sq. ft. *1) 100 ft. 110 ft. (corner lot) 25 ft. (res) 35 ft. (other) 25 ft. 15 ft. 25 ft. (other) 30% res 25% (other) 35 ft. R-2 Single family 7,500 sq. ft. *1) 75 ft. 85 ft. (corner lot) 25 ft. (res) 35 ft. (other) 25 ft. 10 ft. (1 story res.) 15 ft. (2 story) 25 ft. (other) 30% (res) 25% (other) 35 ft. R-3 Single family/two family 7,500 sq. ft. (single family) 9,000 (duplex) *1) 60 ft. (single family) 70 ft. (single family-corner lot) 75 ft. (duplex) 85 ft. (duplex-corner lot) 25 ft. (res) 35 ft. (other) 25 ft. 10 ft. (1-story res.) 12 ft. (2-story or more res.) 25 ft. (other) 30% (res) 25% (other) 35 ft. R-3-A Patio/garden home/townhouse district 5,000 sq. ft. other uses same as R-3 50 ft. (Patio/garden home) single family and duplex same as R-3 25 ft. (res) 35 ft. (other) 25 ft. 10 ft. (one side patio/garden home) 0 ft. (one side patio/garden home) other uses same as R-3 40% (patio/garden home) 25% (other) 35 ft. R-3-B Townhouse district 2,000 sq. ft. other uses same as R-3-A *1) 20 ft. (townhouse) other residence same as R-3-A 25 ft. (res) 35 ft. (other) 25 ft. 0 ft. (townhouse) 10 ft. (at end of townhouse; other uses same as R-3-A 50% (town-house) 25% (other) 30 ft. R-4 Multi-family/low density 7,500 sq. ft. + 1,500 sq. ft. + per unit; 200 sq. ft. reduction/unit for parking within main structure; 1,250 sq. ft. for townhouse lot; 4,360 sq. ft. of land, including common area, for each townhouse dwelling in development 75 ft. multi-family residential Other uses same as R-3-B 25 ft. (res) 35 ft. (other) 25 ft. 10 ft. (1-story res.) 12 ft. (2-story + residential) 35 ft. (other) 40% (res) 45 ft. R-5 Multi-family/medium density 4,000 sq. ft. + 1,000 sq. ft. per unit Other uses same as R-3-A 75 ft. multi-family residential Other same as R-3-B 25 ft. (res) 35 ft. (other) 25 ft. 10 ft. (1-story res.) 12 ft. (2-story + residential) 35 ft. (other) 40% res 45 ft. R-6 Planned residential 4,000 sq. ft. + 1000 sq. ft. per unit Other uses same as R-3-A *1) 75 ft. multi-family residential Other same as R-3-B 25 ft. (res) 35 ft. (other) 25 ft. Same as R-5 40% 45 ft. R-7 Estate lots 25,000-single family residential *1) 150 ft. 75 ft. 75 ft. 25 ft. 20% 45 ft. R-8 Rural residential Same as R-3-B Same as R-3-B 25 ft. (res) 35 ft. (other) 25 ft. Same as R-5 50% 35 ft. 0-1 Office, medical and related services 5000 sq. ft. other uses same as R-5 75 ft. other uses same as R-5 25 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft. (when adjacent to intersection or residential district) 35% other uses same as R-5 45 ft. C-1 Neighborhood 5,000 sq. ft. 75 ft. 25 ft. 0 ft. 25 ft. (when adjacent to residential district) 35% 35 ft. SC-1 Neighborhood shopping district 75,000 sq. ft. 100 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft. 30% 35 ft. C-2 Central business 5,000-sq. ft. 50 ft. 0 0 5 ft. (res) 100% (up to 6 story) 95% (7-12 stories) 90% (13-16 stories) 85% (17 + stories) No limit. C-3 Community business 7,500 sq. ft. other uses same as R-5 75 ft. other uses same as R-5 25 ft. other uses same as R-5 0 25 ft. (when adjacent to residential district or intersection) 50% other uses same as R-5 45 ft. C-4 Arterial services 10,000 sq. ft. 75 ft. 35 ft.; other uses 25 ft. 10 ft. 25 ft. (when serviced from rear-can include alley) 50 ft. (when adjacent to residential district) 12 ft. 40% 45 ft. C-5 General business district 7,500 sq. ft. 50 ft. 30 ft. Same as C-3. 10 ft. 40% 45 ft. C-6 Planned business district 20,000 sq. ft.; out parcels as part of overall development same as C-5 200 ft. other uses same as R-5; out parcels as part of overall development same as C-5 30 ft. 25 ft. 10 ft. 40% 45 ft. C-7 Health and institutional district 10,000 sq. ft. 75 ft. 35 ft. 30 ft. 10 ft. 40% 45 ft. Light industrial 20,000 sq. ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 100 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 35 ft.; Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 35 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 35 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 30% 45 ft. I-2 Heavy industrial 1 AC Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 100 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 35 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 35 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 35 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 30% 45 ft. I-2A Industrial 1 AC Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 100 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 35 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 35 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 35 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 20% 45 ft. I-3 Industrial 1 AC Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 100 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 35 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 35 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 35 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 20% 45 ft. I-3 S Strip mining 1 A Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 100 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 100 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 100 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 100 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 10% 45 ft. I-4 Industrial park 20,000 sq. ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 100 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 35 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 35 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 35 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 30% 45 ft. I-5 Sanitary sewer disposal 1-A Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 100 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 350 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 350 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 350 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 45 ft. I-5 A Waste water treatment 15,000 sq. ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 100 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 100 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 100 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 100 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 50% 45 ft. I-O Obnoxious odors district 15,000 sq. ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 100 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 100 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 100 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 100 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 40% 45 ft. I-6 Industrial waste disposal 1 AC Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 100 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 350 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 350 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 350 ft. Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 45 ft. HWI Hazardous waste 1 AC Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 100 ft. 250 ft. 250 ft. 250 ft. 10% 45 ft. I-6 Planned industrial 1 AC Other uses same as R-5 and C-5 100 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 30% 45 ft. A-1 Agricultural 5 Acres 150 ft. 40 ft. 40 ft. 25 ft. 10% 45 ft. MXD See Mixed use standards See Mixed use standards See Mixed use standards See Mixed use standards See Mixed use standards See Mixed use standards See Mixed use standards INST-1 Institutional 10,000 sq. ft. 100 ft. 35 ft. 25 ft. 15 ft. 40% 45 ft. INST-2 Institutional 10,000 sq. ft. 100 ft. 35 ft. 25 ft. 15 ft. 40% 45 ft. INST-3 Institutional 10,000 sq. ft. 100 ft. 35 ft. 25 ft. 15 ft. 40% 45 ft. PRP Planned recreation 20,000 sq. ft. 100 ft. 35 ft. 25 ft. 15 ft. 20% 45 ft. U-1 Utilities 10,000 sq. ft. 100 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 40% (not including towers no height limits except FAA) MS Mobile home subdivision 15,000 sq. ft. 100 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 15 ft. 10% 20 ft. (no height limit except FAA) MP Mobile home park 10,000 sq. ft. 100 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 15 ft. 20% 20 ft. AP-1 Airport 100 AC 1000 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 20% 45 ft. CEM-1 Cemetery 40 AC 200 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 10% 35 ft. CEM-2 Pet Cemetery 5 AC 100 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft. 10% 35 ft. AE Adult entertainment 7,500 sq. ft. 75 ft. 35 ft. 25 ft. 15 ft. 50% 35 ft. OA Outdoor entertainment 10,000 sq. ft. 75 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft. 15 ft. 10% 35 ft. HZ Holding zone Subject to county standards Subject to county standards Subject to county standards Subject to county standards Subject to county standards Subject to county standards 45 ft.  
* 1) Lot size minimum may be larger where Jefferson County Health Department is required for on site sewer disposal system. 
  
Use Regulations       Residential Uses Residential Uses R-1 Single Family R-2 Single Family R-3 Single Family/Two Family R-3A Patio Home/Townhouse R-4 Multi-Family R-5 Multi-Family R-6 Planned Residential R-7 Estate/Large Lot Residential R-8 Rural Residential O-I Office and Related Services C-1 Neighborhood Commercial SC-1 N'hood Shopping Center C-2 Central Business C-3 Community Business C-4 Arterial Services C-5 General Business C-6 Planned Shopping C-7 Health and Institutional I-1 Light Industrial I-2 Heavy Industrial I-2A Industrial District I-3 Industrial District I-3-S Strip Mining I-4 Industrial Park I-5 Sanitary Sewer/Disposal I-5A Waste Water Treatment (Private) I-O Obnoxious Odors HW - Waste Disposal I-6 Planned Industrial A-1 Agricultural MXD - Mixed Use PRD - Planned Recreation INST-1 Institutional INST-2 Institutional INST-3 Institutional MS - Mobile Home Subdivision MP - Mobile Home Park U-1 Utilities AP-1 Airport CEM - Cemeteries PC - pet Cemeteries AE - Adult Entertainment OA - Outdoor Amusement HZ - Holding District Detached 
Single- 
Family 
Dwelling Unit X X X X X X X X X R R X X * Duplex (two- 
dwelling 
unit) R X R X X R R X X * Multi-Family Dwelling Unit/Condominium X X X R R R X R * Town- 
house X X X R X * Boarding House R R R R * Mobile Home Park R R R X X * Mobile Home Subdivision R R R R X X * Patio/Garden Homes R X X X X R X X *  
Use Regulations         Institutional/Public and Semi 
public uses Institutional/Public and Semi- 
public uses R-1 Single Family R-2 Single Family R-3 Single Family/Two Family R-3A Patio Home/Townhouse R-4 Multi-Family R-5 Multi-Family R-6 Planned Residential R-7 Estate/Large Lot Residential R-8 Rural Residential O-I Office and Related Services C-1 Neighborhood Commercial SC-1 N'hood Shopping Center C-2 Central Business C-3 Community Business C-4 Arterial Services C-5 General Business C-6 Planned Shopping C-7 Health and Institutional I-1 Light Industrial I-2 Heavy Industrial I-2A Industrial District I-3 Industrial District I-3-S Strip Mining I-4 Industrial Park I-5 Sanitary Sewer/Disposal I-5A Waste Water Treatment (Private) I-O Obnoxious Odors HW - Waste Disposal I-6 Planned Industrial A-1 Agricultural MXD - Mixed Use PRD - Planned Recreation INST-1 Institutional INST-2 Institutional INST-3 Institutional MS - Mobile Home Subdivision MP - Mobile Home Park U-1 Utilities AP-1 Airport CEM - Cemeteries PC - pet Cemeteries AE - Adult Entertainment OA - Outdoor Amusement HZ - Holding District Airport/Heliport R R R R R X * Auditoriums, Areas Stadium. Concert Hall and Other Spectator Facilities R R R X X R R R R R R X * Botanical Gardens R R R R R R R R R X X R R R R R * Business-Vocational School R X X X R R R R R * Cemetery R R R R R X * Church R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R X X X X X * College-University R R R R R R R R R X X X * Community Center, YMCA, YWCA X R R X X X R R R X X X X * Domicil- 
iary Facil- 
ity R R R R R R R R R R R R * Fire Station. Police Station R R R R R R R R R X R R X X X X X X R R R R R X X X X X * Outdoor Recreation Facilities such as Park, Golf Course. Tennis Courts. Swimming Pool R R R R X X X R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R X X X X X * Government Offices X X X X X X X X X X R R R R X X X * Health Care Facility R X R R R R R R R X R R R R X R R R * Library R R R R X X X X X X X X X R R R R X R X X X * Museum, Art Gallery R R R R R X X X X X X X X X R R X R R R R * Municipal or Public Garage R R R R R R R R R R R X R R R R * Post 
Office R R R R R R R R R R X R R R * Schools; Public Elementary R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R X R X X X * High School, Parochial, or Private School Having Comparable Curriculum R R R R R R R R R R X R X X X Transit, Bus 
Station R R R R X X X X R R R R R R R *  
Use Regulations       Commercial Uses Commercial 
Uses R-1 Single Family R-2 Single Family R-3 Single Family/Two Family R-3A Patio Home/Townhouse R-4 Multi-Family R-5 Multi-Family R-6 Planned Residential R-7 Estate/Large Lot Residential R-8 Rural Residential O-I Office and Related Services C-1 Neighborhood Commercial SC-1 N'hood Shopping Center C-2 Central Business C-3 Community Business C-4 Arterial Services C-5 General Business C-6 Planned Shopping C-7 Health and Institutional I-1 Light Industrial I-2 Heavy Industrial I-2A Industrial District I-3 Industrial District I-3-S Strip Mining I-4 Industrial Park I-5 Sanitary Sewer/Disposal I-5A Waste Water Treatment (Private) I-O Obnoxious Odors HW - Waste Disposal I-6 Planned Industrial A-1 Agricultural MXD - Mixed Use PRD - Planned Recreation INST-1 Institutional INST-2 Institutional INST-3 Institutional MS - Mobile Home Subdivision MP - Mobile Home Park U-1 Utilities AP-1 Airport CEM - Cemeteries PC - pet Cemeteries AE - Adult Entertainment OA - Outdoor Amusement HZ - Holding District Art Supply and Frame Shop X X X X X X X R R R R R R R R R R X * Automotive Parts Store X X X X X R R R R R R R R R R X * Automobile, Motorcycle or other tracks used for competitive racing R R R R R R R R R R X * Automobile Sales and Rental (new. and used) X X R R R R R R R R R R X * Automotive Repair, major X X R R Automotive Repair, minor X X R R Bank, Financial Institutions R X X X X X X X R R R R R R R R R R X * Barber and Beauty Shops X X X X X X X X R R R R R R R R R R R R X * Bars, Taverns, Lounges and Night Clubs R R R R X X R R R R R R R R R R R R X R * Bicycle Shop X X X X X X X R R R R R R R R R R X R * Boat Sales, Rental, Storage and Service R R R R X R R R R R R R R R R R R X R * Building Contractor Yard R R R R X X X X X X X X R * Building Material Sales and Home Improvement Centers R R R X X X R R X X X X X X X X R X * Car Wash R R R X X R R R R R R R R R R R R X * Card, Book, and Gift Shops R X X X X X X X R R R R R R R R R R R X * Child Care Center R R R R R R R R R R X X R X X X X R R R R R X R R R * Clothing Store R X X X X X X X R R R R R R R R R R R X * Commercial Livestock and Crop Raising R R R X * Commercial Livestock Feed and Sales Yard R R R R X * Commercial Parking Lot R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R X R R * Dance Studio R X X X X X X X R R R R R R R R R R R X R R R * Department Store X X X X X X X R R R X X * Flex Market R R R R R R R R R R R * Drug Store R X X X X X X X R R R R R X R R * Duplicating Service R X X X X X X X R X X X R R * Florist R X X X X X X X R X X X * Funeral Home R R R R X X R R R R R R X R * Fruit, Vegetable, Roadside Stand R X R R R R * Ganie Rooms R R R R R R R R R R X R * Grocery Store X X X X X X X R R R X * Hardware Stores X X X X X X X R R R R R X * Home Occupation R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R * Hotel, Motel R R R X X X X X R R R R R X X X R R * Indoor Sports Facilities such as Bowling, Health Club, Skating, Racquet Sports R R X X X X X R R R R R X X R R R * Jewelry Store X X X X X X X R R R R X * Janitorial and Maintenance Services R X X R X X X R X R R R R * Kennel, Dog and Cat X X R X * Laundro- 
mat, Dry Cleaning Pickup or Plant R R R X X R R X X X X R R X * Livery Stable or Riding Academy, Fish Raising and the Breeding of Fur R R R X R R R * Lodge, Fraternal Organization, Non-Commercial Club not Operated for a Profit R R R R R X R R R R R R R R * Liquor Store R R R R R R R R R R R R R * Metal and Wood Fencing and Ornamental Grillwork Fabrication and Sales R X X X X X X X X X X R * Mini-Warehouse R X X X X X X X X X X R R * Motorcycle Sales, Repair and Services R R R X X X R R * Outdoor Amusements and Commercial Recreation such as Carpet Golf, Par-3 Golf, Go-Cart Track, Water Slide, Skateboard Course, Batting Cage R R R R R R R R R R R R X * Optician R X X X X X X X R R R R R R R X * Office Building. Business, Public or Professional X X X X X X X X X X R R R R R X R R R R * Paint and Wallpaper Stores X X X X X X X X R R R R R R * Pet Shop R X X X X X X X X R R R R * Photographic Studio R X X X X X X X X X R R R R R R * Plumbing, Heating and Cooling, Electrical and other Wholesale Supply and Facilities R R R R X X R X R R R X X R * Pest Control Company R R R X X X R X R R R X X R * Prefabricated and Mobile Home Sales and Service R X R R R R R R R * Plant Nursery R R R R X X R R R X R R R * Recycling Collection Point for Glass, Paper, Aluminum and Other Household Items R R R R R R R R R R R R R * Restaurant R X X X X X X X R R R R R R R X R * Rent-All Store X R R X X X R X R R R R R R * Sales Showrooms for such uses as Appliances, Carpet, Furniture, Home Furnishings, Medical and Office Equipment, Pianos and Organs, Light Fixtures R X X X X X R R R R R R R X * Shoe Store and Repair X X X X X X X X R R R X * Sporting Goods Store X X X X X X X R R R R R R X R * Tailor Shop X X X X X X X R R R R R R X R * Theaters R R R R X R X R R R R X * Towing Service X X X X R * Truck and Heavy Equipment Sales, Rental and Service R R R R X X R R R X R * Veterinarian R R R R R X R R X R R R R *  
Use Regulations      Industrial Uses Commercial 
Uses R-1 Single Family R-2 Single Family R-3 Single Family/Two Family R-3A Patio Home/Townhouse R-4 Multi-Family R-5 Multi-Family R-6 Planned Residential R-7 Estate/Large Lot Residential R-8 Rural Residential O-I Office and Related Services C-1 Neighborhood Commercial SC-1 N'hood Shopping Center C-2 Central Business C-3 Community Business C-4 Arterial Services C-5 General Business C-6 Planned Shopping C-7 Health and Institutional I-1 Light Industrial I-2 Heavy Industrial I-2A Industrial District I-3 Industrial District I-3-S Strip Mining I-4 Industrial Park I-5 Sanitary Sewer/Disposal I-5A Waste Water Treatment (Private) I-O Obnoxious Odors HW - Waste Disposal I-6 Planned Industrial A-1 Agricultural MXD - Mixed Use PRD - Planned Recreation INST-1 Institutional INST-2 Institutional INST-3 Institutional MS - Mobile Home Subdivision MP - Mobile Home Park U-1 Utilities AP-1 Airport CEM - Cemeteries PC - pet Cemeteries AE - Adult Entertainment OA - Outdoor Amusement HZ - Holding District Automobile Dismantling, Junk Yards and Salvage Yards R X R Bottling or Distributing Plant or Dairy R X X X R R Explosive Manufacture or Storage R R R Extraction or Storage of Natural Mineral Resources R R R X Fat, Grease, Lard or Tallow Rendering or Refining X Fixed Plants for Processing Stone, Chert, Gravel, Clay, Coal or Iron Ore X X X X Garbage or Refuse Dump R Glue Manufacture X Iron, Steel, Brass or Copper Foundry or Fabrication Plant X X R R R Light Industrial X X X X X X X X X X R  
Use Regulations       Industrial Uses Industrial 
Uses R-1 Single Family R-2 Single Family R-3 Single Family/Two Family R-3A Patio Home/Townhouse R-4 Multi-Family R-5 Multi-Family R-6 Planned Residential R-7 Estate/Large Lot Residential R-8 Rural Residential O-I Office and Related Services C-1 Neighborhood Commercial SC-1 N'hood Shopping Center C-2 Central Business C-3 Community Business C-4 Arterial Services C-5 General Business C-6 Planned Shopping C-7 Health and Institutional I-1 Light Industrial I-2 Heavy Industrial I-2A Industrial District I-3 Industrial District I-3-S Strip Mining I-4 Industrial Park I-5 Sanitary Sewer/Disposal I-5A Waste Water Treatment (Private) I-O Obnoxious Odors HW - Waste Disposal I-6 Planned Industrial A-1 Agricultural MXD - Mixed Use PRD - Planned Recreation INST-1 Institutional INST-2 Institutional INST-3 Institutional MS - Mobile Home Subdivision MP - Mobile Home Park U-1 Utilities AP-1 Airport CEM - Cemeteries PC - pet Cemeteries AE - Adult Entertainment OA - Outdoor Amusement HZ - Holding District Paper and Pulp Manufacture R R R X R Power Plant R X R X Pump Sta Water R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R X X R R R X X X X R R R R R R R R R X R R R R R R Pump Sta Sewer R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R X X R R R X X X X R R R R R R R R R X R R R R R R Railroad Terminal Shops and Yards R X R R R Research or Testing Laboratories X X R X X R Sawmill X R Stockyard or Slaughter of Animals X X Truck or Bus Terminal X X X X R Wholesale, Warehousing X X X X X X R  
;le=2; X = Permitted Use 
;le=2; R = Permitted Upon Review by ZBA 
;le=2; * + = Subject to Previous County Zoning 
SECTION 8. - DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT CRITERIA 

Sec. 8.1. - Quantitative development criteria. 
(1)  Table 2 provides standards for lot sizes, yards, height, living area and ground area coverage. 
Sec. 8.2. - Area modification for lots of record. 
(1)  Where a lot of record at the time of the effective date of this ordinance has less area or less width than herein required for the district in which it is located, said lot may nevertheless be used as a building site upon an approval to and approval by the building and inspections department. 
(2)  In residential districts, the side yard provided for a small lot of record shall not be less than one-half of the required side yard and approved by building and inspections department and fire department. 
(3)  In non-residential districts, the side yard for a small lot of record shall not be less than one-half of the required side yard and approved by building and inspections department and fire department. 
Sec. 8.3. - General yard requirements. 
(1)  No yard, open space, or lot area required for a building or structure shall, during its life, be occupied by, or counted as open space for any other building or structure. 
(2)  Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky (except for landscaping) unobstructed by any accessory structure or part thereof and unoccupied for storage, servicing or similar use except as provided herein. 
(3)  Accessory structures shall not be located in any required front yard. 
(4)  More than one multiple dwelling, institutional or industrial building may be located upon a lot or tract, but such buildings shall not encroach upon the front, side, and rear yards required by the district regulations. 
(5)  An attached or detached private garage which faces a street shall not be located closer than 25 feet to the street right-of-way line. 
Sec. 8.4. - General yard modifications. 
(1)  The following structures shall be allowed to project or be constructed in any required yard or beyond the building setback line, subject to all limitations set forth herein. 
(a)  Awnings and canopies, not to exceed three feet. 
(b)  Bay windows and chimneys, not to exceed two feet. 
(c)  Driveways, curbs, sidewalks and steps, provided, however, steps or stairs to a dwelling, nonenclosed, not to exceed six (6) feet. 
(d)  Fences, walls, and hedges, subject to the regulations as set forth in this section. 
(e)  Flagpoles. 
(f)  Garbage disposal equipment, nonpermanent. 
(g)  Landscape features, planting boxes and recreational equipment. 
(h)  Overhanging roof, eaves, gutter, cornice, or other architectural features, not to exceed three feet. Open fire escapes may extend into any required yard not more than six feet. 
(i)  Parking space subject to the regulations set forth in section 10. 
(j)  Signs, subject to the regulations set forth in section 11. 
(k)  Terraces (open) and porches (nonenclosed) not to exceed six feet. 
(l)  Trees, shrubs, flowers, and other plants subject to the vision requirements in this section. 
Sec. 8.5. - Front yard modifications. 
(1)  Where 40% or more of the frontage on the same side of a street between two intersecting streets is presently developed or may hereafter be developed with buildings that have a front yard greater or lesser in depth than herein required, new buildings shall not be erected closer to the street than the average front yard so established by the existing buildings. 
(2)  Where 40% or more of the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is presently developed or may hereafter be developed with buildings that do not have a front yard as described above, then: 
(a)  Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 feet of existing buildings on both sides, the minimum front yard shall be a lien drawn between the closest front corners of the adjacent buildings, or 
(b)  Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 feet of an existing building on one side only, such building may be erected as close to the street as the existing adjacent building. 
(3)  Through lots shall provide the required front yard on both sides. 
(4)  With the exception of small lots of record, corner lots shall provide a front yard on each street side. 
(5)  Outdoor displays of merchandise, where permitted, shall have a setback from the street right-of-way lien of not less than one-half of the distance of the required setback. 
Sec. 8.6. - Rear yard modifications. 
(1)  Accessory structures may be built in a rear yard, but such accessory structures shall not occupy more than 30 percent of the required rear yard space and shall not be closer than five feet to any side or rear lot line. 
Sec. 8.7. - Walls and fences. 
(1)  No fence, wall, planting or structure shall be located so as to constitute a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the public right-of-way. The Bessemer Police Department and city engineer of public safety shall assist in the determination of the existence of a hazard. 
(2)  No wall or fence in a required front yard shall exceed a height of three and one-half feet, except as required for a retaining wall. Fence shall be a decatorive fence and approved by the building official. 
Sec. 8.8. - Lighting and glare. 
(1)  Direct or reflected light or glare shall not be produced so as to adversely affect the visibility or tend to interfere with the safety or welfare of persons located at or beyond any property line. 
Sec. 8.9. - Height modification. 
(1)  Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, gas tanks, steeples, penthouses, stacks, tanks, water towers and ornamental towers and spires, where permitted may be erected to any height not in conflict with existing or hereafter adopted ordinances of the City of Bessemer, except that where permitted in connection with residential uses, such structures shall be limited to a height of twenty-five feet above the average height of structures permitted in that district. 
(2)  Churches, schools and other public and semi-public buildings may exceed the height limitations of the district if the minimum depth of the front, side and rear yards required in the district is increased one foot for each two feet by which the height of such public or semi-public structure exceeds the height limit. 
Sec. 8.10. - Landscape and buffer requirements. 
(1)  Purpose of definition of bufferyards. 
    Bufferyards are a permanent unit of land together with the plantings and structures required thereon. Both the amount of land and the type and amount of planting specified for each bufferyard required by this ordinance are designed to ameliorate nuisances between adjacent land uses or between a land use and a public road. 
    The planting units required of bufferyards/screening have been calculated to insure that they do, in fact, function to "buffer" and provide an aesthetically pleasing environment. Bufferyards/screening shall be required to separate different land uses from each other in order to eliminate or minimize potential nuisances such as dirt, litter, noise, glare of lights, signs, and unsightly buildings or parking areas, or to provide spacing or reduce adverse impacts of noise, odor, or danger from fires or explosion. 
(2)  Location of bufferyards/screening. Bufferyards/screening shall be located on the outer perimeter of a lot or parcel, extending to the lot or parcel boundary line. Bufferyards/screening shall not be located on any portion of an existing public or private street or right-of-way. 
(3)  Determination of bufferyard/screening requirements. To determine a bufferyard/screening required between two adjacent parcels or between a parcel and a street, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(a)  Identify the proposed land use. 
(b)  Identify the use of land adjacent to the proposed use. 
(c)  Determine the bufferyard/screening required on each boundary (or segment thereof) of the subject parcel by referring to the following Table of Bufferyard Requirements and illustrations which specify the bufferyard/screening required between streets and adjacent land uses. 
(4)  Responsibility for bufferyard/screening. 
(a)  When a use is first to develop on two adjacent vacant parcels, the first use shall provide the buffer, specified by the Table of Bufferyard Requirements for vacant land. 
(b)  The second use to develop shall at the time it develops, provide all additional plant material structures and/or land necessary to provide the total bufferyard/screening required between the two uses, as specified by the Table of Bufferyard Requirements. 
(5)  Bufferyard/screening/landscaping specifications. 
(a)  The exact placement of required plants and structures shall be the decision of the developer. Required landscaping shall be designed in such a manner as to impart its aesthetic character when viewed from any area accessible to the public or from adjacent properties. 
(b)  Plant materials used for installation shall conform to the standards established by the American Association of Nurserymen in the "American Standard for Nursery Stock," for each type (i.e., canopy tree, shrub, conifer, etc.) with minimum size as appropriate for the minimum caliper/container size designated herein. 
Canopy/tree 2" caliper Understory trees 3/4" caliper Deciduous shrubs 2-gallon container Evergreen shrubs 18" balled and burlap  
(d)[(c)]  Grass sod must be healthy, clean and reasonably free of weeds, noxious pests and diseases. 
(e)[(d)]  Installation - All landscaping/screening shall be installed in a sound, workman-like manner and according to accepted good planting procedures with the quantity and quality of plant materials as described. All elements of landscaping shall be installed so as to meet all other applicable ordinances and code requirements. 
(f)[(e)]  Maintenance - The owner, occupant, tenant and the respective agent of each, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all bufferyard/screening/landscaping. Landscaping shall be maintained in a good condition so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance at least equal to the original installation and shall be kept free from refuse and debris. Dead vegetation and landscaping material shall be promptly replaced with healthy, living plantings. 
(g)[(f)]  Grass establishment shall be: 
-  Sodded, plugged, sprigged or seed. 
-  Sod only in high erosion area. 
-  Seed must provide coverage within 30 days (assuming appropriate growing conditions). 
(6)  Bufferyard substitutions. 
(a)  The following plant material substitutions shall satisfy the requirements of this ordinance. 
-  Any existing healthy, well-formed plant materials which are greater than or equal to the recommended buffer and which otherwise satisfy the requirements of this section may be counted toward satisfying all such requirements. 
-  Structures, where required, may be substituted with approval of the planning and zoning commission. 
(7)  Use of bufferyard. 
(a)  If approved by the building and inspections department, a bufferyard may be used for passive recreation; however, no plant material may be removed and such use shall not be a nuisance. 
(8)  Bufferyards part of required yards. 
(a)  Where front, side and rear yards are required by this ordinance, bufferyards may be established within such required yards. 
(9)  Screening. 
(a)  Outdoor trash receptacles and storage areas shall be screened by using an opaque fence or a masonry wall, at a minimum of 6 feet in height. The fence or wall shall be combined with evergreen shrubs planted in a 3-foot minimum planting area around the foundation of the fence or wall. 
(b)  Outdoor fencing. The fence or wall shall be combined with evergreen shrubs planted in a 3 foot minimum planted area around the foundation of the fence or wall. 
(c)  All fencing and masonry shall be consistent with the proposed structures. 
(10)  Definitions. 
(a)  Berm : A mound of earth. 
(b)  Broadleaf : Leaves which are broad in basic structure. 
(c)  Canopy or overstory tree : A tree with a large, broad spreading crown, usually, broadleaf and deciduous with minimum mature height of 40 feet. 
(d)  Conifer : Cone bearing plants, usually having large needlelike leaves or smaller scalelike leaves. Most are evergreen but can be deciduous. 
(e)  Deciduous : Leaves fall off or are shed each year. 
(f)  Evergreen : A plant which has green foliage throughout the year. 
(g)  Groundcover : Plants growing close to the ground which spread to form a dense covering over the ground. 
(h)  Mulch : A protective covering (such as pine straw or bark) spread on the ground especially to reduce evaporation, maintain even soil temperature, prevent erosion, control weeds, or enrich the soil. 
(i)  Shrub : A woody plant, usually multi-stemmed or well branched from the base, the branches being retained to the ground. When used for buffer plantings, shrubs must also reach a mature height between 4 and 15 feet. 
(j)  Tree : A living, woody, self-supporting perennial 10 feet or more in height when mature, usually having a single elongated main stem and distinct crown. 
(k)  Understory tree : A small (approximately 10 to 25 feet high when mature), usually shade tolerant tree, capable of thriving in the lower light intensities found under the canopy of tall trees. 
SECTION 9. - SPECIAL USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 9.1. - General. 
(1)  The following regulations shall provide supplemental requirements or standards within zone districts per this ordinance. 
Sec. 9.2. - Mobile home park requirements. 
(1)  Application. 
(a)  Each application for approval of a mobile home park shall be accompanied by three copies of the plot plan drawn to scale and prepared by a registered engineer in a mobile home park district. The following information shall be shown on each plan: 
1.  The location and legal description of the proposed mobile home park. 
2.  Plans and specifications of all building, improvements, and facilities constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home park. 
3.  The proposed use of buildings shown on the site. 
4.  The location and size of all mobile home spaces. 
5.  The location of all points of entry and exit for motor vehicles and internal circulation pattern. 
6.  The location of all landscaping to be provided. 
7.  The location of all lighting standards to be provided. 
8.  The location of all walls and fences and the indication of their height and the materials of their construction. 
9.  The location of all off-street parking facilities. 
10.  The name and address of the applicant. 
11.  Such other architectural and engineering data as may be required to permit the department of buildings and inspections, the planning and zoning commission, or the city engineer to determine if the provisions of this ordinance are met. 
(b)  A time schedule for development shall be prepared, which shall demonstrate the applicant's ability to provide the proposed services within one year of plan approval. 
(2)  Review process. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed mobile home parking in accordance with establishment of a MF zone district. 
(b)  The planning and zoning commission shall also review the recommendations of the city engineer, the building inspection officer, the Jefferson County Health Department, and any other officials as deemed appropriate before action on the proposed mobile home park is taken. 
(3)  Development standards. 
(a)  No parcel of land containing less than two and one-half acres and less than 15 mobile home spaces, available at the time of first occupancy shall be used for a mobile home park, however, the plans submitted for approval shall be designed for a minimum of 25 mobile home units. 
(b)  The mobile home park shall be subject to the density provisions of the district in which it is located, provided, however, there shall be not less than 3,000 square feet of lot area for each space provided on the site. This space ratio shall include access roads, automobile parking, accessory building space, and recreational area. 
(c)  The mobile home park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to insure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water. 
(d)  Each mobile home park shall have a front yard of 25 feet extending for the full width of the parcel devoted to said use. 
(e)  Each mobile home park shall have a rear yard and a side yard on both sides of the parcel devoted to said use of not less than 10 feet. 
(f)  Where a side or rear yard abuts a street, the yard shall be not less than twenty-five feet (25) feet and all yards shall be landscaped and maintained. 
(g)  No building or structure erected or stationed in this park shall have a height greater than one story or 15 feet. 
(h)  A mobile home park shall be entirely enclosed, exclusive of driveways, at its external boundaries by a solid wall, fence, or evergreen hedge not less than seven feet in height. Such wall, fence, or hedge shall not be constructed or planted within the required front yard setback. 
(i)  Each mobile home park shall be permitted to display on each street frontage, one identifying sign of a maximum size of nine square feet. Said sign shall contain thereon only the name and address of the mobile home park and may be lighted by indirect lighting only. 
(j)  Each mobile home space shall be of sufficient size that, in addition to the trailer, the following areas shall be provided. 
1.  Each mobile home space shall be at least 30 feet wide and such space shall be clearly defined by permanent markers. 
2.  There shall be a front yard setback of 10 feet from all access roads within the mobile home park. 
3.  Mobile homes shall be so harbored on each space so that there shall be at least a twenty (20) foot clearance between mobile homes, provided, however, with respect to mobile homes parked end-to-end, the end-to-end clearance shall be not less than ten (10) feet. No mobile home shall be located closer than twenty (20) feet from any building within the mobile home park. 
4.  There shall be at least two paved, off-street parking spaces for each trailer space, which shall be on the same site as the trailer served, and may be located in the rear or side yard of said trailer space. 
5.  Each mobile home space shall be provided with a paved patio of a least two hundred (200) square feet and having a storage locker of at least one hundred (100) cubic feet. Storage lockers may be located in locker compounds. 
(4)  General provisions. 
(a)  There shall be established and maintained within each mobile home park an automobile parking area for the use of guests. The number of spaces within this area shall be equal to one for each four trailer sites. 
(b)  Access roads within a mobile home park shall be paved to a width of not less than 25 feet. Where access roads are paved to a width of 32 feet or more, the required guest parking area shall be waived. 
(c)  Mobile home spaces may abut upon a driveway of not less than twenty (20) fee tin width, which shall have unobstructed access to the access roads within the mobile home park. The sole vehicular access shall not be by alley, and all dead-end driveways shall include adequate vehicular turning space or cul-de-sac. 
(d)  A minimum of six inches of compacted gravel, or other suitable pavement material, shall be installed for each trailer space. Size of pads shall be as follows: 
1.  5% - 10' × 40' or larger 
2.  90% - 10' × 45' or larger 
3.  5% - 1-' × 50' or larger 
(e)  Walkways not less than two feet wide shall be provided from the mobile home spaces to service buildings. 
(f)  Each mobile home space shall be provided with a connection to a sanitary sewer line or to a sewer system approved by the health department. 
(g)  There shall be provided a park and recreation area having a minimum of 150 square feet for each mobile home space. Areas shall be consolidated into usable areas with minimum dimensions of not less than 30 feet. 
(h)  Each mobile home park shall be provided with a management office and such service buildings as are necessary to provide facilities for mail distribution, storage space for supplies, maintenance materials and equipment, and laundry facilities equipped with washing machines and dryers. Outside drying yards shall be enclosed with a six foot high solid fence. 
(i)  Trailers, with or without toilet facilities, that cannot be connected to a sanitary sewer line shall not be permitted in a mobile home park. 
(j)  Cabanas and other similar enclosed structures are prohibited. 
(k)  Mobile homes shall not be used for commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential uses within the mobile home parks. 
(l)  A use permit fee of $15.00 per mobile home space shall be payable to the city by the applicant upon approval of the mobile home park. 
Sec. 9.3. - Mobile home subdivision. 
(1)  Application. 
(a)  Each application for mobile home subdivision shall be accompanied by three copies of the proposed plan drawn to scale and prepared by a registered engineer. The following information shall be shown on each plan: 
1.  A description of the site location. 
2.  Location and width of all streets, parking facilities and walkways. 
3.  Area and dimensions of the site. 
4.  Number, layout and dimension of all lots. 
5.  Location, size and layout of all utilities. 
6.  Assessment of drainage conditions by a registered engineer, including all proposed measures needed to rectify problems, where needed. 
(2)  Review process. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed mobile home subdivision, in accordance with establishment of MS zoning district. 
(b)  The planning and zoning commission shall review the recommendations of the city engineer, the department of building and inspections, the Jefferson County Health Department, and any other officials as deemed appropriate before action on the proposed mobile home subdivision is taken. 
(3)  Site standards. 
(a)  The minimum lot width shall be 50 feet. 
(b)  The minimum lot area or size shall be 7,500 square feet. 
(c)  The minimum yard size shall be as follows: 
Front 35' Rear 35' Side 8'  
Note- Corner lot: setback shall be same on both streets, roads or highways. 
(a)[(d)]  All lots shall be individually owned. 
(b)[(e)]  All required yards shall be permanently landscaped and maintained. 
(c)[(f)]  All mobile home sites shall abut upon a roadway which is hard surfaced, and which meets city specifications pertaining to streets. 
(d)[(g)]  Access points shall be controlled through the review of plans submitted to the board of adjustments on each mobile home subdivision plan. 
(e)[(h)]  The entire area shall be adequately served by water, sanitary facilities, and adequate drainage provisions. 
(f)[(i)]  All public improvements shall conform to the requirements of the Bessemer Subdivision Regulations. 
(4)  Mobile home standards. 
(a)  The minimum mobile home floor area shall be 500 square feet. 
(b)  Each mobile home shall be provided with two off-street parking spaces. 
(c)  All mobile homes shall be individually owned. 
Sec. 9.4. - Modular buildings/freestanding mobile homes. 
(1)  Modular buildings may be allowed in industrial districts and a temporary structure in other districts upon review and approval by the zoning board of adjustment. 
(2)  Modular homes are allowed in residential zone districts, subject to compliance with all other zone district standards. 
(3)  Mobiles homes are only allowed in mobile home parks or subdivisions. 
(4)  Mobile home structures or modular home structures are allowed in I-2, Heavy industry districts, for office and security purposes. One such structure may be allowed on tracts of 10 acres or greater. Said structures may be occupied by security personnel, overnight, subject to all city codes and regulations relative to living quarters. Such mobile homes or modular structures may be allowed under the same conditions in other industrial district subject to zoning board of adjustment approval. 
(5)  Manufactured homes in residential districts subject to zoning board of adjustment approval. 
Sec. 9.5. - Cemetery. 
(1)  Application. Each application for a cemetery shall be accompanied by three copies of the proposed plan drawn to scale and prepared by a registered engineer. The following information shall be shown on each plan: 
(a)  General topography. 
(b)  Property lines. 
(c)  Scale. 
(d)  Storm drainage facilities. 
(e)  Utility easements. Plus the location and dimensions of all. 
(f)  Buildings and structures. 
(g)  Exterior lighting. 
(h)  Buffer strips and fences. 
(i)  Outside storage areas. 
(j)  Parking and loading areas. 
(k)  Points of ingress and egress. 
(l)  Signs. 
(2)  Public hearing. The planning and zoning commission shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed cemetery in accordance with establishment of CEM-1 or CEM -2 zone district. 
(3)  Requirements. 
(a)  Any new cemetery shall be located on a site containing not less than 20 cres. 
(b)  A six-foot-high protective wall or fence shall be located on all property lines. 
(c)  The principal entrance or entrances to a cemetery shall be located not closer than 500 feet from the boundary of a residential zone. 
(d)  Mausoleums, crematoriums, or any other building or structure accessory to or incidental to a cemetery shall not be closer than 200 feet to any property line and shall not exceed 35 feet in height. 
(e)  No burial plots shall be located closer than 50 feet from any property line, nor 150 feet from any water pipe, main, or well. 
Sec. 9.6. - Swimming pools. 
(1)  A private swimming pool shall be any pool or open tank not located within a completely enclosed building, and containing water to a depth at any point greater than one and one-half feet. Private swimming pools are permitted in any residential district provided: 
(a)  The pool is intended and is to be used solely for enjoyment of the occupants of the property on which it is located and their guests. 
(b)  No swimming pool or part thereof, excluding aprons, walks, and equipment rooms, shall protrude into any required front or side yard. 
(c)  The swimming pool area shall be so walled or fenced so as to prevent uncontrolled access by children from the street or from adjacent properties. Said fence or wall shall not be less than four feet in height and maintained in good condition. 
(d)  Lighting fixtures may not be higher than 10 feet. 
(2)  A community club swimming pool not open to the public shall be any pool constructed by an association of property owners, or by a private club for use and enjoyment by members of the association or club and their families and guests. Community and club swimming pools shall comply with the following conditions and requirements. 
(a)  The pool is intended solely for the enjoyment of the members and families and guests of members of the association or club under whose ownership or jurisdiction the pool is operated. 
(b)  The pool and accessory structures thereto, including the areas used by bathers, shall be not closer than 50 feet to any property line of the property on which located. 
(c)  The swimming pool and all of the area used by the bathers shall be so walled or fenced as to prevent uncontrolled access by children from the street or adjacent properties. Said fence or wall shall be not less than a nominal four feet in height and maintained in good condition. The area surrounding the enclosure, except for the parking spaces, shall be suitably landscaped with grass, hardy shrubs and trees, and maintained in good condition. 
Sec. 9.7. - Private tennis courts. 
(1)  All tennis courts constructed in a residential district shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
(a)  The tennis court must be located in the rear yard. 
(b)  The tennis court may not be located any closer than 25 feet from any property line and residential structure. 
(c)  All exterior lighting fixtures shall be constructed to direct the beam below the horizontal plans of the fixture and shall reflect away from any adjacent property. 
(2)  Tennis courts for multi-family and commercial uses shall meet standards seemed by the zoning board of adjustment to be appropriate upon review of the specific proposal. 
Sec. 9.8. - Home occupation. 
(1)  General restrictions. The home occupation shall be clearly incidental to residential use of the dwelling and shall not change the essential residential character of the dwelling or adversely affect the uses permitted in the district of which it is a part. No home occupations shall be permitted which might interfere with the general welfare of the surrounding residential area due to potential noise, increased pedestrian and vehicular traffic or any other conditions which would constitute an objectionable use of residentially zoned property. (Subject to approval of the zoning board of adjustments.) 
(2)  Limitation on type of home occupation. Customary home occupations should be limited to an office or a business of a personal service nature. 
(3)  Confinement to building. The home occupation shall be confined to 25% of the principal building; however, no outside storage shall be used in connection with the home occupation. 
(4)  Employment limitations. Employment shall be limited to members of the family residing in the dwelling, and there shall be no employment of help other than members of the residential family. 
(5)  Sale of products. No display of products shall be visible from the street and only articles made on the premises may be sold, except that nondurable articles (consumable products) that are incidental to a service, shall be the principal use in the home occupation, may be sold on the premises. 
(6)  Limitation of students. Instruction in music, dancing and similar subjects should be limited to two students as a time. 
(7)  Time restrictions. The activity carried on as a home occupation shall be limited to the hours between 7[:00] a.m. and 10[:00] p.m. 
(8)  Inspection. The City of Bessemer reserves the right to inspect the areas of the building to be used as a home occupation before the issuance of a license to ensure that said building or part thereof is in compliance with city ordinances and codes. 
Sec. 9.9. - Adult establishments. 
(1)  Permit required. 
(a)  No adult establishment, as defined by this subsection, shall be constructed, established, or operated by any person without first obtaining a permit from the director of buildings and inspection, which permit shall certify that such adult establishment complies with the requirements of this section. 
(2)  Locational requirements. No adult establishment shall be constructed, established, or operated within: 
(a)  Fifteen hundred (1500) feet of a residential or dwelling district. 
(b)  Fifteen hundred (1500) feet of a school. 
(c)  Fifteen hundred (1500) feet of a public park situated in a residential dwelling district. 
(d)  Fifteen hundred (1500) feet of a church. 
(e)  Fifteen hundred (1500) feet of another adult establishment. 
Sec. 9.10. - Airports. 
(1)  Airport development must conform to FAA and other flight safety requirements. 
(2)  Structures in other zone districts must comply with FAA requirements. 
Sec. 9.11. - Flood hazard requirements. 
(1)  Other zoning provisions notwithstanding, all construction must be in conformance with federal flood hazard requirements and all regulations, ordinances, etc. of the City of Bessemer. 
Sec. 9.12. - Communal living facilities. 
(1)  No communal living facility shall be located less than 1,000 feet from the nearest other such facility. 
Sec. 9.13. - Cellular communication towers. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of these guidelines is to establish minimum considerations and criteria for the zoning board of adjustment review of variance and special exception proposals for communications towers. It is the board's express intent that the construction of new towers be an option of last resort: to the extent feasible, location of antennae on existing towers, building rooftops, and other suitable structures should first be sought. These guidelines are designed to ensure the compatibility of towers with and avoid adverse impacts to nearby properties. 
(2)  Communications tower. Defined a structure, such as a self-supporting lattice tower, guy tower, monopoly tower, or building, on which transmitting or receiving antennae are located, including accessory facilities for equipment storage and operations. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, and the like, but excludes accessory structures to a permitted use such as, ham radio towers, receive-only antennae, radio dispatch systems, transportable telecommunications devices, and the like. 
(3)  Applicability. All communications towers subject to approval as a variance or special exception, in residential districts, subject to these guidelines. Towers are allowed in commercial, industrial districts, subject to these standards. 
(4)  Objectives. The proposed location and design of all communications towers shall duly consider the following public health, safety, and general welfare objectives: 
(a)  Structural safety. The proposed tower will comply with wind loading and other structural standards contained in applicable building and technical codes (including sec. 1205 of the Standard Building Code and the Electronic Industries Association RS 222 code) so as not to endanger the health and safety of residents, employees or travelers in the event of structural failure of the tower due to extreme weather conditions or other acts of God. 
(b)  View protection. The proposed tower facility will be designed to minimize adverse visual impacts to surrounding properties and the public right-of-way, given the topography of the proposed site and surrounding area. 
(c)  Land use compatibility. The proposed tower facility will be compatible with the surrounding land uses, given the character of use and development of the location. 
(d)  Design harmony. The proposed tower facility will be designed in harmony with the natural setting and the surrounding development pattern. 
(e)  Existing communications services. The proposed tower facility will comply with FCC and other applicable agency standards so as not to interfere with existing communications services to the area. 
(f)  Health effects. The proposed tower will comply will all applicable federal and state health standards so as not to cause detrimental health effects to persons in the surroundings. 
(5)  Development criteria. The zoning board of adjustment, where required, shall review all communications towers on case-by-case basis for compliance with applicable criteria listed below, however, any of these criteria may be waived or adjusted by the board if a particular case may so warrant. in any event, these criteria are considered the necessary minimum to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. The board may impose higher standards it may deem necessary to further the objectives of these guidelines. 
(a)  Setbacks. 
1.  All towers, including guys, and accessory facilities shall meet minimum district yard and setback requirements. 
2.  When located within or adjacent to a residential district or dwelling, the minimum standard setback from all adjoining residential property boundaries shall be equal to one foot of setback for each four feet of tower height. 
3.  The board may reduce the standard setbacks in exceptional cases where a hardship would result due to unusual conditions on the site or other impracticalities. However, the board shall not reduce setbacks to the detriment of affected residential properties. 
(b)  Appearance. 
1.  Tower shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or be painted sky blue so as to reduce the visibility of the structure, unless other standards are required by the FAA. 
2.  The design of the tower compound shall, to the extent possible, maximize use building materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that effectively blend the tower facilities within the surrounding natural setting and built environment. 
3.  Where communications towers are appropriate for a given location, the type of tower shall be restricted to monopolies in or near residential area and other urban areas of special aesthetic concern, such as downtown, commercial revitalization areas, historic districts, and scenic corridors. 
(c)  Lighting. Tower shall not be lighted unless required by the FAA or other authority for safety purposes. Where required, the board shall review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. "Dual lighting" (red at night/strobe during day) shall be preferred unless restricted by the FAA. Security lighting may be permitted in accordance with E-5 below. 
(d)  Landscaping. 
1.  A landscaped buffer shall effectively screen the view of the tower compound from adjacent public ways and residential properties. 
2.  The standard buffer shall consist of a minimum four foot wide landscaped strip outside the perimeter of the compound. Security fencing shall be screened to its full height by a decay-resistant, solid wood fence: earth berms and brick or masonry walls may also be appropriate screens. The buffer strip shall be planted with an attractive combination of trees, shrubs, and/or groundcovers that enhances the outward appearance of the screening fence. 
3.  In isolated non-residential areas, alternative landscaping methods may be accepted, such as the use of earth-toned colored, vinyl-coated steel security fencing in combination with evergreen shrubs, trees, vines, and/or other plantings. 
4.  In certain locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, such as remote, agricultural or rural locations or developed heavy industrial areas, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waved. 
5.  Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, preservations of substantial natural growth around the property perimeter may be sufficient buffer. 
(e)  Security devices. 
1.  The facility shall be fully secured. A minimum eight feet high, galvanized steel, chain link fence shall be installed around the perimeter of the compound (measured to top of the fence of barbed wire, if applicable). Security fencing shall require screening in accordance with E-4 above. Other security measures shall include locks and alarms. Approved barbed or razor wire and lighting of the compound shall be permitted, if deemed necessary to fully secure the tower compound. 
(f)  Access. 
1.  Driveways and parking shall be provided to assure the operator's access to the facility for maintenance or emergency services. In some cases, parking/access may be from an adjoining alley, public street, or off-street parking area. 
(g)  Shared use. 
1.  No new tower shall be established if space is structurally and technically available on an existing tower which would serve the area that the new tower would serve. Towers shall be designed to maximize shared use to the extent possible, given the structural and technical limitations of the type of tower proposed. In any event, co-location shall be encouraged. If feasible, each tower shall, at a minimum, be designed for double its initially intended use for all transmitting and receiving antennae other than microwave dish antennae. 
(h)  Removal of obsolete towers. 
1.  Any tower that is no longer in use for its original communications purpose shall be removed at the owner's expense. The owner shall provide the city with a copy of the notice to the FCC of intent to cease operations and shall be given 90 days from the date of ceasing operations to the obsolete tower and accessory structures. In the case of multiple operators sharing use of single tower, this provision shall not become effective until all users cease perations. 
(6)  Application. 
(a)  Any application submitted for variance or special exception approval shall submit the following items, in addition to the standard board application, to show compliance with the board's review guidelines: 
1.  Statement of impact on health, safety and welfare. A brief written statement shall address conformance with health, safety and welfare objectives of these guidelines. 
2.  Site plan. A scaled site plan shall show the location and dimensions of all improvements, including setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, and other information necessary to assess compliance with development criteria of these guidelines. 
3.  Rendering. A rendering or sketch of the tower, accessory facilities, and compound shall show colors, materials, and treatment. If lighting or other FAA requirement for tower color is proposed, evidence of such requirement shall be submitted. 
4.  Justification for new tower. A proposal for a new tower shall be documented by the applicant that the planned equipment for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing tower within the proposed service area. The applicant shall submit a written affidavit that attempts to share an existing tower have been attempted but failed or that no such tower exists. 
5.  Certification of shared use design. A qualified professional engineer shall certify that the proposed tower design can ultimately accommodate the maximum number of shared users, in accordance with section E-7, Development Criteria. 
SECTION 10. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 10.1. - Definitions. 
(1)  A parking space shall have a minimum area of not less than 180 square feet, minimum width of nine feet and a minimum length of twenty feet, exclusive of driveways and maneuvering area. 
Sec. 10.2. - Genertal requirements. 
(1)  The parking space requirement for a use not specifically mentioned herein shall be the same as required for a use of similar nature. The board of adjustment shall make the determination. 
(2)  These standards shall apply fully to all additions, expansions, enlargements or reconstructions on the basis of the addition, expansion, enlargement or reconstruction only. 
(3)  In the case of mixed or joint uses, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately. 
(4)  The use of any required parking space for the storage of any motor vehicle for sale, or for any other purpose other than the parking of a motor vehicle for employees or visitors is prohibited. 
(5)  Where fractional spaces result, the parking space required shall be construed to be the next highest whole number. 
Sec. 10.3. - Location of required parking spaces. 
(1)  Residential off-street parking shall be located on the lot intended to be served. 
(2)  Required off-street parking for other than residential use shall be either on the same lot or within 200 feet of the building it is intended to serve measured from the nearest point of the building to the nearest point of the off-street parking lot, measured along the proposed pedestrian access route. 
(3)  Up to 50 percent of the parking spaces required for (a) theaters, public auditoriums, bowling alleys, night clubs or churches may be provided and used jointly by (b) banks, offices, retail stores, repair shops, service establishments and similar uses not normally open, used or operated during the same hours as those listed in (a); provided, however, the written agreement thereto is properly executed and filed. Such joint parking facilities shall be located within 400 feet of the non-residential uses served. 
(4)  In any case where the required parking spaces are not located on the same lot with the building or use served, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used, a written agreement thereby assuring their retention for such purposes, shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form by the city attorney and shall be filed with the application for a building permit, and shall be in full force and effect until released by resolution of the zoning board of adjustment. 
(5)  Use of off-street parking in residential area for non-residential purposes is prohibited. 
Sec. 10.4. - Minimum required parking spaces for individual uses. 
(1)  Generally. The following off-street parking figures specify the minimum number of off-street parking spaces: 
(a)  For all required off-street parking, the minimum dimensions of each parking stall shall be a minimum of nine (9.0) feet by twenty (20') feet, exclusive of aisle width, which shall be delineated by striping or other similar means; minimum area shall be 180 square feet. 
(b)  All parking spaces required herein, including adequate driveways, and maneuvering areas shall be improved with a suitable, hard surface, permanent type of pavement. 
(c)  If the required number of spaces is not a whole number, the number of required spaces shall be rounded up to the next higher whole number. 
(d)  When a development is specifically designed to be used for senior citizens or other special residential uses or as approved by ZBA, all such units shall be required to provide a minimum of one (1) parking space for each such unit/resident. 
(e)  Reference herein to "employee(s) on the largest work shift" means the maximum number of employees employed at the facility regardless of the time period during which this occurs and regardless of whether any such person is a full-time employee. The largest work shift may be a particular day of the week or a lunch or dinner period in the case of a restaurant. 
(f)  The term "capacity" as used herein means the maximum number of persons that may be accommodated by the use as determined by its design or by fire code regulations, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Required residential parking. 
(a)  Dwelling, single family: one space for each unit. 
(b)  Dwelling, multi-family: 11/2 spaces per unit for first 20 units plus 1 space per unit over 20 units. 
(c)  Group dwellings: one (1) space per bedroom or sleeping room. 
(3)  Non-residential parking. The following minimum number of parking spaces shall be required of the nonresidential uses specified below in all districts except the downtown commercial district. No off-street parking will be required for non-residential uses in the downtown commercial district. 
(a)  Agricultural uses: one (1) space per employee on the largest shift. 
(b)  Agriculture support uses: one (1) space per employee on the largest shift, plus one (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area provided for customer sales and service operations. 
(c)  Commercial and entertainment uses, except as specifically designated below: One (1) space per hundred fifty (150) square feet of gross floor area of customer sales and service, plus one (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of office gross floor area, or, if the use has at least one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area, five and one-half (5.5) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
1.  Banks: one (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area of customer sales and service, plus five (5) spaces off-street waiting (loading) spaces per drive-in lane, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest work shift. 
2.  Banks, automated, freestanding walk-up facility: one (1) space per facility for service and use. 
3.  Beauty and barber shops: three (3) spaces per operator or one (1) space per one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area of customer sales and service, whichever is larger, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest shift. 
4.  Funeral home: one (1) space per four (4) patron seats or twenty-five (25) spaces per chapel unit, whichever is greater. 
5.  Grocery or supermarket: one (1) space per one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area of customer sales and service. 
6.  Hospital: two (2) spaces per three (3) patient beds, plus one (1) space per staff doctor and each other employee on the largest work shift. 
7.  Hotel or motel: one (1) space per room or suite, plus one (1) space per every three (3) employees on the largest work shift, plus one (1) space per three (3) persons to the maximum capacity of each public meeting and/or banquet room, plus fifty (50) percent of the spaces otherwise required for accessory uses (e.g., restaurants and bars). 
8.  Private clubs: one (1) space per three (3) persons to the maximum capacity of the facility. 
9.  Repair services: one (1) space per three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area of customer sales and service, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest work shift. 
10.  Restaurant, standard: one (1) space per three (3) patron seats or one (1) space per hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area of customer sales and service, whichever is greater, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest work shift. 
11.  School, commercial or trade: one (1) space per three (3) students, plus one (1) space per employee (including faculty) at capacity class attendance period. 
12.  Shopping center: five (5) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area of customer sales and service. 
13.  Theaters and auditoriums: one (1) space per three (3) patrons based on maximum capacity. These requirements may be satisfied on a space-by-space basis by a facility's providing written proof that it has the use of a nearby parking lot available to its patrons (e.g., by contractual arrangement). 
(d)  Commercial/recreational uses (except as designated below): one (1) space per four (4) patrons to the maximum capacity of facility, plus one (1) space per two (2) employees on the largest work shift. 
1.  Bowling alley: five (5) spaces per lane, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest work shift. 
2.  Drive-in theater: one (1) space per automobile station, plus one (1) space per employee. 
3.  Golf driving range: one (1) space per tee, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest work shift. 
4.  Marina: one and one-half (1.5) spaces per berth. At least ten (10) percent of the spaces must be large enough to accommodate cars with trailers. 
5.  Miniature golf: one (1) space per hole, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest work shift. 
6.  Outdoor theater: one (1) space per three (3) patrons to the maximum capacity of the facility inclusive of both indoor and outdoor capability. 
7.  Skating rink, ice or roller: one (1) space per three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area of customer sales and service. 
(e)  Industrial and extraction uses: one (1) space per employee on the largest shift, plus one (1) space per company vehicle normally left on the premises. 
(f)  Institutional/recreational uses, (except as designated below): Open space per four (4) patrons to the maximum capacity of facility, plus one (1) space per two (2) employees per largest work shift. 
1.  Camps, day or youth: one (1) space per employee on the largest shift, plus one (1) space per camp vehicle normally parked on the premises. 
2.  Cemetery: one (1) space per employee, plus one (1) space per four (4) visitors to the maximum capacity. 
3.  Church: one (1) space per four (4) seats of maximum capacity. Overflow parking over and above the spaces required by this section may be allowed in planned and approved grassed areas that are appropriately designed and maintained. 
4.  Community and recreation center: one (1) space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area of customer sales and service, or one (1) space per four (4) patrons to the maximum capacity, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest shift. 
5.  Day or nursery school: one (1) space per teacher/employee on the largest shift; plus one (1) off-street parking or loading space per ten (10) children. Parking or loading spaces designated for children shall be located such that there is direct pedestrian access into the facility without crossing streets or driveways. 
6.  Libraries and museums: one (1) space per two hundred and fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area of customer sales and service or one (1) space per four (4) seats to the maximum capacity, whichever is greater, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest shift. 
7.  Monasteries, convents: one (1) space per six (6) residents, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest shift, plus (1) space per five (5) chapel seats if the public may attend. 
8.  Nursing homes: one (1) space per six (6) patient beds, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest shift, plus one (1) space per staff member and visiting doctor. 
9.  Schools: 
a)  Elementary and junior high: one (1) space per teacher and staff member, plus one (1) space per two (2) classrooms. 
b)  Senior high: one (1) space per teacher and staff member on the largest shift, plus one (1) space per five (5) non bused students. 
c)  College: one (1) space per staff member on the largest shift, plus one space per two (2) students of the largest class attendance period. 
10.  Swimming facility: one (1) space per seventy-five (75) square feet of gross water area, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest shift. 
11.  Tennis, racquetball, handball courts: four (4) spaces per court, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest shift. 
(g)  Commercial support uses, except as designated below: one (1) space per employee on the largest shift, plus one (1) space per company vehicle regularly stored on premises. 
1.  Veterinary office with enclosed kennels and/or pens: three (3) spaces per doctor, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest shift. 
2.  Nursery uses: one (1) space per employee on the largest shift, plus one (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area of inside sales or display. 
(h)  Office uses (except as designated below): one (1) space per two hundred and fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area of customer sales and service. 
1.  Medical offices: five (5) spaces per doctor. 
2.  Office/warehouse: one space per 250 square feet of office space plus one space per employee of maximum working shift plus one space per company vehicle. (If owner does not provide floor plan, building official & city engineer will divide square footage as 1/3 office, 2/3 warehouse.) 
(i)  Outdoor recreational uses (except as designated below): one (1) space per four (4) expected patrons at capacity. 
1.  Golf courses (nine and eighteen hole): thirty (30) spaces per nine (9) holes, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest shift, plus fifty (50) percent of spaces otherwise required for any accessory uses (e.g., bars, restaurants). 
2.  Golf, par three: fifteen (15) spaces per nine (9) holes, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest shift. 
3.  Outdoor swimming pool: one (1) space per seventy-five (75) square feet of gross water area. 
4.  Tennis court: three (3) spaces per court. 
(j)  Recreational rental uses (except as designated below): one and one-half (1.5) spaces per site or dwelling unit. 
1.  Recreational vehicle park: one and one-half (1.5) spaces per each recreational vehicle site, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest shift. 
(k)  Auto related service uses (except as designated below): one (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area of customer sales and service, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest shift. 
1.  Convenience store grocery: one (1) space per one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area of customer sales and service. 
2.  Fast-food restaurant: one (1) space per fifty (50) square feet of gross floor area of customer sales and service, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest work shift. Sufficient space on-site shall be provided to accommodate stacking vehicles. Such space shall at a minimum provide capacity for four (4) vehicles from the start of the stacking lane to the order board; two (2) vehicles from the order board to the service window; and one and one-half (1.5) vehicles from the service window to the exit to a public right-of-way. 
3.  Road services uses: one (1) space per employee on the largest work shift, plus one (1) space per company vehicle normally stored on the premises. 
4.  Taverns, dance halls, night clubs, and lounges: one (1) space per fifty (50) square feet of gross floor area of customer sales and service, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest shift. 
5.  Vehicle sales and service: one (1) space per fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet of gross floor area of customer sales and service. 
6.  Vehicle repair and maintenance services: one (1) space per four hundred (400) square feet of gross floor area of customer sales and service, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest work shift. 
7.  Mini warehouse: one (1) space per ten (10) storage cubicles, plus two (2) spaces per manager's residence, plus one (1) space per twenty-five (25) storage lockers located at the warehouse office. 
8.  Towing service: one space per 300 square feet of storage area or yard space. 
Sec. 10.5. - Reduction in required parking spaces. 
(1)  In order to prevent the establishment of a greater number of parking spaces than actually needed to meet the particular needs of those large uses over five hundred thousand (500,000) square feet of gross floor area, a reduction in the number of required off-street parking spaces may be permitted. This reduction shall be permitted subject to the following conditions. 
a)  A maximum reduction of one (1) parking space per every one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area or twenty (20) percent of the total spaces required can be permitted. The land development plan shall indicate the location and dimensions of the parking area provided. 
b)  Sufficient area must be reserved for the total number of off-street parking spaces required by section 10.4. The purpose of this reservation is to insure adequate area to meet any future need for additional parking spaces. This reservation shall be provided for by deed-restricting that portion of the site required to provide for the total number of parking spaces on the same property as is being proposed for development. The reserved parking area shall not include areas for required bufferyards, setbacks, or areas which would otherwise be unsuitable for parking spaces due to the physical characteristics of the land or other requirements of this ordinance. The developer shall provide a landscaping plan for the reserved area. 
c)  The developer shall enter into written agreement with the City of Bessemer that the additional parking spaces up to the total spaces required shall be provided at the owner's expense should the zoning officer determine that the total required parking spaces are necessary to satisfy the needs of the particular use pursuant to the standards imposed by this ordinance. 
d)  Certain large uses, such as regional shopping centers, may need fewer parking spaces than are required by this ordinance since their trip generation per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area is typically less than smaller uses. For example, large industrial users may find, through van-pooling or car-pooling practices, that their parking needs are reduced. This section provides a twenty (20) percent maximum reduction in required parking spaces while at the same time requiring that land be reserved to accommodate future parking needs. 
Sec. 10.6. - Parking provision for physically handicapped. 
(1)  In providing parking facilities, provisions shall be made in accordance with building and other codes for parking for physically handicapped. 
Sec. 10.7. - Loading area requirements. 
(1)  Loading space general. 
(a)  The minimum area for each off-street loading space, excluding area for maneuvering, shall be two hundred and fifty (250) square feet. 
(b)  At no time shall any part of a truck or van be allowed to extend into the right-of-way of a public thoroughfare while the truck or van is being loaded or unloaded. 
(c)  On the same premises with every building or structure involving the receipt or dispatch for vehicles as a necessity fork, or incidental to, the operation or use of the building, there shall be provided and maintained adequate space for standing, loading and unloading services, in order to avoid undue interference with public use of streets or alleys. 
(d)  A loading space shall have a minimum clear height of 14 feet and shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide by 45 feet long. 
(e)  The entire loading area shall be paved and graded to properly drain. 
(2)  Number of loading spaces required. 
(a)  Any use with a gross floor area of six thousand (6,000) square feet or more which requires deliveries or shipments must provide off-street loading facilities, except in the downtown commercial district, in accordance with the requirements specified below. 
(b)  Every retail establishment, industrial or manufacturing use, warehouse, wholesale use, freight terminal, railroad yard, hospital, or sanitarium having an aggregate gross floor area of six thousand (6,000) square feet or more shall provide off-street loading facilities as follows: 
Gross Floor Area 
in square feet Number of Berths 6,000-24,999 1 25,000-79,999 2 80,000-127,999 3 128,000-198,999 4 199,000-255,999 5 256,000-319,999 6 320,000-391,999 7  
For each additional seventy-two thousand (72,000) square feet (or fraction thereof) of gross floor area, one (1) additional berth shall be provided. 
Sec. 10.8. - Parking lot standards. 
(1)  Except for parcels of land devoted to one and two family uses, all areas devoted to off-street parking shall be so designed and be of such size that no vehicle is required to back into a public street to obtain egress. 
(2)  There shall be clearly defined driveways used for ingress and egress. 
(3)  All areas devoted to permanent off-street parking as required under this section shall be of a sealed-surface construction and maintained in such a manner that no dust will result from continuous use. 
(4)  The parking lot shall be drained to eliminate surface water. 
(5)  Where the parking lot is contiguous to a residential district which has common frontage in the same block with the parking lot, there shall be established a setback line twenty-five (25) feet from the street lot line. 
(6)  Where parking is to be provided in the front yard of a multiple family dwelling, there shall be established a landscaped strip 9 feet wide adjacent to the street lot line. This 9-foot strip of land is for the purposes of this ordinance called a "buffer strip." The ground in the front buffer strip shall be prepared and shall be planted with trees, shrubs, and grass. 
(7)  Plans for the layout of a parking lot must be approved by the zoning board of adjustment based on design standards approved by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. The recommendations of the city engineer shall be reviewed before a decision is made. 
(8)  The zoning board of adjustment shall have the authority to approve off-street parking in any district which is more restrictive than that required for the major land use it is intended to serve, subject to the preceding conditions. The following conditions shall also apply: 
(a)  The parking lot shall not have access from the more restrictive district. 
(b)  Bumper or wheel stops shall be provided so as to prevent any vehicle from projecting over the buffer strip. 
(c)  The intensity of light and arrangement of reflectors shall be such as not to interfere with Residential Districts. 
(d)  No sign of any kind shall be erected except information signs used to guide traffic and to state the conditions and terms of the use of the lot. Only non-intermittent white lighting of signs shall be permitted. 
(9)  Parking areas for single and two household residential dwellings shall be confined to the driveway, garages or rear of the house, and shall not be permitted in the required front setback. Parking areas for multi-household dwellings are permitted within required front setbacks, although they must be located behind required bufferyards. 
(10)  Automobiles, trucks or trailers of any kind or type without current license plates shall not be parked or stored on any lot zoned for residential use, other than in completely enclosed buildings. The parking or storage of such trucks, tractor trailers and construction equipment is not permitted in residential zones, with the exception of vehicles not exceeding one-half (1/2) ton loading capacity which are needed for travel to and from work by residents of the dwelling unit and which are completely enclosed within a buildings. Not more than one (1) travel or camping trailer per family, living on the premises, shall be permitted on a lot in any residential zone; and the trailer shall not be occupied temporally or permanently while it is parked or stored. 
(11)  Minimum area for the purpose of these regulations an off-street parking space is an all-weather surfaced area, not in a street or alley, permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one automobile and connected to a street or alley by an asphalt or concrete driveway which affords ingress and egress. 
(12)  Off-street parking facilities shall be properly graded for drainage to prevent damage to abutting property and/or public streets and alleys and surfaced with asphalt, concrete bituminous, or other impervious material. Off-street parking areas shall be maintained in a clean, orderly, dust-free, and weed-free condition at the expense of the owner or lessee and not used for the sale, repair, or dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials, or supplies. 
(13)  Separation from walkways and streets; off-street spaces shall be separated from walkways, sidewalks, streets, or alleys, and required setbacks by a wall, fence, curbing, or other approved protective device. Required off-street parking, where permitted to occur within setback areas, shall not intrude into required bufferyards. Also, where no bufferyard is required for a new or re-developed use, required parking shall not be located closer than three (3) feet from any property line. The minimum separation between off-street parking areas and principle buildings shall be five (5) feet so as to allow for pedestrian use of appropriate walkways. 
(14)  Entrances and exits; landscaping curbing or other approved barriers shall be provided along boundaries to control entrance and exit of vehicles or pedestrians. All parking facilities, except those serving single household detached and two household dwellings, shall be designed so that all existing movements onto a public street are in a forward motion. Entrance and exit driveways to public streets and alleys in the vicinity of street intersections must be located at least fifty (50) feet, measured along the curbline, from the intersection of the nearest business. Entrance and exit driveways at other locations or at intersections not covered by the above restrictions may be denied if such a locations will create an accident hazard for normal traffic. 
(15)  Parking spaces in lots of more than 10 spaces shall be marked by painted lines, curbs or other means to indicate individual spaces. Signs or markers, as approved by the zoning administrator, shall be used as necessary to insure efficient traffic operation of the lot. 
(16)  Lighting; adequate lighting shall be provided in off-street parking spaces which are to be used at night. Equipment for lighting parking facilities shall be arranged so that light does not interfere with traffic or adjoining residential areas. 
(17)  Landscaping; where off-street parking, developed in conjunction with a permitted use or as a separate use occupying an individual lot or lots, comprises twenty (20) or more off-street parking spaces, at least ten (10%) percent of the impervious surface area shall be open and landscaped in such a manner as to divide and break up the expanse of paving with islands and barriers; the natural landscape shall be preserved in all possible instances. Wherever healthy plant material exists on a site, the minimum planting standards may be adjusted for such plant material, if in the opinion of the planning and zoning commission such adjustment is in the best interest of the city, and preserves all intents of this ordinance. a minimum of 6 foot wide strip is required for any parking lot adjacent to a street or residential property. 
(18)  Fire lanes; off-street parking areas shall designate appropriate "fire lanes" to afford access for emergency vehicles, and shall be so marked as indicated on approved site plans by the fire marshal. 
Sec. 10.9. - Storage and parking of trailers and commercial vehicles. 
(1)  Commercial vehicles and trailers of all types, including travel, boat, camping and hauling, shall not be parked or stored on any lot occupied by a dwelling or on any lot in any residential district except in accordance with the following provisions: 
(a)  Not more than one commercial vehicle, which does not exceed one and one-half tons rated capacity, per family living on the premises, shall be permitted; and in no case shall a commercial vehicle used for hauling explosives, gasoline or liquefied petroleum products be permitted. 
(b)  Commercial vehicles and trailers shall not exceed 32 feet in length, or eight feet in width, and shall not be parked or stored for more than 48 hours unless it is located behind the front yard building line. A camping or travel trailer shall not be occupied either temporarily or permanently while it is parked or stored in any area except in a mobile home park authorized under this ordinance. 
SECTION 11. - SIGN REGULATIONS 

Sec. 11.1. - Purpose. 
(1)  It is hereby declared that the environmental and safety interests of the City of Bessemer are reasonably promoted by the provisions of this article. Accordingly, it is the intent and purpose of this article to provide for the orderly and harmonious display of signs within the community; to aid in the identification of properties and enterprises for the convenience of the public; to avoid the erection of displays which produce deleterious and injurious effects to adjacent properties and to the environment; to provide for the safety of the traveling public by limiting distractions, hazards, and obstructions; to minimize visual clutter and encourage a positive visual environment within the city; and to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
Sec. 11.2. - Application and enforcement. 
(1)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all areas within the corporate limits of the City of Bessemer, but shall not apply to signs erected by or on behalf of or pursuant to the authorization of a governmental body, including legal notices; identification and informational signs; traffic, directional, and regulatory signs; and official signs of a non-commercial nature erected by public utilities. The provisions of this article describe those signs which are permitted; all others are excluded. Unless otherwise provided, the yard and setback requirements for the various districts and for streets, highways, and thoroughfares, established shall be applicable to signs authorized hereby. 
(2)  The provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the building inspection officer of the department of building and inspections. This official and other officials in behalf of the department shall have the right to enter upon any premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections necessary to carry out his duties and the enforcement of this article. 
Sec. 11.3. - Measurement of area. 
(1)  The area of a sign is measured as the entire area within a circle, triangle or parallelogram enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem or any figure of similar character, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is placed. 
(2)  Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign, except that where two such faces are placed back to back and are at no point more than 42 inches from one another and do not form an angle of more than 90;deg;, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area of one face if the two faces are of equal area, or as the area of the larger face if the two faces are of unequal area. 
(3)  Whenever the nearest part of any sign is set back 50 feet or more from the nearest front lot line, for purposes of area restrictions of this Ordinance, its area shall be considered to be a percentage of the actual area shown in the following schedule: 
Setback in feet Percent 50-100 110 100-150 120 150-200 130 200-250 140 250 or more 150  
(4)  Where a sign consists solely of lettering or other sign elements without any distinguishing border printed or mounted on a wall or a roof of a building, panel or background, any blank rectangular area which is more than 10 percent of the area of the sign as otherwise computed shall be disregarded. All of the lettering and other sign elements printed or mounted upon a wall of a building without any distinguishing border, panel or background and pertaining to the same enterprise shall be treated as a single sign for purposes of area computation. 
Sec. 11.4. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following definitions, terms, and their application shall be used and applied: 
(1)  Advertisement. The calling of a service, product, or activity to the attention of the public, including identifying such service, product, or activity and emphasizing desirable qualities, so as to produce a desire to buy or patronize. 
(2)  Alteration. The replacement, enlargement, reduction, or reshaping of, or addition to, a sign, sign trim, frame, pole, brackets, or any supporting member; or any change in the number of poles supporting a sign; or, except as authorized under the definition of "maintenance" herein defined, the replacement or modification of any words, letters, numerals, symbols, or other surface features of a sign in order to create a substantially different visual effect, or to advertise a business, activity, product, or service of a different type, category, or nature than the business, activity, product, or service which it advertised before the replacement or modification. 
(3)  Area. The size of a sign measured by the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle, or other geometric shape or combination thereof, which will encompass the entire sign, including any border or trim but excluding the base, apron, supports, and other structural members. 
(4)  Attached sign. A sign fastened or affixed to, mounted against, or otherwise connected to, a building or other nonsign structure, provided however, that the primary purpose of said structure is not the display of the sign. 
(5)  Billboard. See off-premise[s] sign, definition below. 
(6)  Building inspection officer. The inspection enforcement officer of the zoning ordinance of the City of Bessemer, Alabama, or any of his authorized assistants or inspectors. 
(7)  Business center sign. A detached sign which identifies a complex of two (2) or more occupants or tenants on the same lot or tract of land. 
(8)  Construction site identification sign. A sign located on the site of a construction project which identifies the owners, architects, engineers, contractors, mechanics, artisans, craftsmen, financial institutions, and other individuals or firms involved with the construction, but does not include any advertisement of any product, service, or activity, except that such sign may include information regarding sale or leasing, and words announcing the name or character of the building enterprise or the purpose for which the building is intended. 
(9)  Detached or ground-mounted sign. A sign not attached or fastened to, or mounted against, or otherwise connected in any way to, a building or other nonsign structure located on the same premises as the sign, but instead mounted on or attached to framework whose primary purpose is to display the sign; for purpose of mounting signs in the City of Bessemer, said mounting should be a pylon or monument sign structure; pole signs are prohibited. 
(10)  Directional sign. A sign of a non-commercial nature which directs the reader to the location of a public, religious, or educational institution, or to the location of a public work or building; or signs directing traffic on private property, such as ingress and egress signs; or signs displayed for the direction and convenience of the public, including signs which identify restrooms, location of public telephones, public entrances, freight entrances, and the like. Such signs may display a business name or logo and directional information or symbols, but shall not bear nor display any advertisement. 
(11)  Electric sign. A sign with electrical wiring or lighting therein or thereon, or used in conjunction with the sign, including use of neon or florescent tubing. 
(12)  Garage or yard sale sign. A temporary sign which advertises a garage or yard sale held at a residence. 
(13)  Height of sign. The vertical distance of a sign measured from the road or grade of the site (to which the sign is oriented, whichever is higher) to the top of the sign, including border, trim, frame, supports, and all other structural members and appurtenances; except as relates to roof-mounted signs, or where the context within which the term is used clearly indicates otherwise. 
(14)  Home occupation sign. A sign advertising an activity conducted entirely within a residence and carried on solely by the inhabitant thereof, and which activity is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the residence for dwelling purposes. 
(15)  Illuminated sign. A sign in which an artificial source of light is used in connection with the display of such sign. 
(16)  Institutional sign. A church, school, or similar institution's identification sign, bulletin board, or directional sign. 
(17)  Length of sign. The horizontal distance of a sign measured from one end of the sign to the other, including border, trim, frame, supports, and all other structural members and appurtenances. 
(18)  Maintenance. The normal care and minor repair necessary to maintain safe, attractive, and finished sign structure, trim, frame, poles, brackets, and surface. Replacing or updating of copy or logo on a valid nonconforming on premise[s] sign shall be considered maintenance only if the type, category, or nature of the activity or product or service being advertised remains the same, provided the sign is not altered thereby. The message or copy of any off-premise[s] sign may be changed or replaced without regard to the contents thereof as a part of normal maintenance. 
(19)  Marquee. A permanent roofed structure attached to and supported by a building and projecting over a public sidewalk. 
(20)  Marquee sign. A sign attached to or painted on or inscribed on, and partly or fully supported by, or made an integral part of, a marquee. 
(21)  Nonconforming sign. A sign not prohibited herein as a public nuisance that conformed in all respects to the sign regulations and applicable zoning provisions in effect when it was located, but which now violates one (1) or more provisions of this article as of the date of the official adoption and passage of this article; in [the] central business district only, an on-premise[s] attached sign which extends over a public sidewalk for the purpose of this article shall not be deemed nonconforming and not illegal. 
(22)  On-premises sign. A sign that draws attention to or communicates information about a business, service, product, commodity, accommodation, attraction, church, school, public or charitable institution, or other enterprise or activity that exists or is being conducted, sold, offered, maintained, or provided, except that an on-premise[s] sign may also display a non-commercial message, whether or not such message relates to the premises in question. 
(23)  Off-premises sign. A sign that draws attention to or communicates information about a business, service, product, commodity, accommodation, attraction, church, school, public or charitable institution or other enterprise or activity that exists or is being conducted, sold, offered, maintained, or provided at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located, or otherwise conveys a commercial or non-commercial message unrelated to the premises upon which the sign is located. 
(24)  Portable sign. A temporary sign allowed by permit only, with a minimum permit fee of $15, plus $1 issuance fee, made of any material, with or without changeable lettering, which is designed to be, or is, portable, and which is mounted on a vehicle, trailer, stand, or similar structure, with or without wheels, and is not permanently embedded in the ground; also known as a trailer sign, or mobile sign. For the purposes of this article, such signs shall be considered detached signs, and as such, shall meet all the requirements specified for detached signs. Portable signs must conform to wind load and electrical requirements, as well as other applicable provisions of the codes and ordinances enforced by the City of Bessemer, and must be anchored or supported in such a manner as to guard against the effects of wind. A portable sign permit is valid for ninety (90) days after date of issuance and a maximum of 1 permit per year is allowed for any single property. 
(25)  Projecting sign. An attached sign erected on the face or outside wall of any building or nonsign structure and projecting out at an angle therefrom. 
(26)  Real estate sign. A sign advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the premises or part of the premises on which the sign is displayed. 
(27)  Roof-mounted sign. An attached sign which is affixed primarily and directly to, and which extends above, the roof of any building or nonsign structure. 
(28)  Setback. Unless otherwise provided, such term refers to the established yard and setback requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
(29)  Sign. A display board, screen, placard, or any other device, or any painted or pasted-on display, which is visible from any public place, street, or highway, or from any way or property open to the public for vehicular travel, and upon which is displayed or included any letter, word, numeral, banner, flag, emblem, logo, symbol, decoration, device, representation, or similar item used as, or which is in the nature of, an identification, announcement, direction, notice, advertisement, or other attention getting device. For the purposes of this article, this definition shall also include painted, pasted, self-supporting, and attached words, letters, numerals, symbols, emblems, and other such displays, meaning thereby those displays which are themselves painted, pasted, or attached directly to a structure and not mounted on any signboard. 
(30)  Standard building code. The Standard Building Code published by the International Building Code Congress International, Inc., as adopted and amended by the city of Bessemer from time to time. 
(31)  Subdivision, condominium, and apartment identification signs. Signs that identify the name of a residential subdivision, condominium development, or apartment complex. 
(32)  Temporary sign. A sign of a non-permanent nature is used in connection with a circumstance, situation, or event that is designed, intended and expected to take place or to be completed within a reasonably short and definite time period after the erection of such sign. If a sign display area is permanent, but the message displayed is subject to periodic changes, such sign shall not be regarded as temporary. All portable signs shall be considered to be temporary signs, and will be regulated according to provisions for temporary signs. (See Portable sign , above) 
(33)  Wall sign. An attached sign which is mounted parallel to or flush against an exterior wall of a building. 
(34)  Warning sign. A sign, containing no advertising material, warning the public of the existence of danger. 
Sec. 11.5. - Exemptions. 
(1)  There shall be exempt from the provisions of this article, the following types of signs, which shall not count in the computation of any applicable total sign number or area: 
a)  Signs not exceeding two (2) square feet in area which denote the name, address, or business hours only of the occupant of the premises. 
b)  On-premise[s] directional signs, so long as they do not exceed four (4) square feet in area and they meet the following conditions: 
1.  If located within ten (10) feet of the public right-of-way, such signs shall not exceed thirty (30) inches in heights. 
2.  If located in any setback area, but not closer than ten (10) feet from the public right-of-way, such signs shall not exceed three and one-half (31/2) feet in height. 
3.  If not located in any setback area, such signs shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. 
c)  Signs which are fully located within the interior of any building or stadium or within an enclosed lobby or court of any building. 
d)  Publicly owned memorial tablets or signs. 
e)  Signs painted on or otherwise attached to currently licensed motor vehicles, so long as the primary function of such vehicle is the ordinary one attributed to vehicles in general, and not to advertise or identify as a sign by itself would. 
f)  Signs proclaiming religious, political, or other non-commercial messages, other than those regulated by section 11.6 that do not exceed one (1) per abutting street or sixteen (16) square feet in area and that are not internally illuminated. 
g)  Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings or works of art, so long as such features do not contain moving parts or moving or flashing lights. 
h)  Small changeable signs over gasoline pump islands illustrating current pricing of gasoline. 
Sec. 11.6. - Temporary signs. 
(1)  The following temporary signs are permitted in the specified districts without a building permit, subject to the following conditions in addition to those set out elsewhere in this article: 
(a)  One (1) unlighted real estate sign per street frontage, not exceeding six (6) square feet in area if in a residential district, or thirty-two (32) square feet in area if in any other district. Such signs shall be removed no later than ten (10) days after the sale, lease, or rental is closed or otherwise completed. 
(b)  One (1) unlighted construction site identification sign per contractor, not exceeding twelve (12) square feet if in a residential district, or thirty-two (32) square feet if in any other district, or one (1) sign per construction project, not exceeding one hundred (100) square feet in area and including names of all construction companies, engineers, and architects. Such signs shall not be erected prior to the issuance of the building permit and shall be removed no later than ten (10) days after the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or the commencement of the intended use, whichever occurs first. (See section 11.9[4]) 
(c)  Signs erected in connection with the observance of generally recognized holidays. Such signs shall be removed no later than ten (10) days after the end of the holiday being observed. 
(d)  Signs erected in connection with elections or political campaigns which do not exceed six (6) square feet in area if in a residential district, or thirty-two (32) square feet in area if in any other district. Such signs shall be removed no later than ten (10) days after the election, final runoff election, or conclusion of the campaign for which they were erected. 
(e)  One (1) sign per street frontage, not exceeding six (6) square feet in area if in a residential district, or thirty-two (32) square feet in area if in any other district, which indicates that a special event such as a grand opening, fair, carnival, circus, festival, animal show, contest, race, entertainment show, or similar event is to take place, so long as such event is of a temporary nature. Such signs shall not be erected sooner than thirty (30) days before the event and shall be removed no later than ten (10) days after the event. 
(f)  One (1) garage, yard sale, or estate sale sign per street frontage, provided that such signs shall not exceed (6) square feet in area and shall be removed not later than (3) days after the sale. 
(g)  Signs evidencing an award by a governmental agency, chamber of commerce, or other nonprofit organization in recognition of the beauty and aesthetically pleasing condition of the premises; and signs recognizing and honoring historical properties or excellence and distinction in architectural rehabilitation of the premises on which the sign is located, so long as such signs remain on the premises for not more than one (1) year, do not exceed six (6) square feet in area, and do not exceed six (6) feet in height. 
(2)  No person shall place or erect a temporary sign within an street right-of way, or attach it to any utility pole; nor shall any person place or erect any such sign upon a building, wall, tree, fence, or other property of another person or business without first obtaining the consent of the owner of such property. 
(3)  The signs authorized herein shall at all times be subject to the provisions of this section. 
Sec. 11.7. - Permits, applications, fees and inspections. 
(1)  Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, move, alter or convert any sign in the city or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a building permit for each sign from the building inspection officer as required by this ordinance. Permits are not required for routine sign maintenance. 
(2)  Application for permits. Application for a permit shall be made to the building inspection officer upon a form provided by the building inspection officer and shall be accompanied by such information as may be required to assure compliance with all appropriate laws and regulations of the city, including: 
(a)  Name and address of owner of the sign. 
(b)  Name and address of owner or the person in possession of the premises where the sign is located or to be located. 
(c)  Clear and legible drawings with description definitively showing the location of the sign which is subject of the permit and all other existing signs. 
(d)  Drawings issued and stamped by a licensed engineer or architect, showing the dimensions, construction supports, size, electrical wiring and components, wind load specifications, materials of the sign, and method of attachment. 
(e)  A building and electrical permit shall be required for all flashing, intermittent illumination or portable signs. 
(3)  Issuance denial. When a permit is denied by the building inspection officer, notice shall be given to the proper applicant of the denial. 
(4)  Appeals of permit denial. Appeal may be taken to the board of adjustment upon denial by the building inspection officer to issue a building permit. 
(5)  Permit fees. Application for permits shall be filed with the building inspection officer together with a $15 minimum permit fee, plus 1% of the contract valuation above $1,500, as specified by the building inspection officer for each sign. 
(6)  Inspection of signs. The person erecting, altering, relocating, enlarging or converting any sign shall notify the building inspection officer upon completion of the work for which permits are required and issued. All free standing signs shall be subject to a footing inspection and all electrical signs shall be subject to an electrical inspection by the building inspection officer. 
(7)  Unlawful signs. Every sign in the city shall be maintained in good structural condition. The building inspection officer may inspect and shall have the authority to order removal of signs which become dilapidated or abandoned. Removal will be at the sign owner's expense. 
Sec. 11.8. - General sign regulations. 
(1)  Height requirements: 
(a)  No detached sign of any type of kind which exceeds six (6) feet in height shall be located, erected, or maintained in any residential district. 
(b)  No detached sign of any type or kind, other than an off-premise[s] sign, which exceeds eighteen (18) feet in height shall be located, erected, or maintained in any district, except that signs may be allowed up to a maximum of 24' for hotels, hospitals, planned developments, if in conformance with an overall development plan approved by the planning and zoning commission. In no case shall a sign height exceed the principle building on the same lot. 
(c)  No off-premise[s] sign which exceeds forty (40) feet in height, forty-eight (48) feet in length, or six hundred seventy-two (672) square feet in area per side, shall be located, erected, or maintained in any district. 
(2)  Roof-mounted signs shall not be permitted unless reviewed and approved by the zoning board of adjustments. 
(3)  Attached signs meaning those primarily attached to the side of a building, shall not extend above a line equal to the height of the building to which they are attached. 
(4)  A two-sided sign shall be regarded as one (1) sign so long as the two (2) sides at not point separated by a distance in excess of five (5) feet. 
(5)  All signs, and all components, supporting structure, and appurtenances thereof, shall be maintained in good repair, free of rust, peeling, flaking fading, broken or cracked panels, and broken or missing letters, presenting a clean and finished appearance. 
(6)  The area within ten (10) feet in all directions of any part of a detached sign shall be kept clear of debris and trash, and grass and other undergrowth in said area shall not exceed five (5) inches in height, measured from ground level. 
(7)  Exposed backs of signs shall be painted a single color and shall present a clean and finished appearance. 
(8)  Signs fixed or mounted directly on or in windows shall not require a permit and shall not count against the signage allocation for the premises, provided that such signs do not cover more than fifteen (15) percent of the total window area. 
(9)  No sign, nor any part thereof, shall be erected or located in or project over any public right-of-way, except as otherwise provided by this article. 
(10)  No sign shall display flashing, intermittent, rotating, or moving lights, or lights of changing degrees of intensity, which are visible from the right of way of a public street or highway, or from any other vehicular travel way open to the public. An exception is an electronic message which may be allowed in all non-residential districts upon approval by the zoning board of adjustments. 
(11)  Changeable message signs may be permitted in all non-residential districts as a special exception. This shall include manually changeable message boards provided the sign panel matches the overall sign color in lieu of white. Electronic changeable signs shall be allowed if all other sign standards are met. Only one such changeable sign may be allowed per lot. 
(12)  No sign shall revolve or be animated, or utilize movement or apparent movement in order to attract the attention of the public, which is visible from the right-of-way of a public street or highway, or from any other vehicular travel way open to the public. 
(a)  If located within ten (10) feet of the public right-of-way, the sign shall not exceed three and one-half (31/2) feet in height nor forty (40) square feet in area. 
(b)  If the sign and all supporting member, trim, and other parts thereof are located ten (10) feet or more from the public right-of-way, the sign shall not exceed six (6) feet in height nor eighty (80) square feet in area. 
(13)  Any number of attached condominium or apartment identification signs shall be permitted, provided however, that the total area of all such signs per development or complex shall not exceed thirty-six (36) square feet, none of which shall extend above the building. 
(14)  One detached condominium or apartment identification sign shall be permitted on each public street frontage, provided each sign complies with the following requirements in addition to those set out elsewhere in this article: 
(a)  Such signs and all supporting members, trim, and other part thereof shall be located ten (10) feet or more from the public right-of-way, and shall not exceed six (6) feet in height nor forty (40) square feet in area. 
(15)  The following signs, which are hereby declared a public nuisance, are prohibited and shall not be given nonconforming status. Any such signs existing on the effective date of this article, or thereafter, shall be removed or brought into conformance herewith not later than 5 years. 
(a)  Signs which copy, imitate, or in any way approximate an official traffic sign or device, designed to cause the public to focus attention on the sign, where the ultimate purpose of such sign is to draw attention to the service or product being offered. 
(b)  Signs which interfere with the view of street traffic, or interfere with any sign displayed by public authority for the purpose of giving traffic instruction or direction or other public information. 
(c)  Signs which display flashing, intermittent, rotating, or moving lights, or lights of changing intensity which are visible from the right-or-way of a public street or highway, or from any other vehicular travel way open to the public, and which are located within the setback abutting a public street or highway. 
(d)  Signs which permit focused light, such as beams or rays of light, to be directed onto a public street, highway, road, sidewalk, or premise[s] of another owner or tenant when such light is of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or reflection and impair vision, or constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance. 
(e)  Signs on public property that are attached to or maintained upon trees, or painted or drawn upon rocks or other natural features. 
(f)  Signs incorporating any noisy mechanical device which emits sound of such a volume as to be heard over the normal road noise by an average motorist on a highway or street. 
(g)  Signs which fail to meet the standards set out by the Standard Building Code, National Electrical Code, or any other applicable codes enforced by the City of Bessemer including without limitation, applicable wind load and electrical requirements. 
(h)  Signs, or any parts or appurtenances or supporting members thereof, which obstruct or interfere with any door, side escape, ventilation opening, or other means of ingress and egress or ventilation. 
(i)  Signs which interfere with the view necessary for vehicular or pedestrian traffic to proceed safely or to enter onto or exit from public or private streets, roads, or highways. 
(j)  Signs, including without limitation those existing on the effective date of this article, which violate one (1) or more of the provisions of this article, and which are not nonconforming signs as defined in this article. 
(16)  No sign shall be erected or maintained at any location where by reason of its position, wording, illumination, size, shape, or color it may obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or be confused with, any authorized traffic control sign, signal, or device. 
(17)  No sign shall contain or make use of any light, word, phrase, symbol, shape, form, or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic. 
(18)  No sign having flashing, intermittent, or animated illumination shall be permitted within three hundred (300) feet of property in any residential district unless such sign is not visible from such property. 
(19)  No illuminated sign shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet of property in any residential district unless the illumination of such sign is so designed that it does not shine or reflect light onto such property. 
(20)  No business or advertising ground sign shall be erected to exceed fifty (50) feet in length. 
(21)  No part of any wall or projecting sign that is attached to a building shall be erected to a height greater than that regulated in the zoning code of the City of Bessemer. 
(22)  All outdoor advertising structures, including billboards, shall be erected or placed in conformity with the side and rear yard requirements of the district in which the off-premise[s] signs is located. However, no advertising structure shall be erected or placed closer than within 100 feet of any residential district and shall be set back from the established right-of-way line of any street or highway at least as far as the required front yard depth for a principal use in such district. 
(23)  Business ground signs shall be located not closer than 10 feet to a street right-of-way line unless such sign is a least 10 feet above the ground and vision under the sign is only incidentally obstructed by supporting members. Further, all business signs shall set back five feet from all side and rear property lines. 
(24)  Ground mounted signs shall be mounted on pylons or monument sign standards. 
(25)  No sign shall be placed in any public right-of-way, except publicly owned signs, such as traffic control signs, directional signs, and subdivision identification signs. 
(26)  Signs projecting from a building or extending over public property shall maintain a clear height of nine feet above the sidewalk and all such signs shall not extend within more than 18 inches of the curb line but in no case shall they project to a distance greater than 10 feet. 
(27)  Professional signs for home occupations, where permitted, shall not exceed two square feet in area, provided, such sign is either a wall or ground sign located not closer than 20 feet to the street right-of-way line. 
(28)  Trailer signs may not be installed on premises within the City of Bessemer, except upon review by the board of zoning adjustments for temporary purposes for a specified period of time, not to exceed 90 days; a special exception for this time limit may be if granted for up to sixty (60) upon review and approval by the board of zoning adjustment if signs are installed in accordance with requirements for standard detached sign. Only one such sign may be allowed per lot. Sign may include changeable message board, electronic or manual, subject to zoning board of adjustment approval. 
(29)  Internally and externally illuminated signs are allowed in all non-residential districts, provided other size, color, safety and other standards are met and provided light does not project onto right-of-way or adjacent properties, or interfere with vision of pedestrians or motorists. Externally illuminated signs may be allowed in a residential district as exception by the zoning board of adjustment. 
Sec. 11.9. - Signs permitted in all districts. 
(1)  For each permitted or required parking area that has a capacity of more than four cars, one sign, not more than four square feet in area, designating each entrance to or exit from such parking area, and one sign, not more than 12 square feet in area, identifying or designating the conditions of use of such parking area. 
(2)  One non-illuminated "for sale" or "for rent" sign not exceeding six (6) square feet in area and advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the premises on which the sign is located. A larger sign shall be permitted for two or more lots in single ownership or for properties in excess of 100 feet in width, provided that the area of such sign shall be increased on a graded scale of one square foot increase in area for each additional five (5) feet of frontage over 100 feet, but in no case shall the sign exceed in the aggregate 200 square feet. Such sign shall be a ground or wall sign and located not closer than 20 feet from the street line. 
(3)  For each real estate subdivision that has been approved in accordance with the Bessemer Subdivision Regulations, one sign, not over one hundred (100) square feet in area, advertising the sale of property in such subdivision. Such sign shall be permitted only when located on some portion of the subdivision being advertised for sale and shall not encroach upon any required yard. Such sign may be illuminated, but no flashing, intermittent or animated illumination is permitted. Such sign shall be maintained only during such time as some portion of the land is unsold. 
(4)  For construction on or development of a lot, one sign per contractor, not more that twelve (12) square feet in area, or one sign not exceeding one hundred (100) square feet in area, giving the names of all the contractors, engineers, or architects, but only during the time that construction or development is actively underway. (See section 11.6[b]) 
(5)  One sign, not more than nine square feet in area, pertaining to the sale of agricultural products raised on the premises. 
(6)  Signs established by, or by order of, any governmental agency. 
(7)  For special events such as a grand opening, fair, carnival, circus, festival, animal show, contest, race, entertainment show, or similar event one (1) sign per street frontage, not exceeding six (6) square feet in area if in a residential district, or thirty-two (32) square feet in area if in any other district, which indicates that such an event is to take place, so long as such event is of a temporary nature. Such signs shall not be erected sooner than thirty (30) days before the event and shall be removed not later than ten (10) days after the event. 
(8)  Signs located on the rolling stock of common carriers or on motor vehicles or trailers bearing current license plates which are traveling or lawfully parked upon public highways, or lawfully parked upon any other premises for a period not exceeding four hours or for a longer period where the primary purpose of such parking is not the display of any sign. 
Sec. 11.10. - Signs in residential districts. 
(1)  For single-family, two-family, and multiple-family dwellings: Nameplates shall not exceed two square feet in area, shall indicate only name and/or address of the occupants, premises, announcement of boarders or roomers, or customary home occupation. 
(2)  For multiple-family and group dwellings: Identification signs, not to exceed nine (9) square feet in area, shall be permitted; such sign shall indicate only the name and/or address of the premises, and the name of the management. Such sign shall be attached flush with the principal building and may have indirect illumination. 
(3)  For churches, schools, or public buildings: Bulletin boards or identification signs, not to exceed 20 square feet in area, shall be permitted; such bulletin board or identification sign shall indicate nothing other that name and/or address of the premises, and schedule of services or other information relevant to the operation of the premises. Such sign shall be located not closer than one-half the required setbacks and may have indirect illumination. 
(4)  Only one sign per street frontage shall be permitted. 
(5)  Flashing, intermittent illumination or portable signs on wheels are prohibited. 
(6)  Billboards and other advertising structures are prohibited. 
(7)  Signs permitted in the planned residential districts will be determined as part of the development plan review process. 
(8)  Temporary signs, condominium and subdivision entrance signs subject to general sign regulations. 
Sec. 11.11. - Signs in central business district signs. 
(1)  Any number of attached on remise signs, provided that the total area of all such signs as located per wall face shall not exceed five (5) percent of the total of such wall face area, to a maximum area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet per wall face. 
(2)  On lots or tracts of land having only one (1) occupant, tenant, or commercial or business enterprise, one (1) detached on-premise[s] sign having a maximum area of thirty-six (36) square feet on a side per two hundred fifty (250) feet of street frontage or fraction thereof, provided however, that where additional signs are permitted because frontage is in excess of two hundred fifty (250) feet, such signs shall not be placed closer than one hundred (100) feet to another detached sign on the same property. If such lot or tract of land has frontage on more than one (1) street, such as on a street corner or intersection, one (1) additional detached sign, subject to the above restrictions, may be erected for each additional abutting street segment which equals or exceeds one hundred (100) feet in length, and shall be erected and located on the property immediately abutting such additional street segment. 
(3)  On lots or tracts of land having two (2) or more occupants, tenants, or commercial or business enterprises, one (1) detached business center sign having a maximum area of sixty-four (64) square feet on a side per two hundred fifty (250) feet of street frontage or fraction thereof, provided however, that where additional signs are permitted because of frontage in excess of two hundred fifty (250) feet, such signs shall not be placed closer than one hundred (100) feet to another detached sign on the same property. If such lot or tract of land has frontage on more than one (1) street, such as on a street corner or intersection, one (1) additional detached business center sign, subject to the above restrictions, may be erected for each additional abutting street segment which equals or exceeds one hundred (100) feet in length, and shall be erected and located on the property immediately abutting such additional street segment. 
(4)  Marquee and marquee signs on theaters, may, in addition to all other signs permitted by this section, extend over the public sidewalk (but not over any part of the street or street curb). 
(5)  Condominium and apartment identification signs complying with the general sign regulations. 
(6)  Subdivision entrance signs complying with the general sign regulations. 
(7)  Temporary signs as permitted under general sign regulations. 
Sec. 11.12. - Signs in business districts, office, and specialty districts. 
(1)  On lots or tracts of land having only one (1) occupant, tenant, or commercial or business enterprise, any number of attached on-premise[s] signs is permitted, provided however, that the total area of all such signs shall not exceed 10% of the wall area upon which the signage is placed or one hundred (100) square feet, whichever is less, none of which shall extend above the roof line of the building. In addition, those businesses or establishments which have building frontage in excess of one hundred (100) feet, may display an additional two (2) square feet of attached signage for each additional foot of building frontage in excess of one hundred (100) feet, to a maximum area of two hundred (200) square feet. 
(2)  On lots or tracts of land having two (2) or more occupants, tenants, or commercial or business enterprises, any number of attached on-premise[s] signs, provided however, that the total area of all such signs per individual occupant, tenant, or enterprise shall not exceed 10% of the wall area of the business on which said sign is placed, or one hundred (100) square feet, whichever is less, none of which shall extend above the building. In addition, those businesses or establishments which are utilized or operated as a separate business or establishment and which have store or establishment frontage in excess of one hundred (100) feet, may display an additional two (2) square feet of attached signage for each additional foot of store or establishment frontage in excess of one hundred (100) feet, to a maximum area of two hundred (200) square feet. 
(3)  On lots or tracts of land having only one (1) occupant, tenant, or commercial or business enterprise, one (1) detached on-premise[s] sign having a maximum area of one hundred (100) square feet on a side per two hundred fifty (250) feet of street frontage or fraction thereof, provided however, that where additional signs are permitted because of frontage in excess of two hundred fifty (250) feet, such signs shall not be placed closer than one hundred (100) feet to another detached sign on the same property. If such lot or tract of land has frontage on more than one (1) street, such as on a street corner or intersection, one (1) additional detached sign, subject to the above restrictions, may be erected for each additional abutting street segment which equals or exceeds one hundred (100) feet in length, and shall be erected and located on the property immediately abutting such additional street segment. Where businesses locate an attached and detached sign, the total area of combined signage for the property may not exceed the maximum allowable for either attached or detached signs. 
(4)  On lots or tracts of land having two (2) or more occupants, tenants, or commercial or business enterprises, one (1) detached business center sign having a maximum area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet on a side per two hundred fifty (250) feet of street frontage or fraction thereof, provided however, that where additional signs are permitted because of frontage in excess of two hundred fifty (250) feet, such signs shall not be placed closer than one hundred (100) feet to another detached sign on the same property. If such lot or tract of land has frontage on more than one (1) street, such as on a street corner or intersection, one (1) additional detached business center sign, subject to the above restrictions, may be erected for each additional abutting street segment which equals or exceeds one hundred (100) feet in length, and shall be erected and located on the property immediately abutting such additional street segment. 
(5)  Condominium and apartment identification signs complying with the general sign regulations. 
(6)  Subdivision entrance signs complying with the general sign regulations. 
(7)  Temporary signs as permitted under general sign regulations. 
Sec. 11.13. - Signs in business districts-industrial. 
(1)  On lots or tracts of land having only one (1) occupant, tenant, or commercial or business enterprise, any number of attached on-premise[s] signs, provided however, that the total area of all such signs shall not exceed 10% of the wall area upon which the signage is placed or one hundred (100) square feet, whichever is less, none of which shall extend above the roof line of the building. In addition, those businesses or establishments which have building frontage in excess of one hundred (100) feet may display an additional two (2) square feet of attached signage for each additional foot of building frontage in excess of one hundred (100) feet, to a maximum area of two hundred (200) square feet. 
(2)  On lots or tracts of land having two (2) or more occupants, tenants, or commercial or business enterprises, any number of attached on-premise[s] signs, provided however, that the total area of all such signs per individual occupant, tenant, or enterprise shall not exceed 10% of the wall area of the business in which the sign is placed or one hundred (100) square feet, whichever is less, none of which shall extend above the roof line of the building. In addition, those businesses or establishments which are utilized or operated as a separate business or establishment and which have store or establishment frontage in excess of one hundred (100) feet, may display an additional two (2) square feet of attached signage for each additional foot of store or establishment frontage in excess of one hundred (100) feet, to a maximum area of two hundred (200) square feet. 
(3)  On lots or tracts of land having only one (1) occupant, tenant, or commercial or business enterprise, one (1) detached on-premise[s] sign having a maximum area of one hundred (100) feet on a side per two hundred fifty (250) feet of strong frontage or fraction thereof, provided, however, that where additional signs are permitted because of frontage in excess of two hundred fifty (250) feet, such signs shall not be placed closer than one hundred (100) feet to another detached sign on the same property. If such lot or tract of land has frontage on more than (1) street, such as on a street corner or intersection, one (1) additional detached sign, subject to the above restrictions, may be erected for each additional abutting street segment, which equals or exceeds one hundred (100) feet in length, and shall be erected and located on the property immediately abutting such additional street segment. Where businesses locate an attached and detached sign, the total area of combined signage for the property may not exceed the maximum allowable for either attached or detached signs. 
(4)  On lots or tracts of land having two (2) or more occupants, tenants, or commercial or business enterprises, one (1) detached business center sign having a maximum area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet on a side per two hundred fifty (250) feet of street frontage or fraction thereof, provided however, that where additional signs are permitted because of frontage in excess of two hundred fifty (250) feet, such signs shall not be placed closer to another detached sign on the same property than one hundred (100) feet. If such lot or tracts of land has frontage on more than one (1) street, such as on a street corner or intersection, one (1) additional detached business center sign, subject to the above restrictions, may be erected for each additional abutting street segment which equals or exceeds one hundred (100) feet in length, and shall be erected and located on the property immediately abutting such additional street segment. 
Sec. 11.14. - Signs in institutional and specialty districts. 
(1)  On lots or tracts of land having only one (1) occupant, tenant or commercial or business enterprise, any number of attached on-premise[s] signs, provided however, that the total area of all such signs shall not exceed 10% of the wall area upon which the signage is placed, or one hundred (100) square feet, whichever is less, none of which shall extend above the roof line of the building. In addition, those businesses or establishments which have building frontage in excess of one hundred (100) feet, may display an additional two (2) square feet of attached signage for each additional foot of building frontage in excess of one hundred (100) feet, to a maximum area of two hundred (200) square feet. 
(2)  On lots or tracts of land having two or more occupants, tenants, or commercial or business enterprises, any number of attached on-premise[s] signs, provided however, that the total area of all such signs per individual occupant, tenant, or enterprise shall not exceed 10% of the wall area on which the sign is placed or one hundred (100) square feet, whichever is less, none of which shall extend above the roof line of the building. In addition, those businesses or establishments which are utilized or operated as a separate business or establishment and which have store or establishment frontage in excess of one hundred (100) feet may display an additional two (2) square feet of attached signage for each additional foot of store or establishment frontage in excess of one hundred (100 feet) to a maximum area of two hundred (200) square feet. 
(3)  On lots or tracts of land having only one (1) occupant, tenant, or commercial or business enterprise, one (1) detached on-premise[s] sign having a maximum of thirty-six (36) square feet on a side per two hundred fifty (250) feet of street frontage or fraction thereof, provided however, that where additional signs are permitted because of frontage in excess of two hundred fifty (250) feet, such signs shall not be placed closer than one hundred (100) feet to another detached sign on the same property. If such lot or tract of land has frontage on more than one (1) street, such as on a street corner or intersection, one (1) detached sign, subject to the above restrictions may be erected for each additional abutting street segment which equals or exceeds one hundred (100) feet in length, and shall be erected and located on the property immediately abutting such additional street segment. Where businesses locate an attached and detached sign, the total area of combined signage for the property may not exceed the maximum allowable for either attached or detached signs. 
(4)  On lots or tracts of land having two (2) or more occupants, tenants, or enterprises, one (1) detached business center sign having a maximum area of 200 square feet allowed. Additional sign area may be allowed for hotels, hospitals and planned development in accordance with a development approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
Sec. 11.15. - Off-premise[s] signs/billboards. 
    Off-premise[s] signs having a maximum area of six hundred seventy-two (672) square feet on a side, a maximum height of forty (40) feet, and a maximum length of forty-eight (48) feet are allowed in business districts where they are a permitted use, provided that the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Such signs shall not be located, erected, or maintained closer than one thousand (1000) feet from another detached off-premise[s] sign, measured on the same side of the street; and 
(2)  Such signs shall not be located, erected or maintained closer that two hundred (200) feet from the border of any residential district; and 
(3)  Such signs shall not be located, erected, or maintained closer than one hundred (100) feet from the intersection of any public highways or street; and 
(4)  Such signs shall comply with the setback requirements; 
(5)  Neither such signs themselves, not the trim, apron, supports, or structural members of such signs, other than poles, shall obstruct visibility between the heights of three and one-half (31/2) feet and ten (10 feet), as measured from the street level; and 
(6)  Poles supporting such signs shall not exceed forty (40) inches in diameter, and 
(7)  There shall be no more than one (1) such sign on any one (1) pole, support, or sign structure; 
(8)  An off-premise[s] sign may not be located on the same parcel with another commercial use and must be located on a property meeting other district requirements. 
Sec. 11.16. - Setback requirements. 
(1)  All off-premise[s] detached signs shall be located, erected, and maintained so that neither the sign itself nor any part of supporting member thereof extends over the front, rear, or side yard setback. 
(2)  In all districts other than residential districts, unless otherwise specifically provided, temporary signs shall be located as follows: 
(a)  No such signs shall be located within ten (10) feet of a public right-of-way; and 
(b)  If located in a setback area, but not closer than ten (10) feet from a public right-of-way, such signs shall not exceed three and one-half (31/2) feet in height; and 
(c)  If located more than ten (10) feet from a public right-of-way and not within any setback area, such signs shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. 
(3)  Temporary signs located in residential districts which do not exceed six (6) square feet in area or six (6) feet in height may be located, erected, and maintained in the front, rear, or side yard setback up to the public right-of-way. 
(4)  All other detached signs shall be located, erected and maintained so that neither the sign itself nor any part of supporting member thereof extends into, over, or is located, within ten (10) feet of an abutting public street right-of-way, or extends into, over, or is located within any applicable front, rear, or side yard setback, the greater of which shall apply. 
(5)  All on-premise[s] attached signs shall be located, erected, and maintained so that neither the sign itself nor any part thereof extends more than fourteen (14) inches over the applicable front, rear, or side yard setback. 
(6)  Where property is situated at the intersection of public street or highways, and there is no applicable setback for one (1) or more of the street or highway frontages, the front setback shall apply as the applicable setback. 
Sec. 11.17. - Maintenance and appearance of signs. 
(1)  All signs shall be maintained in good condition, so as to present a neat and orderly appearance. The department of building and inspections may cause to be removed, after due notice, any sign that shows gross neglect or becomes dilapidated. 
Sec. 11.18. - Illegal and nonconforming signs. 
(1)  It is intended to eliminate nonconforming signs, except as otherwise specifically set forth in this section. Any lawfully erected sign, the maintenance of which is made lawful by this ordinance may continue to be maintained exactly as such existing at the time when the maintenance thereof became otherwise unlawful under the provisions of this ordinance. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided for, nonconforming signs may remain in use and may be maintained. However: 
(a)  If such sign is altered; or 
(b)  If at any time after six (6) months from the effective date of this article said sign requires repairs of a value in excess of fifty (50) percent of its replacement value, exclusive of foundations and supports; or 
(c)  If after such time it is destroyed to the extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its replacement value, exclusive of foundations and supports; or 
(d)  As respects an on-premise[s] sign only, if the use of said on-premise[s] sign is abandoned for a period of ninety (90) days, or changes so that it advertises a business, activity, product, or service of a different type, category, or nature than the business, activity, product, or service which it advertised before the change; then in any of said instances, said sign shall lose its conforming status, and shall be deemed as an illegal sign and shall be made to conform to all provisions of this article, or be removed. As used herein, "abandoned" shall be taken to refer to a sign which advertises an activity or business no long being conducted, or a service or product no longer being offered or produced, on the premises where such sign is located. 
(3)  No person may engage in any activity that causes an increase in the extent of nonconformity of a nonconforming sign. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, no conforming sign may be enlarged or altered in such a manner as to cause a nonconforming condition, nor may illumination be added to any conforming sign. 
(4)  A nonconforming sign may not be moved or replaced except to bring it into complete conformity with this article. 
(5)  No detached sign shall be erected on the same lot with an existing nonconforming detached sign until the nonconforming sign has been removed or made to conform to the provision of this article; provided however, such provision shall not apply to an off-premise[s] detached sign which is or could be deemed nonconforming solely by virtue of the spacing requirements of this article for off premise[s] signs. 
(6)  No nonconforming sign: 
(a)  Shall be changed to another nonconforming sign; 
(b)  Shall have any changes made in the words or symbols used or the message displayed on the sign unless the sign is an off-premise[s] advertising sign, or a bulletin board, or substantially similarly type of sign, specifically designed for periodic change of message; 
(c)  Shall be structurally altered so as to prolong the life of the sign or so as to change the shape, size, type or design of the sign; 
(d)  Shall be re-established after the activity, business or usage to which it relates has been discontinued for 30 days or longer; or 
(e)  Shall be re-established after damage or destruction if the estimated expense for reconstruction exceeds 50% of the reproduction cost. 
Sec. 11.19. - Sign removal and repair. 
(1)  Unsafe signs. If the department of building and inspections shall find that any sign or any part of any sign is in danger of falling, or presents a hazard from electrical shock or fire, or is otherwise unsafe, insecure, or a menace to the public, she/he shall give written notice to the owner, agent, or person having the beneficial interest in such sign, or in the building or the premises on which such sign is located. If the sign was conforming in all other respects at the time notice was given, repairs of the condition prompting the notice shall be made within thirty (30) days. If the sign had been deemed nonconforming pursuant to section 25-80 at the time notice was given, and if no more than six (6) month time has elapsed since the effective date of this article, such sign shall be permitted to remain, but shall be subject to the above thirty-day repair requirement. However, after six (6) months from the effective date of this article, if repairs required to a nonconforming sign under this section are in excess of fifty (50) percent of its replacement value, or if not brought into conformance with this article within thirty (30) days shall not be repaired and continue to function as a nonconforming sign. 
    If the repair or removal of an unsafe sign is not accomplished within the above mandated thirty (30) day period, the department of building and inspections is hereby authorized to cause the sign to be removed forthwith at the expense of the owner, agent, or person having the beneficial interest in such sign, or in the building or premises on which such sign is located. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the building director is authorized to cause any sign to be removed summarily and without notice, at the expense of the owner, agent, or person having the beneficial interest in such sign, or in the building or premises on which such sign is located, whenever she/he determines that such sign is an immediate and imminent peril to persons or property. 
(2)  Obsolete signs. Any sign, whether existing on or erected after the effective date of this article, which advertises a business or activity no longer being conducted, or a service or product no longer being offered or produced, shall be removed by the owner, agent, or person having the beneficial interest in such sign, or in the building or premises on which the sign is located, within ninety (90) days of the cessation of such business, service, sale, or production. 
    If the department of building and inspections shall find that any such sign contemplated by the above paragraph has not been removed within the above mandated ninety-day period, she/he shall give written notice to the owner, agent, or person having the beneficial interest in such sign, or in the building or premises on which such sign is located. Removal of the sign shall be effected within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice from the building inspection officer. If such sign has not been removed at the conclusion of such ten-day period. The building inspection officer is hereby authorized to cause the sign to be removed forthwith at the expense of the owner, agent, or person having the beneficial interest in such sign, or in the building or premises on which such sign is located. 
(3)  Permit limitation. No sign permit shall be issued for any premises where there exists an unsafe or obsolete sign as defined above, until the provisions of (a) [(1)] and (b) [(2)] above have been complied with. 
Sec. 11.20. - Appeal. 
(1)  Any decision of the building inspection officer made in the administration and enforcement of this article may be appealed to the board of zoning adjustment, subject to the provisions of section 11-52-80, et. seq., Code of Alabama, 1975. 
Sec. 11.21. - Other codes applicable. 
(1)  All signs shall comply with the other provisions of the Code of Bessemer, Alabama, as amended from time to time, and all codes incorporated by reference into such Code. 
Sec. 11.22. - Severability. 
(1)  The requirements and provisions of this article are severable, and should any section or part thereof be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, the decision of the court shall not affect the validity of this article as a whole nor any section or part thereof, other than the section or part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
APPENDIX [1A]. - APPLICATION FOR REZONING[2] 
City of Bessemer 
Application for Rezoning 
Planning & Zoning Commission 
Date: ____________ 
Name of Applicant: ____________ Phone: ____________ 
Address ____________ City ____________ State ____________ Zip Code ____________ 
Owner of Property: ____________ Phone: ____________ 
Address ____________ City ____________ State ____________ Zip Code ____________ 
Legal Description of Property: Map Book: ____________ Page: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Address of Property: ____________ City ____________ State ____________ Zip Code ____________ 
Parcel Identification Number: ____________ 
Zone Requested: ____________ 
Present Use: ____________ 
Scheduled for Hearing: ____________ 
Zone Requested: ____________ 
Proposed Use: ____________ 
Reason for Rezoning Request: ____________ 
? Attached Tax Map of Property Showing Zoning & Zoning of Adjacent Property. 
? Attached Copy of Ownership Deed. 
? Attached Preliminary Site Plan. 
? Attached Additional Pages as Necessary. 
____________ ____________ 
Applicant Signature 
____________ ____________ 
Disposition 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Appendix A within the zoning regulations adopted by the city council in Ordinance No. 3391, adopted September 16, 2008, has been renumbered to Appendix 1A. This change is indicated in brackets for clarity. 

APPENDIX [1B]. - APPLICATION FOR RESURVEY PLAT[3] 
City of Bessemer 
Application for Resurvey Plat 
Date ____________ 
Name of Subdivision ____________ 
Name of Applicant ____________ 
Owner of Record ____________ 
Surveyor ____________ 
Property Address ____________ 
Parcel Identification Number ____________ 
Previous Subdivision Name ____________ 
____________ ____________ 
Lot Numbers (Attach Plat Map of Original Subdivision) 
Existing Parcel Zoning ____________ 
Name of Applicant ____________ 
Will The Property Require Rezoning? ? YES ? NO 
Proposed Zoning ____________ 
Will Public Improvements be Required by Resurvey? ? YES ? NO 
? Attach five (5) copies of resurvey plat. 
I, ____________ hereby depose and say that all the above statements and the statements contained in the papers submitted herewith are true. 
Signature ____________ Title ____________ 
Address ____________ City ____________ State ____________ Zip Code ____________ 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Appendix B within the zoning regulations as adopted by the city council in Ordinance No. 3391, adopted September 16, 2008, has been renumbered to Appendix 1B. This change is indicated in brackets for clarity. 

APPENDIX [1C]. - APPLICATION FOR PRELIMINARY/FINAL PLAT[4] 
City of Bessemer 
Application for Preliminary or Final Plat 
DATE: ____________ 
Name of Subdivision ____________ ____________ 
Applicant Name ____________ Phone Number ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Address ____________ City ____________ State ____________ Zip Code ____________ 
Owner of Record ____________ Phone Number ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Address ____________ City ____________ State ____________ Zip Code ____________ 
Engineer ____________ Phone Number ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Address ____________ City ____________ State ____________ Zip Code ____________ 
Land Surveyor ____________ Phone Number ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Address ____________ City ____________ State ____________ Zip Code ____________ 
Attorney ____________ Phone Number ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Address ____________ City ____________ State ____________ Zip Code ____________ 
Subdivision located on the ____________ Side of ____________ feet ____________ of ____________ 
(Left, Right) (Street) (Direction) (Street) 
Total Acreage ____________ Number of Lots ____________ 
Legal Description of Subdivision ____________ 1/4 of ____________ 1/4 of Section ____________ Township ____________ Range ____________ ? Attached Legal 
Parcel Identification Number: ____________ ? Attached Tax Map 
Present Zoning: ____________ Will the property require rezoning: ____________ Proposed Zoning: ____________ 
Attach Utility Availability Letters: ? Water ? Sewer ? Power ? Phone 
Type of Bonding Required for Public Improvements: ____________ 
? Attached five (5) copies of the proposed vicinity sketch map and preliminary sketch plan or final plat. 
I, ____________ , hereby depose and say that all the above statements and the statements contained in the papers submitted herewith are true. 
Signature ____________ Title ____________ 
Address ____________ City ____________ State ____________ Zip Code ____________ 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Appendix C within the zoning regulations as adopted by the city council in Ordinance No. 3391, adopted September 16, 2008, has been renumbered to Appendix 1C. This change is indicated in brackets for clarity. 

APPENDIX [1D]. - APPLICATION FOR VARIANCE[5] 
City of Bessemer 
Zoning Board of Adjustment 
TELEPHONE ____________ DATE ____________ 
APPLICANT ____________ ADDRESS ____________ 
OWNER ____________ ADDRESS ____________ 
LOCATION OF PROPERTY ____________ ____________ 
(Street and Number/Subdivision and Lot Number) 
    Note- Fill in Section 1, 2, or 3 as appropriate. Do not fill in more than one of these sections. This application is not acceptable unless all required statements have been made. Additional information may be supplied on separate sheets if the space provided is inadequate. 
Sec. 1. Appeal from decision of building official. 
Relation to the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance 
Describe decision of the Building Official from which appeal is made: ____________ 
____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Provision of the Zoning Ordinance or district boundary in question: ____________ 
____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Sec. 2. Application for an adjustment. 
As required by the Zoning Ordinance 
Provision of the Zoning Ordinance Requiring a Special Exception in this case: ____________ 
____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Description of proposed use showing justification for a Special Exception: ____________ 
____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Sec. 3. Application for an adjustment. 
As required by the Zoning Ordinance 
Provision of the Zoning Ordinance from which an adjustment is requested: ____________ 
____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Peculiar or unusual conditions which justify an adjustment is requested: ____________ 
____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
STATUS 
Building Permit Number ____________ Date ____________ Signed ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Date this Application Filed ____________ 
Notice of Hearing ____________ 
Advertised On ____________ 
Date of Hearing ____________ 
Notice Mailed To ____________ 
APPLICANT 
DECISION 
Granted 
Application or appeal denied in accordance with terms of the following resolution: 
____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Date ____________      ____________ / ____________ / ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ 
Chairman, Zoning Board of Adjustment 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Appendix D within the zoning regulations as adopted by the city council in Ordinance No. 3391, adopted September 16, 2008, has been renumbered to Appendix 1D. This change is indicated in brackets for clarity. 

Appendix C - MUNICIPAL FINES[1] 
Sec. 1. Comprehensive fine Ordinance No. 3057. 
1.  The schedule of fines for Ordinance Number 3057 (Regulation of the Production of Noise), section 401(1) [Code of Ala. 1995, § 78-118], is hereby adopted as follows: 
First violation $100.00 Second and subsequent violations  200.00  
2.  All other requirements and regulations of Ordinance Number 3057 will hereby remain in full force and effect. 
3.  The schedule of fines for section 98-192 Code of Ordinances, City of Bessemer, (Abandoning a motor vehicle) is hereby adopted as follows: 
First violation $ 50.00 Second violation  100.00 Third violation  150.00 Fourth violation  200.00  
4.  All other requirements and regulations of section 98-192 Code of Ordinances, City of Bessemer, will hereby remain in full force and effect. 
5.  The schedule of fines for section 90-36 Code of Ordinances, City of Bessemer, (Accumulation of rubbish) is hereby adopted as follows: 
First violation $100.00 Second and subsequent violations  200.00  
6.  All other requirements and regulations of section 90-36 Code of Ordinances, City of Bessemer, will hereby remain in full force and effect. 
7.  The schedule of fines for section 90-2 Code of Ordinances, City of Bessemer, (Dumping on streets and thoroughfares) is hereby adopted as follows: 
First violation $250.00 Second violation  500.00  
8.  All other requirements and regulations of section 90-2 Code of Ordinances, City of Bessemer, will hereby remain in full force and effect. 
9.  The schedule of fines for section 14-4 Code of Ordinances, City of Bessemer, (Dogs running at large) is hereby amended as follows: 
First violation $100.00 Second violation (within 2 years)  200.00  
10.  All other requirements and regulations of section 14-4 Code of Ordinances, City of Bessemer, will hereby remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 3183, 4-23-2002) 
Chapter 14 
ANIMALS 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL 
Sec. 14-4. Penalty amounts. 
    The minimum penalty or fine for violations of this chapter shall be as follows: 
(1)  Failure to procure a license tag (section 14-51): $25.00 
(2)  A noisy dog (section 14-56): $25.00 
(3)  A dog running at large within the corporate limits of the city (section 14-58): $25.00 
(4)  Violation of the leash law (section 14-60): $25.00 
(Code 1995, § 14-4; Ord. No. 1895, § 3, 5-6-1975) 
ARTICLE II. DOGS 
Sec. 14-53. Same-Fee; vaccination certificate. 
    Pursuant to subsection 14-53(d) of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Bessemer the following fee and fine schedule pertaining to dogs situated within the City of Bessemer, is set as follows: 
(1)  The annual dog tag issuance fee required under subsection 14-53(a) is set at $5.00 for each dog up to a maximum of five dogs. 
(2)  The annual dog tag issuance fee required under subsection 14-53(b) is set at $30.00 maximum where five or more dogs all belonging to the same person are in the same kennel, humane society or pet shop. 
(3)  The delinquent fee required under section 14-54 is set at $10.00 for each dog tag issuance fee not paid by the last day of February. 
(4)  The minimum penalty or fine for violation of chapter 14 is hereby established at $25.00 as required under section 14-4. 
(Ord. No. 3489, § 1, 12-4-2012) 
Chapter 18 
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE VII. HOUSING CODE 
Sec. 18-177. Schedule of minimum penalties and fines for violations of housing code; citations. 
(a)  There is hereby established a schedule of minimum penalties and fines for violations of offenses defined in the housing code of the city and for the dumping of rubbish or spilling loads from trucks onto city streets or in an unauthorized place within the city limits. The schedule of fines is as follows: 
(1)  Defective or nonapproved garbage container: $2.00. 
(2)  No garbage container: $5.00. 
(3)  A person storing rubbish on his premises: $10.00. 
(4)  Truck or vehicle dumping rubbish in an unauthorized place: $20.00. 
(5)  Truck spilling loads onto city street: $20.00. 
(b)  The city clerk and treasurer is hereby authorized to have printed appropriate citations which reflect the foregoing fines and which may be given by any city employee upon the observation of any violation of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1995, § 18-182; Ord. No. 2125, §§ 1, 2, 2-24-1981) 
Chapter 62 
HEALTH AND SANITATION 
ARTICLE VII. SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES 
Sec. 62-103. Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who willfully smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited under this article; or any business proprietor or person in charge of a public place who fails or refuses to designate smoking and nonsmoking areas as required herein, or who refuses to enforce the designation, shall be in violation of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to violate any of the terms and provisions of this article. Any person violating any of the terms and provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not less than $25.00 nor more than the maximum penalty allowed by the state for a misdemeanor violation for each such offense. On each occurrence any violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 3351, § VIII, 11-6-2007) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is a schedule of municipal fines that have been established by the city council. Parenthetical history notes following the fine provisions indicate the section number within the Code where the fine was established, the ordinance or resolution number from which the fine was derived, and any amendment to that originating legislation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. 

Appendix D - MUNICIPAL FEES[1] 
Chapter 2 
ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE II. CITY COUNCIL 
Sec. 2-23. Qualification fees. 
(a)  A qualification fee in the amount of $50.00 is hereby fixed and imposed upon all candidates seeking election as mayor of the city, except as hereinafter provided for. 
(b)  A qualification fee in the amount of $50.00 is hereby fixed and imposed upon all candidates seeking election as councilmember of the city, except as hereinafter provided for. 
(c)  The qualification fee shall be paid to the city clerk and deposited to the general fund of the city at or prior to the time of taking out qualification papers by any such candidates. 
(d)  Any person desiring to qualify who is not financially able to pay the required fee may qualify provided such prospective candidate furnishes the clerk with an affidavit stating that he is financially unable to pay the required fee fixed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 3178, §§ 1-4, 5-7-2002) 
Chapter 6 
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
Sec. 6-7. Transfer of licenses; fee. 
(a)  Licenses issued pursuant to this section may not be assigned. Upon written application, and subject to the approval by the state alcoholic beverage control board, the city is authorized to transfer any license from one person to another, or from one place to another within its jurisdiction, or both. No transfer shall be made to a person who would not have been eligible to receive the license originally, nor for the transaction of business at a place for which the license could not originally have been issued lawfully. 
(b)  No license shall be transferred in any event more than one time during the term of the license. 
(c)  A fee of $25.00 shall be paid by the applicant upon the filing of an application to transfer any alcoholic beverage license. This fee shall not be refunded even if the application is denied. 
(Code 1995, § 6-7; Ord. No. 2233, § 1(3-6), 9-21-1984; Ord. No. 2291, § 1, 12-17-1985) 
Chapter 10 
AMUSEMENTS 
ARTICLE III. BINGO 
DIVISION 2. PERMIT 
Sec. 10-83. Application; form; fee; expiry; renewal; contents. 
    Any qualified organizations desiring to obtain a permit to operate bingo games shall make application to the chief of police on forms prescribed by the chief of police and shall pay an annual fee of $150.00. No permit shall be issued to any qualified organization unless such organization has been in existence in the county for 24 months immediately prior to the issuance of the permit. Such permit will expire at midnight on December 31, following the granting of such permit. Renewal application for each calendar year shall be filed with the chief of police prior to December 31 of each year and shall be on a form prescribed by the chief of police. Each application for a permit and each application for renewal of a permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and home address of the applicant and, if the applicant is a corporation, association or other similar legal entity, the names and home addresses of each of the officers of the organization as well as the names and addresses of the directors, or other person similarly situated, of the organization. 
(2)  The names and home addresses of each of the persons who will be operating or promoting the bingo game. 
(3)  The names and home addresses of any persons, organizations or other legal entities that will act as surety for the applicant, or to whom the applicant is financially indebted, or to whom any financial obligation is owed by the applicant. 
(4)  The location at which the applicant will conduct the bingo games. 
(5)  A statement showing the convictions, if any, for criminal offenses, other than minor traffic offenses, of each of the persons listed in subsections (1), (2) and (3) of this section. 
(6)  Any other necessary and reasonable information which the chief of police may require. 
(7)  The chief of police shall make recommendation to the city council as to whether the permit requested shall be issued. 
The city council shall refuse to grant a bingo permit to any applicant who fails to fully provide the information required by this section. 
(Code 1995, § 10-77; Ord. No. 2108, § 3, 10-7-1980; Ord. No. 2578, § 1-A, 11-24-1992) 
Sec. 10-87. Special permit; application; fee; grounds for issuance; contents; term; number; transferral. 
(a)  Upon special application submitted by a qualified organization licensed pursuant to section 10-83 and upon the applicant's payment of a fee of $50.00 to the city, the city council may issue a special permit for conducting bingo at locations and on days other than those set forth in its annual permit. 
(b)  A qualified organization which does not hold a permit pursuant to section 10-84 may apply for a special permit for conducting bingo at a designated location for a special occasion. Such an applicant shall submit to the chief of police a written application prepared in accordance with and on a form prescribed by rule of the chief of police. The application shall include the information required by section 10-83(3) except that the applicant shall indicate the day on which the applicant will conduct bingo for the special occasion. Upon a determination by the chief of police that the applicant is a qualified organization and is not ineligible pursuant to section 10-86, and, upon the applicant's payment of the fee required under this subsection to the city clerk and treasurer, the city council may issue a special permit. A separate fee shall be charged if the applicant will conduct bingo on only one day under the special permit, the fee shall be $25.00 or if the applicant will conduct bingo on more than one day under the special permit, the fee shall be $50.00. 
(c)  A special permit shall contain the name and address of the permit holder and shall specify the location at which the permit holder may conduct bingo, the days not exceeding two consecutive days on which the permit holder may conduct and the number of bingo games which the permit holder may conduct for the special occasion. 
(d)  A qualified organization licensed pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall not be issued more than two special permits in any one-year period. A special permit is not assignable nor transferable. 
(Code 1995, § 10-81; Ord. No. 2108, § 5, 10-7-1980) 
ARTICLE IV. MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND CENTERS 
Sec. 10-123. Application for license, fee, term. 
(a)  Applications for an amusement center license and MAD sticker or decal shall be made to the city revenue department on a form provided by the revenue department, and shall be in accordance with the provisions of this section. The application for license, sticker or decal shall be verified and state, among other things: 
(1)  The number and type of machines or devices intended to be operated; 
(2)  The proposed locations for such machines or devices; 
(3)  The proposed business address, the full name of the business; 
(4)  The owner, description, model and serial number of each MAD; and 
(5)  The full name, present address and date of birth of each and every owner of such business. 
(b)  The application for an amusement center license shall be accompanied by an annual license fee of $1,000.00. 
(c)  The amount of the license fee for each MAD shall be based upon the following factors, whether: 
(1)  Twenty five dollars if the MAD dispenses no rewards except free play, or if it dispenses or the player is awarded coupons, certificates, or tickets valued in the amount of one cent (1/100 one dollar) or less per play; or 
(2)  The license fee shall be $200.00 if the MAD dispenses or the player is awarded coupons, certificates, or tickets valued in an amount greater than one cent (1/100 one dollar) per play. 
(d)  The application for an amusement center shall also be accompanied by a drawing showing the floor plan of the proposed business, all exits, the proposed location of each MAD, and its floorspace requirement as required under the building code of the city. 
(e)  An application for a MAD license shall be accompanied by a drawing showing the proposed location of each MAD. 
(f)  No license shall be issued until such time as the fire department has determined that the proposed location of each MAD will not interfere with egress from the building in case of fire, and that all fire regulations and life safety codes have been satisfied. 
(g)  No such licenses shall be issued until such time as the building department has determined that all electrical, pneumatic and hydraulic connections to each MAD comply with the this Code, and that all building and zoning regulations have been satisfied. 
(h)  No license shall be issued until such time as the police department has verified the accuracy of the information set forth in the application. No license shall be issued for any MAD if the police department finds that said MAD is a gambling device as defined by the statutes and courts of the state. Should said application be incomplete or contain material inaccuracies, same shall be grounds for denial of the license. In addition, the police department shall investigate as to the possible criminal record of the applicant or the officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation. Should it be determined that any of said parties have, within two years prior to the date of the application, been convicted of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or involving the operation of an amusement center, or of any felony, said conviction shall be grounds for denial of a license. 
(i)  If, after the issuance of any license, the licensee desires to operate additional MAD's or to relocate those MAD's already in place, the applicant shall submit an amended application, in a form similar to the original application, showing, the additions, changes or modifications desired. Any drawings, or other information filed with the original license application and not affected by the additions, changes or modifications requested may be incorporated by reference in the amended application. 
(Ord. No. 3116, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 3240, § 2, 5-4-2004; Ord. No. 3272, § 1, 11-2-2004) 
Sec. 10-129. Renewal procedure. 
(a)  Within 30 days of the expiration of the license, a licensee may apply to the director for renewal thereof, on such applications as shall be provided by the director. 
(b)  Renewal applications shall contain the name, address and license number of the licensee's operation, and further, licensee shall indicate any changes from the information furnished to the director at the time of the original application. 
(c)  An application for renewal of an amusement center license shall be accompanied by a renewal application fee of $1,000.00, no part of which shall be refundable. 
(d)  An application for renewal of a MAD license shall be accompanied by a renewal application fee of $200.00, no part of which shall be refundable. 
(Ord. No. 3116, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 3240, § 3, 5-4-2004) 
Chapter 14 
ANIMALS 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL 
Sec. 14-20. Dead animals-Removal; costs. 
(a)  No person shall permit any dead horse, cow, sheep or other animal carcass to remain within the city longer than a reasonable time for removing or burying the same, which shall be done in accordance with any of the county health department rules and regulations. 
(b)  The charge for removal by the city of any dead horse or cow shall be as $100.00. 
(Code 1973, § 5-46; Code 1995, § 14-20) 
ARTICLE II. DOGS 
Sec. 14-53. License tag-Fee; vaccination certificate. 
(a)  Before any dog license tag shall be issued for any dog, the applicant therefor shall pay the clerk and treasurer the sum of $1.00 a tag issuance fee. He shall deliver to the clerk and treasurer the certificate of some person authorized in section 14-114 to vaccinate dogs showing the name, color, breed, sex, weight and age of the dog for which a dog license tag is sought, and that the dog described in the certificate has been vaccinated by such authorized person in accordance with sections 14-113 and 14-114 and showing, also, the date of vaccination, the name of the manufacturer of the vaccine administered, the manufacturer's lot number of the vaccine administered, the number of cubic centimeters of vaccine administered and the method of administration of the vaccine. 
(b)  Where five or more dogs all belonging to the same person are in the same kennel, humane society or pet shop a maximum annual fee of $5.00 for the issuance of dog license tags for such dogs shall be charged. 
(c)  The clerk and treasurer shall not issue any license tag for any dog for any calendar year other than the calendar year in which such certificate shows the dog was vaccinated. 
(Code 1973, § 5-6; Code 1995, § 14-53) 
Sec. 14-54. Same-Delinquent license fee. 
    All licenses required by section 14-51 which have not been paid within the month of February of each year shall be delinquent. A delinquent fee of $1.00 shall be added to the amount of such license. 
(Code 1973, § 5-7; Code 1995, § 14-54) 
Sec. 14-92. Redemption prior to sale; fees. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the poundkeeper or any agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under this article, to take up and impound any animal running at large, found loose, or grazing or feeding in violation of this section. Such animal picked up by animal control will be kept for a period of two weeks. If after such time the animal is not claimed, animal control retains the right to sell said animal for a price of not more than $250.00 or release animal into the care of a charitable organization so designated by the city. 
(b)  If, before the day of sale, any animal so taken up and impounded is applied for by the owner or person entitled to its custody, it shall be released to the owner by the poundkeeper or any agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under this article, on the payment of the actual cost of impounding, feeding and maintaining such animal. 
(c)  The proceeds of all sales of any such animal taken up and impounded as aforesaid shall be paid into the revenue department, but if any surplus of proceeds of sale remain after paying the charges and expenses thereof and all expenses for impounding, feeding and maintaining such animal, such surplus shall be paid to the owner of the animal from the sale of which the proceeds were derived, upon satisfactory proof of the ownership being made. 
(d)  There is hereby established. An impoundment fee for all animals placed in the animal shelter operated by the city as follows: 
(1)  Dogs and cats. 
a.  Fifty dollars for the first time the animal is impounded within a 12-month period. 
b.  One hundred dollars for the second time the animal is impounded within a 12-month period. 
c.  Two hundred dollars for the third time the animal is impounded within a 12-month period. 
d.  Three hundred dollars for the fourth time the animal is impounded within a 12-month period. 
(2)  Large animals. Livestock; horse, mule, hog, sheep, goat, ox, cow, or other head of livestock. 
a.  Two hundred dollars for the first time the animal is impounded within a 12-month period. 
b.  Two hundred dollars for the second time the animal is impounded within a 12-month period. 
c.  Three hundred and fifty dollars for the third time the animal is impounded within a 12-month period. 
d.  Five hundred dollars for the fourth time the animal is impounded within a 12-month period. 
(e)  Additional fees. The owner of any animal impounded by the city will also be liable for the cost of maintenance, care, feed, or any other costs incurred in housing such animal. Such cost will be ascertained and determined by the poundkeeper or any agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 5-21; Code 1995, § 14-92; Ord. No. 3219, 5-27-2003) 
Chapter 18 
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL 
Sec. 18-4. Unused permits; refunds. 
    The city clerk and treasurer is authorized to make refunds of amounts paid for permits issued under this chapter at any time within 90 days after the issuance of the permits, provided the building inspection officer certifies in writing to the city clerk and treasurer as follows: The permit for which the refund is requested has not been utilized to begin any work, and no such work is planned. Any refund made under the provisions of this section shall be subject to an administrative charge of $25.00, which amount shall be deducted from the refund applied for. 
(Code 1995, § 18-4; Ord. No. 2551, § VII, 9-17-1991) 
Sec. 18-6. Permit-Double permit fees. 
    When work for which a permit is required by this chapter is commenced prior to the obtaining of a permit, the permit applicant shall be required to pay a $15.00 penalty, as provided by section 18-9, plus a double permit fee. In no event shall the applicant pay less than $36.00. The payment of the required fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with all of the requirements of all applicable regulations and codes of this chapter, nor shall it relieve them from being subject to any of the penalties therein. The double fee requirement shall be applicable to all divisions of the building and zoning department, as noted in this section. 
(Code 1973, § 10-13; Code 1995, § 18-6; Ord. No. 2551, § IX, 9-17-1991) 
Sec. 18-9. Citations for violations of chapter. 
(a)  The building inspection officer or any city police officer shall serve upon the owner of property or each person engaged in the activities regulated under this chapter, which activities are being conducted in violation of this chapter, a citation to appear in the municipal court at a time and date specified thereon to answer the charge of such violation of this chapter; provided, however, that prior to 12:00 noon on the date this matter is to be set before the municipal court, such person charged in such citation, if he has not previously settled or been convicted of three or more such violations within 12 months of the date of such citation, may dispose of the citation by settlement in the following manner: Pay involving payment to the clerk of the municipal court a fine for the offenses charged in the amount of $300.00, plus any and all charges otherwise payable to the city pursuant to the terms and conditions of this chapter. If the offense charged is the third such offense by the owner or person charged within 12 months from the date of such citations, settlement cannot be voluntarily made to the clerk of the municipal court as referred to in this section. If the settlement of the charges set out in the citation is not made prior to 12:00 noon of the date the case is set for trial in the municipal court, and if the party charged fails to appear and answer such charge in the municipal court at the time and place set out in such citation, or if the citation is not otherwise disposed of by such court, a warrant shall be issued charging such party with the violation set out in the citation, which warrant shall be obtained, served and tried as provided by law for the arrest and trial of the offenses involving violations of the ordinances of the city. If a person receiving a citation as provided in this section has, within the prescribed 12 months from the date such citation settled or been convicted of three or more such violations, he shall not be permitted to settle the instant alleged offense, but shall be required to stand trial in the municipal court. 
(b)  Once the warrant has been issued and tried before the municipal court, a person found guilty of such violations shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided according to the provisions of section 1-8, which shall include the payment of any fines levied by the municipal court, plus any court costs as provided and issued by the municipal court. 
(c)  The violation of a provision of this chapter as such provision is presently existing or as hereinafter modified or amended, shall be punished by the provisions of this chapter in the case of voluntary settlement, as provided in any general ordinance of the city. Each day such offense continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  All citations shall be signed by the building inspection officer finding such violations and shall be sent by certified mail to the contractor responsible for the permit or to the owner of the property on which the violation is found, as such owner's name and address appears in the records of the county tax assessor's office. 
(Code 1995, § 18-9; Ord. No. 2551, § XII, 9-17-1991) 
Sec. 18-10. Permit issuance fee. 
    There shall be a fee of $20.00 charged for the issuance of all building, plumbing, electrical, gas, house moving, and demolition permits. 
(Code 1995, § 18-10; Ord. No. 2014, § 1, 3-21-1978) 
ARTICLE II. BUILDING AND RESIDENTIAL CODE 
Sec. 18-34. Building permit fees. 
    Each person engaged in excavation work, building or constructing any individual building, remodeling, adding to air conditioning, roofing, reroofing, storage tanks, fire sprinkler systems or repairing any existing building shall submit plans of each building, construction, addition, remodeling, air conditioning, roofing, reroofing, or repair to the city. For the purpose of determining the fee for the issuance of a building permit, the evaluations of the requested work shall be determined by bona fide signed contracts or other evidence of cost as submitted by the persons requesting a building permit. However, in no event shall the evaluation of the requested work be less than the average cost of construction as set out in the Building Valuation Data (BVD) chart, as revised every six months, in the most current edition of the Building Safety Journal, which is published by the International Code Council. The following charges shall be made for the issuance of building permits based on the contract or estimated cost as referred to in this section: 
(1)  The minimum building permit fee is $26.00, regardless of any additional amount indicated in this section. 
(2)  In the contracts or estimated costs, as determined by the Building Valuation Data (BVD) chart in the most current edition of the Building Safety Journal as published by the International Code Council and referred to in this section, whichever is greater, if such work is $100.00 and less than $2,500.00 in value, the building permit fee shall be $26.00. 
(a)  An additional $1.00 fee per $1,000.00 of value for non-residential construction as required by Alabama Act 2015-308 shall be charged when applicable, per permit issued. 
(3)  Where the contracts or estimated costs, as determined by the Building Valuation Data (BVD) chart in the most current edition of the Building Safety Journal as published by the International Code Council and referred to in this section, is over $2,500.00, the building permit fee shall be based on one percent of the total value. There shall be a reinspection fee of $50.00, when necessitated by faulty materials, equipment or workmanship. 
(4)  The fee for occupancy on any building without a certificate of occupancy in violation of this article shall be $25.00. 
(5)  Trailers approved for construction field offices shall pay a fee of $100.00 when placed on a construction site before utilities can be connected. This shall be for a period of one year and another fee of $100.00 must be paid again at the end of one year if construction is not completed. The trailer office must be moved before the final inspection of the building. 
(Code 1995, § 18-37; Ord. No. 2551, § I, 9-17-1991; Ord. No. 3556, § 1, 12-6-2016) 
ARTICLE III. ELECTRICAL CODE 
Sec. 18-72. Enumeration of fees. 
(a)  The minimum electrical permit fee is $15.00, regardless of any additional amount indicated in this section. 
(b)  Fees for wiring to outlets are as follows: 
1 to 5 outlets $ 4.00 6 to 15 outlets   5.50 16 to 25 outlets   7.00 26 to 40 outlets   8.50 41 to 60 outlets  10.00 61 to 80 outlets  11.50 81 to 100 outlets  13.50 101 to 200 outlets  17.50 201 to 500 outlets  34.00 501 to 1,000 outlets  64.00 1,001 outlets and over  79.00  
(c)  Fees for the installation of fixtures, not including wiring to outlets, are as follows: 
1 to 20 lights $ 5.00 21 to 50 lights   6.50 51 to 100 lights   8.00 101 to 500 lights   9.50 501 lights and over  15.50  
(d)  Fees for wiring for U.L. listed pre-wired equipment, not otherwise shown on the fee schedule, including mobile homes, trailer and mobile offices are as follows: 
20 amperes and under $ 5.50 21 to 30 amperes   7.00 31 to 60 amperes   8.50 61 to 150 amperes  10.00 151 to 300 amperes  13.00 301 to 400 amperes  17.50 401 amperes and over  23.50  
(e)  Fees for main line service switches for light, heat, or power are as follows: 
100 ampere switch or less $ 5.00 200 ampere switch   6.50 400 ampere switch   8.00 600 ampere switch  11.00 800 ampere switch  13.00 1,200 ampere switch  17.00  
Fees for switches shall include only main line services for sub feeder panels. Where temporary service is requested on the same application for permanent service wiring, the permit fee for the temporary service and one outlet shall be waived. 
(f)  Wiring fees for motors, generators, welders capacitors, transformers, signs, festoon, and outline wiring are as follows: 
(1)  All units of one hp or less and units, if 750 watts or less ..... $5.00 
(2)  All units over one hp and less than five hp and units over 750 watts and less than 3,750 watts .....  6.50 
(3)  All units five hp and over and all units of 3,750 watts and over .....  8.00 
(g)  Fees for installation of motors, generators, welders, capacitors, transformers, signs, festoon and outline wiring, not including the wiring thereof are as follows: 
(1)  All units less than five hp and units of less than 3,750 watts ..... $5.00 
(2)  All units five hp and over and all units 3,750 watts and over .....  6.50 
(h)  Fees for wiring for heating appliances, not including space heating, are as follows: 
(1)  Units of 750 watts or less ..... $5.00 
(2)  Each additional three units or fraction thereof 750 watts or less designed to perform the same function in the same building .....  5.00 
(3)  Units over 750 watts and less than 3,750 watts .....  6.50 
(4)  Each additional two units or fraction thereof over 750 watts and less than 3,750 watts, designed to perform the same function in the same building .....  5.00 
(5)  Units of 3,750 watts or over .....  8.00 
(6)  Each additional two units or fraction thereof 3,750 watts and over, designed to perform the same function in the same building .....  5.00 
Where separate over and cooking-top range units are installed, they shall be considered one unit for fee purposes. 
(i)  Fees for installation of heating appliances, not including the wiring thereof, are as follows: 
(1)  Units of 3,750 watts or less ..... $5.00 
(2)  Each additional three units or fraction thereof 3,750 watts or less designed to perform the same function in the same building .....  5.00 
(3)  Units over 3,750 watts .....  6.50 
(4)  Each additional two units or fraction thereof over 3,750 watts, designed to perform the same function in the same building .....  5.00 
(j)  Wiring for space heating is to include only room and building heating. Units shall consist of a room or group of rooms in one building intended for the occupancy by a single-family group, or by a person, or group of persons comprising a single business or association. The wiring fees are as follows: 
(1)  Units of 4,000 watts or less ..... $5.00 
(2)  Units of 4,000 watts but not over 10,000 watts .....  6.50 
(3)  Units over 10,000 watts but not over 20,000 watts .....  8.00 
(4)  Units over 20,000 [watts] .....  9.50 
(k)  Fees for the installation of space heating equipment, not including the wiring thereof, are as follows: 
(1)  Units of 10,000 watts or less ..... $5.00 
(2)  Units over 10,000 watts .....  6.50 
(l)  Reinspection fees, when necessitated by faulty materials, equipment, apparatus or workmanship, are as follows: 
(1)  First reinspection ..... $ 5.00 
(2)  Second reinspection .....   6.50 
(3)  Each additional reinspection .....  11.00 
(m)  The fees for all master electrician cards and all journeyman electrician cards shall be $40.00. All electrical work must be performed by a city-licensed electrician. All electrical cards must be kept current and cannot be reissued without the purchase of all back cards. Back cards of more than one year shall have a $5.00 penalty. This provision includes master, journeyman and reciprocal cards. The city does not reciprocate on P or R cards. Anyone holding the state master electrician card is exempt from the $5.00 penalty. 
(Code 1973, § 10-12; Code 1995, § 18-86; Ord. No. 2035, § I, 12-19-1978; Ord. No. 2551, § III, 9-17-1991) 
Sec. 18-104. Mechanical permit fees. 
(a)  The minimum mechanical permit fee is $26.00, regardless of amount hereafter indicated. 
(b)  The mechanical permits shall have the same fee as building permits. For work of $100.00 up to $2,500.00 or less in value, the permit fee shall be $15.00. For all mechanical permits and for work over $2,500.00, the permit fee shall be based on one percent of the total value, which equals $10.00 per $1,000.00 of work. 
(Code 1995, § 18-107; Ord. No. 2551, § II, 9-17-1991) 
Sec. 18-123. Plumbing permit fees. 
(a)  The minimum plumbing permit fee is $15.00, regardless of any additional amount indicated in this section. 
(b)  The fees are as follows: 
(1)  Water closet ..... $4.00 
(2)  Bathtubs .....  4.00 
(3)  Lavatories .....  4.00 
(4)  Sinks .....  4.00 
(5)  Urinals .....  4.00 
(6)  Drinking fountains .....  4.00 
(7)  Shower baths .....  4.00 
(8)  Backflow preventer .....  4.00 
(9)  Washing machine .....  4.00 
(10)  Dishwasher .....  4.00 
(11)  Floor drains .....  4.00 
(12)  Water heaters (gas or electric) .....  4.00 
(13)  Water line .....  4.00 
(14)  Septic tank connection .....  4.00 
(15)  Hydrants, hose bibs, faucets .....  4.00 
(16)  Water service .....  5.00 
(17)  Sewer .....  5.00 
(Code 1995, § 18-132; Ord. No. 2551, § IV, 9-17-1991) 
ARTICLE VI. GAS CODE 
Sec. 18-146. Gas permit fees. 
    (a) Minimum fee. The minimum gas permit fee is $15.00, regardless of any additional amount indicated in this section. 
    (b) Consumer piping outlets fee schedule. The fees are as follows: 
(1)  First outlet ..... $3.00 
(2)  Each additional outlet .....  1.00 
    (c) Yard line replacement fee schedule. The fees are as follows: 
(1)  First connection ..... $3.00 
(2)  Each additional replacement .....  1.00 
    (d) Boilers; furnaces; dryers; burners; incinerators. A list of units and fees are as follows: 
(1)  Central heating boilers; floor furnaces; central heating furnaces; clothes dryer; conversion burner; incinerators; infrared radiant heaters; power boilers; recessed heaters; room heater, vented; room heater, unvented; and unit heaters. 
(2)  The units listed in subsection (d)(1) of this section shall have the following fees charged: 
a.  50,000 Btu input or less ..... $ 3.00 
b.  50,001 thru 65,000 Btu .....   5.00 
c.  65,001 thru 150,000 Btu .....   7.00 
d.  150,001 thru 300,000 Btu .....   9.00 
e.  Over 300,000 Btu .....  12.00 
f.  Water heater .....   3.00 
g.  Range .....   3.00 
h.  Appliance vent when separate .....   3.00 
i.  Automatic vent dampers .....   3.00 
j.  Induced draft fans .....   3.00 
k.  Draft control switch .....   3.00 
l.  Reinspection fee .....   5.00 
All gas work must be performed by a contractor with state plumbing card or state gasfitters card and city master gas card or city journeyman card. These cards must be renewed annually. The city master gas card and city journeyman gas card will cost $40.00 per year with a $5.00 penalty on back cards after a one-year delinquency, and the contractor must buy all back cards to bring him to the current date. 
(Code 1995, § 18-157; Ord. No. 2551, § V, 9-17-1991) 
ARTICLE VII. HOUSING CODE 
Sec. 18-177. Schedule of minimum penalties and fines for violations of housing code; citations. 
(a)  There is hereby established a schedule of minimum penalties and fines for violations of offenses defined in the housing code of the city and for the dumping of rubbish or spilling loads from trucks onto city streets or in an unauthorized place within the city limits. The schedule of fines is as follows: 
(1)  Defective or nonapproved garbage container ..... $ 2.00 
(2)  No garbage container .....   5.00 
(3)  A person storing rubbish on his premises .....  10.00 
(4)  Truck or vehicle dumping rubbish in an unauthorized place .....  20.00 
(5)  Truck spilling loads onto city street .....  20.00 
(b)  The city clerk and treasurer is hereby authorized to have printed appropriate citations which reflect the foregoing fines and which may be given by any city employee upon the observation of any violation of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1995, § 18-182; Ord. No. 2125, §§ 1, 2, 2-24-1981) 
Chapter 22 
BUSINESSES 
ARTICLE II. BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEMS 
Sec. 22-55. Service charge for false alarms. 
    In addition to other penalties for violations of this article, there shall be levied and charged a $100.00 service charge per false alarm upon such persons whose alarm emits in excess of three false alarms within 90 days after such system has been installed for more than 60 days. 
(Code 1995, § 22-88; Ord. No. 2570, § 2, 5-26-1992) 
Sec. 22-335. License-Change of place of employment; reissuance of license; fee. 
(a)  Upon any change of employer or place of employment of any licensee under this division, such licensee shall apply to the city clerk and treasurer of the city for a reissue of the existing license which such reissued license shall show upon its face the name and business address of the new employer of such licensee as well as applicant's address, age, sex, and signature, for which reissue the licensee shall pay to the city the sum of $100.00. Upon any such reissue, such licensee shall surrender his replaced or old license. 
(b)  No masseur or masseuse shall work for any owner, operator or proprietor whose name and business address is not identical to that shown upon such masseur's or masseuse's license issued under this division. 
(Code 1995, § 22-303; Ord. No. 1974, § 19, 5-10-1977) 
Chapter 26 
CEMETERIES 
Sec. 26-4. Graves-Price per space. 
    The price per grave space for cemetery lots at Cedar Hill Cemetery shall be $450.00 determined on a per lot basis. 
(Code 1995, § 30-4; Ord. No. 2594, § I, 10-19-1993) 
Sec. 26-5. Same-Opening and closing; fees. 
    The cost of opening and closing graves at Cedar Hill Cemetery shall be as follows: 
(1)  Opening and closing of grave space, Monday through Friday ..... $375.00 
(2)  Opening and closing of grave space on Saturday .....  500.00 
(3)  Opening and closing of grave space on Sunday and holidays .....  750.00 
(Code 1995, § 30-5; Ord. No. 2594, § II, 10-19-1993) 
Sec. 26-6. Same-Prices for foundations; markers; benches; monuments. 
    The price for foundations and markers, benches and monuments at Cedar Hill Cemetery shall be as follows: 
(1)  A foundation for a standard marker is $100.00. 
(2)  A foundation for an oversized marker is $125.00. 
(3)  A foundation for a bronze marker is $125.00. 
(4)  A foundation for a bench with two legs is $125.00. 
(5)  A foundation for a veteran's upright marker is $125.00. 
(6)  A foundation for monuments is $60.00 per square foot. 
(Code 1995, § 30-6; Ord. No. 2596, § I, 10-26-1993) 
Chapter 46 
EMERGENCY SERVICES 
ARTICLE III. AMBULANCE SERVICE 
DIVISION 2. BUSINESS LICENSE 
Sec. 46-84. Ambulance License-Hearing upon application; issuance or denial. 
    Within 21 days after the application has been filed with the city clerk, the city council shall set a date for a hearing investigated by the fire chief and the public safety committee on the application, and at the hearing, or upon any date to which the hearing is continued, shall hear all evidence offered by any party that may be presented bearing upon such application. If the city council finds that the applicant is ready, willing and able to comply with all the provisions of this article, state law and that the territory proposed to be served by the operation under the license is, in the opinion of the city council, not adequately served by ambulance facilities, and that the public necessity and convenience require the issuance of such license, then such application shall be granted and a license issued to operate such number of ambulances upon the streets of the city as the city council deems in the public interest, which license shall be issued by the city clerk upon payment to the city by the applicant of a license fee of $5.00 for each vehicle covered by the permit; otherwise, the permit shall be refused. 
(Code 1995, § 46-73; Ord. No. 1938, § 5, 5-25-1976) 
Chapter 50 
ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE II. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
DIVISION 2. APPLICATION AND FEES 
Sec. 50-36. Permit application fee. 
    Each application for the issuance of a permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $100.00, for individual single-family residences and $400.00 for all other types of land disturbing activities, to help defray the city's cost of processing and reviewing the application and the inspections associated with the application. The applicant must submit three sets of its BMP plan with its application and fee to the official. The amount of these permit fees shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1995, § 48-37; Ord. No. 3066, § 3.02, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 3068, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 3360, § 48-37, 2-6-2008) 
Chapter 70 
LAW ENFORCEMENT 
ARTICLE II. CITY JAIL 
Sec. 70-24. Charges for use by prisoners not of city; disposition. 
(a)  For all prisoners placed in the city prison, other than prisoners of the city, a charge of $7.50 each shall be made. A further charge of $1.30, each, per day, or a part thereof, shall be made for feeding and taking care of such prisoners. The city reserves the right to accept or reject any and all such prisoners. 
(b)  The chief of police shall collect such fees and charges as authorized by this section. The monies shall go into the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 2-63; Code 1995, § 70-29) 
Chapter 78 
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE X. BOW HUNTING 
Sec. 78-358. Permit fee; validity. 
    The cost of a bow hunting permit shall be $15.00 and shall be valid for the hunting season in which it is issued. There shall be a hunting permit for each hunting season. 
(Code 1995, § 78-326; Ord. No. 2637, § II, 10-15-1994) 
Chapter 82 
PARKS AND RECREATION 
ARTICLE III. CAMP BESSEMER 
Sec. 82-47. Administration. 
    Camp Bessemer shall be structured as follows: 
(1)  Program coordinator. The program coordinator for Camp Bessemer shall oversee, manage and have general supervision and responsibility for the Camp Bessemer summer program in the city. The program coordinator shall have experience in managing, organizing, promoting and devising recreational, educational enrichment programs for ages six through 13 and overseeing a summer jobs placement program for young adults, 14 years of age and over. 
a.  The program coordinator shall make bi-weekly reports of any and all funds expended and disbursed by Camp Bessemer. The report shall be provided to the mayor with a copy to the council president. The reports shall state the amount and purpose of each expenditure. Each sum expended by the Camp Bessemer program shall be made pursuant to a duly made appropriation by the city council. Each person making an expenditure not so duly appropriated shall be personally liable for such expenditure. 
b.  The program coordinator shall be compensated at the rate of $12.00 perhour. 
c.  Failure to make the report of expenditures required by subsection (1)a of this section when due or within five working days after demand by the council shall, by a vote of the council, result in the termination of the unexpended portion of the sum appropriate in subsection (1)b of this section. 
(2  Day camps. There shall be three day camps operated by Camp Bessemer to accommodate the recreational, and educational enrichment programs for ages six through 13 years and any young adult not employed in the jobs placement and training program. The program coordinator shall be responsible for initiating and overseeing the recreational and educational enrichment programs. 
a.  The day camps shall be made available at three sites: First Baptist Carver Life Center; A.G. Gaston Boys and Girls Club; and Kate Waller Community Center. 
b.  Each day camp site shall have one director and four aides. The directors shall be paid at the rate of $8.00 per hour and the aide shall be paid at the prevailing minimum hourly wage. 
(3)  Job placement and training. A number of local employers have indicated a willingness to have one or more students assigned to their companies for the purpose of actual work and training. The employers will supervise the students and the city will pay such students at the prevailing minimum hourly wage. 
a.  The program coordinator shall be responsible for coordinating with interested local employers and assigning suitable students for employment/training to such employers. 
b.  The program coordinator shall compile a list of assignment of all students referred for employment/training and file the same with the mayor and the city council through the president of the city council not later than June 16 of each year. No student may be paid by the city unless the list of assignment is filed with the mayor and the council. 
(Ord. No. 3303, § 1, 5-17-2006) 
Chapter 90 
SOLID WASTE 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL 
Sec. 90-5. Sanitary sewer maintenance fee. 
(a)  There shall be a sewer maintenance fee charged to all users of the city sanitary sewer system. 
(b)  The sanitary sewer maintenance fee shall be $40.00 for each 100 cubic feet of water used by the municipal sewer user. 
(c)  The sanitary sewer maintenance fee shall be collected by the city water service and shall be billed on the water bill issued for water usage. The city water service shall collect the fee from the sanitary sewer user. 
(d)  All bills for sewer service charges shall be incorporated in the water bill, shall be rendered monthly, shall be due when rendered and shall be paid within 18 days after the original date of billing. A ten percent late charge shall be assessed on all bills paid later than 18 days after being rendered. If the amount of such sewer service charge shall not be paid within 30 days from the rendition of such bill, and if permitted by general law, the city shall discontinue furnishing water to such premises and shall disconnect the same from the water distribution system and shall proceed forthwith to recover the amount of such sewer service charge, together with all applicable penalties, in such lawful manner as it may deem advisable. 
(e)  The proceeds collected from the sanitary sewer service fee shall be deposited in a special fund designated as the city sanitary sewer maintenance fund. A copy of all deposits shall be forwarded to the city clerk of the city. 
(f)  The proceeds of the sanitary sewer maintenance fee shall be used for repairs, maintenance, rehabilitation and extension of sewer lines to the city sanitary sewer system. The funds will also be used to make payments to the state revolving fund for the proceeds used for sewer repairs and maintenance at the 12th Street sewer project. The funds shall also be used for the extension of sanitary sewer extension lines for the purpose of assisting in the extension of sanitary sewer lines within the city and for the purpose of installing sewer lines within the city as laterals to be connected with the county sewer trunk lines and the repair and maintenance of the sewer lines which include cost of engineering, evaluations, rehabilitations and other charges associated with said purposes. The proceeds of the fund can be used for the payment of indebtedness, including bonds, incurred for sanitary sewer purposes for the city. 
(g)  The city sanitary sewer maintenance fund can be drawn on by the mayor and city clerk. 
(h)  All contracts for the maintenance, repair, rehabilitation and extension of sewer lines shall be approved by the governing body of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 86-5; Ord. No. 2665, §§ 1-7, 12-19-1995) 
ARTICLE III. LANDFILL 
Sec. 90-107. Fee. 
(a)  The fee for delivering inert material to the Bessemer/Concord Landfill shall be $10.00 per cubic yard basis. 
(b)  There shall be a minimum charge of $12.00 for all inert material delivered to the Bessemer/Concord Landfill. 
(Code 1995, § 86-83; Ord. No. 2670, §§ I, II, 3-26-1996; Ord. No. 2671, §§ I-III, 4-2-1996; Ord. No. 3130, § 1, 11-21-2000) 
Chapter 94 
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
ARTICLE III. EXCAVATIONS 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY 
Sec. 94-60. Rates for replacement of excavation or pavement materials by city. 
(a)  Any person failing or refusing to replace an excavation or paving within five days after notice from the street superintendent shall be charged the following rates: 
Asphalt on concrete $7.50 per square yard Asphalt on slag  7.50 per square yard Sheet asphalt  4.00 per square yard Concrete  7.50 per square yard Concrete sidewalk  6.00 per square yard Concrete curb  2.00 per lineal foot Concrete curb and gutter  7.50 per square yard  
(b)  All other work shall be done at the cost of labor and material, plus ten percent for supervision. 
(Code 1973, § 21-14; Code 1995, § 90-64) 
DIVISION 2. SEWER, MAIN OR CONDUIT CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR 
Sec. 94-85. Deposit required; permit fee; restoration costs. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of section 94-86, any person desiring to make any opening, cut or excavation in or under the surface of any paved, curbed or otherwise improved street, alley or sidewalk, for any rightful and necessary purpose, shall first pay to the city clerk and treasurer such sum as may be reasonably necessary, as determined by the city engineer or by his authorized deputy, to defray the cost to the city of properly restoring the street, alley or sidewalk to as good condition as it was before making such opening, cut or excavation and of maintaining the same in such condition, normal wear and tear excepted, for a period of five years. 
(b)  The city engineer shall thereupon issue to such person a permit authorizing such work. A fee of $1.50 shall be paid for the permit. 
(c)  No such restoration cost shall be required before making any opening, cut or excavation in any unpaved, uncurbed or unimproved street or alley, but a permit as provided in this division shall first be obtained. 
(Code 1973, § 21-50; Code 1995, § 90-78) 
ARTICLE IV. SIDEWALKS 
Sec. 94-124. Staking out and supervision of construction; fee; refund. 
(a)  There shall be a fee of $0.05 charged per square yard by the city for staking out and supervising the construction of sidewalks. The engineer shall not issue a permit for the construction unless the application is accompanied by a receipt from the city clerk and treasurer showing that the fee has been paid. 
(b)  If the permit is refused, the engineer shall write across the back of such receipt "permit refused" and, upon its presentation to the city clerk and treasurer, the amount so paid in shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(Code 1973, § 21-60; Code 1995, § 90-105) 
ARTICLE V. DRIVEWAYS 
Sec. 94-148. Construction permit-Application; fee. 
(a)  Any person desiring to construct a driveway across a sidewalk in the city shall submit an application to the engineering department giving: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner and occupant of the premises abutting the place where the driveway is to be constructed; 
(2)  A description of the property by lot and block number; 
(3)  Street address; and 
(4)  A description of the width, slope and specifications for the driveway. 
(b)  The application shall be signed by both the owner and occupant of the abutting premises, and shall be accompanied by a $50.00 inspection and permit fee. 
(Code 1973, § 21-5; Code 1995, § 90-127) 
ARTICLE VII. HOUSE NUMBERS 
Sec. 94-204. Display of number; costs. 
(a)  The city council shall have power at any time, by resolution, to require the owners of all buildings to have a number of plain, black figures on a light background put on each house within the city limits in such a conspicuous place as to be legible from the street. The letters shall be not less than two inches in size, and placed on the house by some person designated by the city council to do the work. 
(b)  The owner shall pay such person $100.00 for each house on which figures are placed. The owners shall be allowed to place on their houses gilt or ornamental figures if they see fit. 
(Code 1973, § 21-17; Code 1995, § 90-176) 
Chapter 106 
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 
ARTICLE V. ABANDONED VEHICLES 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY 
Sec. 106-262. Notification of owner and claiming of impounded vehicles. 
(a)  The police department shall give written notice to the owner, secured parties of record, and known lienholders, if any, at least 30 days prior to the date of the sale of the motor vehicle advising such parties of: 
(1)  The complete description of the vehicle and the date and place the vehicle was found or taken into possession; 
(2)  The approximate amount owed for the cost of repair, towing and storage; 
(3)  The location of the vehicle; 
(4)  The time and place that a sale of the vehicle will be held; 
(5)  The right of the owner, secured parties or lienholders to contest the right to sell such vehicle by the filing, within ten days before the date of the sale of the vehicle, of an application for hearing to be conducted before the date of the sale of the vehicle of an application for hearing to be conducted before the judge of the district court or circuit court of the county in which the sale is to be held. The notice required by this section shall be deemed to be given when sent by certified mail, postage prepaid, to the address of the owner, secured party of record, and known lienholder shown on any public filing evidencing such ownership, security interest, or lien; or if none, to any such address ascertained by reasonable effort. 
(b)  If the name and address of the owner, secured parties or lienholders of the vehicle are known or cannot be reasonably ascertained, then the notice required in this section shall be given by publication once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the sale is to be held. The first publication shall be at least 30 days before the date of sale. 
(c)  The registered owner, or other person who can prove he is entitled to possession of a motor vehicle impounded pursuant to the provisions of this article, may claim the motor vehicle within 30 days of the date of impoundment by presenting himself at the depository and by paying a fee determined by the chief of police to reimburse the city for the reasonable and necessary costs of removing and storing the motor vehicle. The fee shall not exceed $50.00 for cost of removal and $3.00 a day for the cost of storage. The standard towing charges for privately owned vehicles are as follows: 
Small vehicles $100.00 Large vehicles  250.00 Dolly charges   45.00 Storage charge for vehicles 
less than 18 feet   15.00 Storage charge for covered 
storage   25.00  
(Code 1995, § 98-197; Ord. No. 2579, § 6, 12-25-1992) 
Chapter 110 
RESERVED 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3561, § 6, adopted May 2, 2017, repealed app. D, ch. 110, §§ 110-5, 110-6, 110-49, 110-72, and 110-73, which pertained to utilities, and derived from the 1995 Code, §§ 102-41, 102-42, 102-61-102-63; Ord. No. 2425, §§ I, II, adopted March 15, 1988; Ord. No. 2582, § 1, adopted Jan. 19, 1993; and Ord. No. 3134, adopted Feb. 6, 2001. 
Chapter 118 
VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
Sec. 118-5. Operator's permit-Required. 
(a)  Every driver of a vehicle for hire shall be required annually to obtain an operator's permit in accordance with this chapter. 
(b)  Every operator of such vehicle licensed in accordance with this section shall be given by the city a permit or card upon which shall be placed, among other information deemed desirable by the city, the photograph of the person so licensed, which shall be carried on the person of the licensee or displayed in a prominent place upon the vehicle so operated at all times. Any person shall have the right to request the identification of the driver and inspect such permit. 
(c)  For the obtaining of the permit as described in this section, the person applying therefor shall pay, in addition to any other license required, the sum of $10.00 to the city clerk and treasurer. 
(Code 1995, § 110-5; Ord. No. 1921, §§ 1, 3, 11-4-1975; Ord. No. 1928, § 1, 1-6-1976) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is a schedule of the municipal fees that have been established by the city council. Parenthetical history notes following the fee provisions indicate the section number within the Code where the fee was established, the ordinance or resolution number from which the fee was derived, and any amendment to that originating legislation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1973 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1973 Code, as updated, which are included herein. Sections of the 1973 Code, as updated, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. 
1973 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 1-1 1-1 1-5, 1-6 1-3, 1-4 1-8 1-2 1-10 1-5 1-11 1-15 1-13 1-6 1-15 1-16 1-16 1-7 1-20, 1-21 1-9, 1-10 1-22 1-19 1-23-1-25 1-11-1-13 1-26 1-8 2-1-2-3 2-54-2-56 2-5-2-8 2-57-2-60 2-10-2-16 2-110-2-116 2-17 2-121 2-18 2-117 2-19-2-22 2-141-2-144 2-23, 2-24 2-79, 2-80 2-26 2-83 2-28 2-81 2-30 2-82 2-30.1-2-30.3 18-11 2-31 2-337 2-32 2-196 2-33-2-36 2-197 2-37 2-198 2-39, 2-40 2-199, 2-200 2-42 2-201 2-43-2-46 2-202, 2-203 2-57, 2-58 26-37, 26-38 2-59-2-61 26-1-26-3 2-62(a)-2-62(c) 70-21-70-23 2-63 70-24 2-64-2-69 70-52-70-57 3-2, 3-3 6-4, 6-5 3-5 6-6 3-8 6-3 3-9 6-8 3-10 6-18 3-12 6-9 3-14, 3-15 6-10, 6-11 3-20 6-12 3-22 6-13 3-28, 3-29 6-14, 6-15 3-32, 3-33 6-16, 6-17 4-1, 4-2 10-19, 10-20 4-7 10-21 4-11 10-22 4-12 78-191 4-13-4-16 78-223-78-226 4-17-4-22 78-246-78-251 4-23-4-27 78-281-78-285 4-28-4-30 78-304-78-306 5-1 14-1 5-2, 5-3 14-5, 14-6 5-4-5-13 14-51-14-60 5-15 14-83 5-16 14-87 5-17 14-84 5-19, 5-20 14-88, 14-89 5-21 14-92 5-22, 5-23 14-90, 14-91 5-24 14-82 5-25 14-120 5-26-5-32 14-113-14-119 5-33 14-7 5-34 14-14 5-35-5-38 14-9-14-12 5-39 14-15 5-41, 5-42 14-16, 14-17 5-43 14-13 5-44-5-48 14-18-14-22 5-49 14-24 5-50, 5-51 14-26, 14-27 5-52 14-25 5-53 14-86 5-54 14-8 5-56 14-23 5-57-5-59 14-28-14-30 5-60 14-81 5-61 14-85 6-1(b) 18-2 6-2 6-6 6-3 18-12 6-5-6-8 18-261-18-264 6-8 18-265 6-10-6-17 18-294-18-301 6-18-6-27 18-346-18-355 6-28-6-33 18-384-18-389 6-34 18-407 6-35 18-411 6-36-6-44 18-408-18-416 6-45 18-321 6-46, 6-47 18-417, 18-418 6-48 18-237 6-49 18-239 6-50 18-238 6-51, 6-52 18-240, 18-241 6-56 18-1 6-71-6-77 18-208-18-214 7-36-7-39 86-72-86-75 7-49 22-201 7-50 22-230 7-51, 7-52 22-202, 22-203 7-53-7-64 22-231-22-242 7-65 86-19 7-71-7-75 22-150-22-154 7-77-7-81 22-177-22-181 7-82-7-86 22-363-22-367 7-100, 7-101 86-44, 86-45 7-101 86-46-86-48 7-102 86-48 7-104, 7-105 86-48 7-107-7-109 22-90-22-92 7-114, 7-115 22-420, 22-421 7-119 22-419 7-135-7-137 90-29-90-31 10-9(a)(1) 18-67 10-11, 10-12 18-71, 18-72 10-13 18-6 10-19 18-63 10-22, 10-23 18-64, 18-65 10-30 18-70 10-40 18-61 10-41 18-60 10-43-10-45 18-66-18-68 10-79 110-4 12-1-12-3 62-45-62-47 12-4 62-13 12-5-12-7 62-68-62-70 12-8 62-1 12-9 62-4 12-10 62-3 12-11 62-2 12-14-12-20 62-5-62-11 15-1 30-2 15-2 30-1 15-3 30-3 15-4, 15-5 30-37, 30-38 15-6(b) 30-40 15-7 30-42 15-8 30-39 15-10-15-12 30-6-30-8 15-13, 15-14 30-4, 30-5 15-15 30-41 15-16-15-18 30-43-30-45 15-29 22-394 15-32 98-1 15-37 78-72 15-44 78-73 15-46 78-74 15-47 78-2 15-48 94-1 15-54 78-29 15-58 54-122 15-59 62-12 15-61 78-5 15-62 78-3 15-66 94-6 15-67 94-5 15-72 78-159 15-75 78-160 15-100 78-30 15-102 78-92 15-120.1 46-53 15-135, 15-136 78-93, 78-94 15-137 22-393 15-142-15-144 78-95-78-97 15-148 94-238 15-150-15-155 78-125-78-130 15-156, 15-157 78-331, 78-332 15-160 78-333 15-163 78-334 17-1 18-122 18-1 118-159 18-2 118-162 18-3, 18-4 118-160, 118-161 18-5-18-9 106-233-106-237 18-12 106-238 18-14 106-239 18-22 118-31 18-23-18-25 118-2-118-4 18-26 118-32 18-27 118-66 18-28 118-35 18-29 118-65 18-30 118-33 18-32 118-34 18-33, 18-34 118-36, 118-37 18-36 118-69 18-37 118-68 18-38 118-38 18-39 118-6 18-40 118-67 19-1 90-1 19-2 90-32 19-3, 19-4 90-63, 90-64 19-5 90-33 19-6, 19-7 90-65, 90-66 19-8 90-2 19-9 90-34 19-10 90-67 19-12 90-35 19-13 90-68 19-14, 19-15 90-36, 90-37 19-16-19-20 90-69-90-73 19-34, 19-35 90-105, 90-106 20-1-20-6 110-110-110-115 20-7 110-122 20-8-20-13 110-116-110-121 20-14 110-123 20-15 110-109 21-1-21-3 94-32-94-34 21-4-21-8 94-147-94-151 21-9 94-57 21-10 94-62 21-13-21-15 94-59-94-61 21-17-21-20 94-204-94-207 21-21-21-25 94-239-94-243 21-28 94-174 21-30 94-175 21-32-21-34 94-6 21-35 94-7 21-37-21-39 94-8-94-10 21-40, 21-41 106-6, 106-7 21-46 94-11 21-47 94-13 21-48-21-51 94-83-94-86 21-55, 21-56 94-87, 94-88 21-57-21-59 94-120-94-122 21-60 94-124 21-61 94-123 21-62 94-171 21-63 94-12 21-69 94-172 21-74 94-173 21-76 106-2 21-81 94-4 21-83, 21-84 94-2, 94-3 22-7 106-10 22-15 106-64 22-16 42-1 22-19 106-63 22-19.1 106-65 22-20 106-62 22-21 106-66 22-22-22-27 106-290-106-295 22-44 106-141 22-45 106-186 22-57 106-91 22-59 106-9 22-62, 22-63 106-11, 106-12 22-66 106-8 22-72, 22-73 106-3, 106-4 22-79 106-5 22-80 106-93 22-81-22-84 106-96-106-99 22-86 106-92 22-88 106-100 22-91 106-166 22-94 106-101 22-96 106-102 22-101-22-108 106-133-106-140 22-109-22-113 106-326-106-330 22-115-22-118 106-331-106-334 23-9, 23-10 110-2, 110-3  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1995 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1995 Code, as updated through September 16, 2008, which are included herein. Sections of the 1995 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1995 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 1-1-1-4 1-1-1-4 1-7-1-9 1-5-1-7 1-11-1-24 1-8-1-21 2-1 2-1 2-26 2-21 2-28 2-22 2-29 2-24 2-46-2-52 2-54-2-60 2-66, 2-67 2-79, 2-80 2-69-2-71 2-81-2-83 2-81-2-92 2-110-2-121 2-106-2-109 2-141-2-144 2-141-2-148 2-196-2-203 2-161-2-163 2-254-2-256 2-186 2-337 6-1-6-17 6-1-6-17 6-19 6-18 10-26, 10-27 10-19, 10-20 10-32 10-21 10-36 10-22 10-56-10-62 10-48-10-54 10-76-10-81 10-82-10-87 14-1-14-30 14-1-14-30 14-51-14-54 14-51-14-54 14-54 14-55 14-56-14-60 14-56-14-60 14-81-14-87 14-81-14-87 14-90, 14-91 14-88, 14-89 14-92 14-92 14-93, 14-94 14-90, 14-91 14-116-14-123 14-113-14-120 18-1-18-12 18-1-18-12 18-36 18-32 18-37 18-34 18-61-18-63 18-59-18-61 18-63 18-62 18-65-18-73 18-63-18-71 18-86 18-72 18-106 18-103 18-131, 18-132 18-122, 18-123 18-156, 18-157 18-145, 18-146 18-181, 18-182 18-176, 18-177 18-206-18-211 18-208-18-213 18-211 18-214 18-236 18-237 18-238-18-240 18-239-18-241 18-261-18-265 18-261-18-265 18-267 18-238 18-276-18-283 18-294-18-301 18-296 18-321 18-306-18-315 18-346-18-355 18-326-18-331 18-384-18-389 18-341-18-352 18-407-18-418 22-86 22-54 22-88-22-91 22-55-22-58 22-111-22-113 22-90-22-92 22-136 22-115 22-138-22-140 22-116-22-118 22-161-22-165 22-150-22-154 22-176-22-180 22-177-22-181 22-201 22-202 22-202 22-201 22-203 22-203 22-216-22-228 22-230-22-242 22-251-22-253 22-263-22-265 22-255, 22-256 22-266, 22-267 22-276-22-280 22-298-22-302 22-281 22-304 22-283 22-305 22-296-22-298 22-329-22-331 22-300-22-305 22-332-22-337 22-326-22-330 22-363-22-367 22-351-22-353 22-393-22-395 22-376-22-378 22-419-22-421 22-401 22-441 22-403-22-406 22-442-22-445 26-1-26-4 102-1-102-4 30-1-30-9 26-1-26-9 30-31, 30-32 26-37, 26-38 34-1 30-2 34-2 30-1 34-3-34-9 30-3-30-9 34-31-34-39 30-37-30-45 38-1-38-5 34-1-34-5 38-31 34-29 38-51-38-57 34-47-34-53 40-26-40-34 38-19-38-27 42-1 42-1 42-26-42-30 42-23-42-27 46-26, 46-27 46-19, 46-20 46-51-46-59 46-46-46-54 46-71-46-77 46-82-46-88 46-82 46-89 46-228 46-21 48-26-48-28 50-21-50-23 48-36-48-42 50-35-50-41 48-56, 48-57 50-51, 50-52 48-65 50-78 48-67, 48-68 50-79, 50-80 48-76-48-82 50-104-50-110 48-96, 48-97 50-134, 50-135 50-1 54-1 50-2 6-6 50-3 54-3 50-27-50-31 54-25-54-29 50-106, 50-107 54-121, 54-122 50-121, 50-122 54-143, 54-144 54-26-54-37 58-19-58-30 54-51-54-55 58-49-58-53 54-66-54-70 58-80-58-84 58-1-58-13 62-1-62-13 58-36-58-38 62-45-62-47 58-51-58-53 62-68-62-70 62-1-62-6 66-1-66-6 62-31-62-42 66-31-66-42 62-66, 62-67 66-73, 66-74 62-91-62-109 66-92-66-110 62-131, 62-132 66-134 70-1 70-1 70-26-70-29 70-21-70-24 70-51-70-56 70-52-70-57 74-2, 74-3 74-1, 74-2 78-1-78-5 78-1-78-5 78-31, 78-32 78-29, 78-30 78-82, 78-83 78-72, 78-73 78-85 78-74 78-106 78-92 78-109 78-93 78-111 78-94 78-114-78-116 78-95-78-97 78-118 78-98 78-141-78-146 78-125-78-130 78-172 78-159 78-175 78-160 78-177 78-161 78-211 78-192 78-212 78-191 78-226-78-229 78-223-78-226 78-241-78-246 78-246-78-251 78-256-78-260 78-281-78-285 78-271-78-273 78-304-78-306 78-296-78-299 78-331-78-334 78-325-78-330 78-357-78-362 82-26, 82-27 86-19, 86-20 82-51-82-56 86-44-86-49 82-76-82-79 86-72-86-75 86-1-86-5 90-1-90-5 86-31-86-39 90-29-90-37 86-51-86-61 90-63-90-73 86-81-86-83 90-105-90-107 90-1-90-14 94-1-94-14 90-36-90-38 94-32-94-34 90-61-90-66 94-57-94-62 90-76-90-81 94-83-94-88 90-101-90-105 94-120-94-124 90-126-90-130 94-147-94-151 90-151-90-155 94-171-94-175 90-176-90-179 94-204-94-207 90-201-90-206 94-238-94-243 94-1 98-1 94-26-94-30 98-23-98-27 94-51-94-57 98-58-98-64 94-81 98-89 98-1 106-1 98-3 106-2 98-7, 98-8 106-3, 106-4 98-10 106-5 98-12-98-14 106-6-106-8 98-16, 98-17 106-9, 106-10 98-19-98-21 106-11-106-13 98-51-98-55 106-62-106-66 98-76-98-87 106-91-106-102 98-101-98-109 106-133-106-141 98-121 106-166 98-131 106-186 98-141, 98-142 106-211, 106-212 98-161-98-167 106-233-106-239 98-191 106-257 98-193-98-198 106-258-106-263 98-211-98-216 106-290-106-295 98-236-98-244 106-326-106-334 102-1-102-4 110-1-110-4 102-41 110-49 102-42 110-5, 110-6 102-42-102-47 110-50-110-55 102-50 110-56 102-61, 102-62 110-72, 110-73 102-63 110-5, 110-6 102-76 110-90 102-96-102-110 110-109-110-123 102-121-102-125 110-145-110-149 106-26-106-35 114-19-114-28 110-1-110-6 118-1-118-6 110-31-110-38 118-31-118-38 110-51-110-55 118-65-118-69 110-76 118-97 110-86-110-93 118-123-118-130 110-116-110-119 118-159-118-162  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1995 Code, as updated through September 16, 2008, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1995 Code, as supplemented. This tables contains some ordinances which precede September 16, 2008, but which were never included in the 1995 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since September 16, 2008, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section Section 
this Code 1895  5- 6-1975 1-3 14-2-14-4 1900  7-22-1975 1, 2 74-1, 74-2 1901  8-12-1975 1 86-20 1910  9- 2-1975 1-3 90-2-90-4 1912  9-16-1975 1 106-94, 106-95 1921 11- 4-1975 1, 3 118-5 1928  1- 6-1976 1 118-5 1938  5-25-1976 1 46-47 2 46-46 3-5 46-82-46-84 7 46-85 8 46-87 9 46-49 10 46-88 15 46-89 16 46-86 17-19 46-50-46-52 20 46-54 22 46-48 1942  6-22-1976 1 2-118 2-121 1973  5- 3-1977 1 106-63 1974  5-10-1977 1-8 22-298-22-305 9 22-330 10 22-337 12 22-329 13 22-334 15-17 22-331-22-333 18 22-336 19 22-335 1977  6- 7-1977 1 106-62, 106-63 1993 11- 8-1977 1-3 26-7-26-9 1995 11-15-1977 1, 2 2-119, 2-120 1998 11-22-1977 4 42-23, 42-24 2006  1-10-1978 1, 2 18-68, 18-69 2011  2-21-1978 1 42-1 2014  3-21-1978 1 18-10 2018  5-30-1978 1 106-9 2032 10-10-1978 1 2-21 2035 12-19-1978 I 18-72 2065 10- 2-1979 1 2-118 2-121 2074 11-18-1979 4 78-1 2085  2-26-1980 1-3 22-263-22-265 5 22-266 2108 10- 7-1980 2-4 10-82-10-84 5 10-87 6-9 10-50-10-53 10 10-49 11 10-54 12 10-85 13 10-48 14 10-86 2121  2-10-1981 1 22-263 2 22-267 2125  2-24-1981 1, 2 18-177 2163  2-23-1982 18-62 2166  3-16-1982 1 102-1 2, 3 102-3, 102-4 4 102-2 2203  3-29-1983 1 94-58 2204  5- 3-1983 6-2 2205  5-31-1983 22-442-22-445 2208  7- 5-1983 22-116-22-118 2215  8-30-1983 1-4 78-1 2224  1-17-1984 98-89 2225  1-31-1984 30-9 2233  9-21-1984 1(3-6) 6-7 2291 12-17-1985 1 6-7 2294  1-14-1986 1-5 78-4 2301  2-25-1986 2-1 2331  7- 1-1986 1, 2 46-19, 46-20 4(a), (c)-(e) 46-21 2369  1-13-1987 2 42-23, 42-24 6-8 42-25-42-27 2411 10-13-1987 1, 2 94-14 2413 10-13-1987 1, 2 106-63 2425  3-15-1988 I 110-49 II 110-5, 110-6 II-IV 110-50-110-52 IV-VI 110-53-110-55 2435  6-28-1988 2-5 34-50-34-53 6 34-49 7 34-48 2436  7- 5-1988 1 118-123 2 118-97 2, 3 118-124, 118-125 3 118-126, 118-127 4-6 118-128-118-130 2473  4- 4-1989 1-3 110-145-110-147 2486  8- 1-1989 1-5 54-25-54-29 2489  8-22-1989 1 98-25 2 98-23 3 98-26 4 98-24 5 98-27 2490  8-22-1989 1 98-58 3-6 98-60-98-63 9 98-64 2491  8-29-1989 1, 2 110-148, 110-149 2509  4-10-1990 1-10 114-19-114-28 2536  2-26-1991 I, II 54-143, 54-144 IV(1) 54-121 2541  5-21-1991 I 66-2 II 66-1 III(A), (B) 66-32 III(C), III(D) 66-33, 66-34 III(E)-III(H) 66-36-66-39 III(I) 66-40 IV 66-41 IV(B) 66-134 V, V(A) 66-92 V(B)-V(H) 66-93-66-99 V(I) 66-100 V(J)-V(R) 66-101-66-109 V(S) 66-35 VI 66-42 VII(A), VII(B) 66-73, 66-74 VIII(A), VIII(B) 66-5, 66-6 IX 66-3 2549  9-17-1991 1 18-32 18-103 18-122 18-145 18-176 54-1 2551  9-17-1991 I 18-34 II 18-104 III 18-72 IV 18-123 V 18-146 VI-XII 18-3-18-9 2552  9-17-1991 I(1) 98-25 II(3) 98-26 2553  9-17-1991 1 98-58 1(2) 98-59 2554  9-17-1991 98-89 2568  5-19-1992 1, 4 66-134 2 66-92 3 66-110 2570  5-26-1992 1-5 22-54-22-58 2578 11-24-1992 1-A 10-83 2579 12-25-1992 1-7 106-257-106-263 2582  1-19-1993 1 110-5, 110-6 110-72, 110-73 2589  4- 6-1993 1 18-59 2590  6-15-1993 2, 3 106-211 2594 10-19-1993 I, II 26-4, 26-5 2596 10-26-1993 I 26-6 2603 12-21-1993 I, II 46-19, 46-20 2612  2- 1-1994 I-III 2-254-2-256 2613  3- 1-1994 34-29 2624  6-21-1994 2 2-22 3 2-24 2625  6-21-1994 106-212 2627  7-19-1994 I 54-143 II, III 54-144 2628  7-19-1994 1-3 22-395 2629  7-19-1994 art. 1 58-20 art. 1, § A- 58-21-58-23 art. 1, § C art. 2 58-19 art. 3, § A, 58-24, 58-25 art. 3, § B art. 3, § C 58-51 art. 3, § D- 58-26-58-30 art. 3, § H art. 4, § A 58-49 art. 4, § B 58-52 art. 4, § C 58-50 art. 4, § D 58-53 art. 5, § A- 58-80-58-84 art. 5, § E 2637 10-15-1994 II 78-358 III, IV 78-361, 78-362 V, VI 78-359, 78-360 10-25-1994 I 78-357 2663 11- 7-1995 1, 2 54-1 2665 12-19-1995 1-7 90-5 2670  3-26-1996 I, II 90-107 2671  4- 2-1996 I-III 90-107 2690  2-18-1997 I 78-161 3020  3- 3-1998 70-1 3024  6- 2-1998 18-7 54-1 54-3 3025  6- 2-1998 1 18-32 18-59 18-103 18-122 18-145 3051  1- 5-1999 1-9 38-19-38-27 3057  3-16-1999 101-601 78-98 3066  7- 6-1999 1.01 50-21 2.01 50-22 3.01-3.06 50-35-50-40 4.01, 4.02 50-41 5.01, 5.02 50-51, 50-52 6.01-6.03 50-78-50-80 7.01-7.07 50-104-50-110 8.01, 8.02 50-134, 50-135 9.01 50-23 3068  7- 6-1999 50-36 3092 12-21-1999 106-13 3097  2-22-2000 110-56 3116  8-15-2000 10-118-10-133 3130 11-21-2000 1 90-107 3134  2- 6-2001 110-5, 110-6 3139  3-20-2001 2 54-47 3 54-68 4 54-95 5, 6 54-96 3156  6- 9-2001 14-31 3158  6-26-2001 4 54-95 3165 11-20-2001 1 106-63 3178  5- 7-2002 1-4 2-23 3189  7- 2-2002 2-25 3205 11- 5-2002 54-1 3207 12-17-2002 I-IX 38-58-38-66 3218  4-15-2003 1 42-2 3219  5-27-2003 14-92 3240  5- 4-2004 1, 2 10-122, 10-123 3 10-129 3255  8- 3-2004 2-21 3272 11- 2-2004 1 10-123 3281  4-19-2005 1(a) 106-257 1(b)-1(d) 106-296 3282  4-19-2005 114-27 3283  5-17-2005 1 18-103 18-145 18-176 1, 4 54-1 2 18-59 3 18-32 5 18-122 6 18-33 3284  5-17-2005 1-4 54-2 3292 11- 1-2005 1, 2 42-59, 42-60 3 42-58 4 42-61 3296  2-14-2006 1-11 82-19-82-29 3303  5-17-2006 1-4 82-47-82-50 3306  6-20-2006 1-6 2-309 3314 10- 2-2006 1-22 2-21 3332  4-17-2007 1-4 22-474-22-477 3334  6-12-2007 50-1 3335  6-19-2007 1 2-279 3351 11- 6-2007 I 62-102 II-VI 62-107-62-111 VII 62-106 VIII-X 62-103-62-105 3358 12-18-2007 1-15 22-1-22-15 17-25 22-17-22-25 3360  2- 6-2008 50-1 48-26-48-28 50-21-50-23 48-36-48-42 50-35-50-41 48-56, 48-57 50-51, 50-52 48-66-48-68 50-78-50-80 48-76-48-82 50-104-50-110 48-96, 48-97 50-134, 50-135 116-08  2-19-2008(Res.) 2-230 3385  7-15-2008 1, 2 2-472, 2-473 3 2-471 2-474 4(A)-(C), (E), 
(G)-(O) 2-475 4(D) 2-476 5, 6 2-477, 2-478 3407  6- 2-2009 1-4 106-361-106-364 3419 11- 3-2009 arts. 1-6 58-19-58-30, 58-49-58-53, 58-80-58-84 3431  3-23-2010 1 18-103 18-145 18-176 54-1(a) 2 18-32 3 54-1(b) 4 18-122 5 18-33 3436  5- 4-2010 1A       Added 18-33(3) 3455 11- 1-2010 1-23 2-21 3459  4-19-2011 1, 2       Added 98-28 3463  5- 3-2011 1-16       Rpld 10-48-10-54, 10-82-10-87       Added 10-48-10-63 3465  6-21-2011 I 98-89(a)(1) 3468  8-16-2011       Rpld 6-8, 6-15, 22-25 3474  4- 3-2012 1-3       Added 2-2 3476  5-15-2012 1-4       Added 110-74 3481  8-14-2012 1-16       Rpld 62-102-62-111       Added 62-102-62-117 3482  9-11-2012 1       Added ch. 62, art. III(note) 3488 12- 4-2012 1 22-3(3) 3489 12- 4-2012 1 App. C, 
§ 14-53 3490  2-19-2013 1 62-102 2 62-104 3, 4 62-108, 62-109 3492  4-2-2013 art. 8       Rpld 58-19-58-30, 58-49-58-53, 58-80-58-84 arts. 1-6       Added 58-19-58-22, 58-31-58-39, 58-51-58-53, 58-61-58-65, 58-71, 58-81 3493  4-16-2013 1 2-279 3494  4-16-2013 1       Added 2-21(18A) 3499  7-16-2013 II       Rpld 2-79, 2-80, 2-82       Added 2-84-2-100 3514  1-21-2014       Added 94-15 3522  9- 2-2014 I 38-20(b) 3526 10-21-2014 I       Added App. A, § 3.2(23A) II App. A, § 7.3(4) 3527 11- 3-2014 1-23 2-21 3529 12-16-2014 I App. B, § 3.2(37A) II       Added App. B, § 6.1(n)       Rnbd App. B, § 6.1(n) ;       as App. B, § 6.1(o) III       Added App. B, § 6.6(i) 3531  4- 7-2015 1, 2 18-32, 18-33 3 54-1 4 18-59 5 18-103 6 18-122 7 18-145 8 18-176 3540  9-15-2015 1-6       Added 2-321-2-326 3548  6-21-2016 1       Added 2-21(18B) 3549  7-19-2016 1       Rpld 2-471-2-478 2-8       Added 2-471-2-478 3556 12- 6-2016 1       Added App. D, § 18-34(2)(a) 3558  2-21-2017 1-3 2-21(17) 3559  4-18-2017 1, 2 98-28 3561  5- 2-2017 1, 2 110-5, 110-6 3, 4 110-49, 110-50 5       Added 110-51(k), (l) 6       Rpld App. D, ch. 110 3562  5-16-2017 1-17       Added 106-381-106-397  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Alabama state law. 
Code of Ala. 1975 
Section Section 

this Code 1-1-1 et seq. 1-3 1-1-4 1-3 1-3-8 1-3 2-5-17 Ch. 22, Art. XI 2-28-1 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. XII 3-1-1 et seq. Ch. 14 3-5-14 Ch. 14 3-7A-1 14-1 3-7A-1 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. IV 4-3-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 5 4-3-5 Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 5 5-19A-1 et seq. Ch. 86, Art. III 5-19A-2 86-44 6-5-122 Ch. 18, Art. IX 8-13-1 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. VI 8-16-1 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. V 8-17-80 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. V 8-17-210 54-47 8-17-210 et seq. Ch. 54, Art. III 54-47 8-19-1 et seq. Ch. 22 8-22-1 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. V 11-19-1- 
11-19-24 58-19 tit. 11, ch. 51 22-1 11-40-1 1-2 11-40-1 et seq. Ch. 2 11-43-1 et seq. Ch. 2 11-43-5 54-1 Ch. 70 11-43-6 2-1 11-43-40 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II 11-43-45, 11-43-46 Ch. 2, Art. III 11-43-48 Ch. 2, Art. II 2-21 11-43-50 Ch. 2, Art. II 2-21 11-43-55 Ch. 70 11-43-59 Ch. 18 Ch. 54 11-43-82 34-3 11-43-100 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 2 11-43-100 2-86 11-43-101 2-91 11-43-104 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 2 11-43-120 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 2 11-43-120 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 2 11-43-140 et seq. 54-1 11-43D-1 et seq. Ch. 2 11-45-1- 
11-45-11 58-19 11-45-1.1 Ch. 78, Art. IX 11-45-2 78-1 11-45-7 1-1 1-4 11-45-8 Ch. 18 2-87 18-32 18-33 18-59 18-103 18-122 18-145 18-176 54-1 11-45-9 1-8 38-25 11-45-9.1 38-25 62-104 62-115 11-47-7 Ch. 70, Art. II 11-47-22 Ch. 26 11-47-40 et seq. Ch. 26 11-47-110 Ch. 14 Ch. 14, Art. III 11-47-111 Ch. 10, Art. III 11-47-112 Ch. 6 11-47-116 Ch. 70, Art. III 11-47-117 Ch. 18, Art. IX Ch. 106, Art. V Ch. 114 11-47-118 Ch. 18, Art. IX Ch. 114 11-47-130 et seq. Ch. 62 Ch. 114 11-47-140 Ch. 114 11-47-190 et seq. 2-1 11-47-210 et seq. Ch. 82 11-48-1 et seq. Ch. 94 11-48-16 Ch. 58 11-48-19 106-234 11-49-1 Ch. 118, Art. II 11-49-1 et seq. Ch. 94 11-49-3 Ch. 106, Art. IV 11-49-4, 11-49-5 106-10 11-50-1 et seq. Ch. 110 11-50-53, 11-50-54 110-110 11-51-40-11-51-74 114-28 11-51-44 22-13 11-51-90 98-58 11-51-90 et seq. Ch. 22 11-51-90.2(f) 110-4 11-51-90B 22-2 11-51-91 Ch. 22 11-51-92 22-20 11-51-100 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. IX 11-51-101 Ch. 118 11-51-102 et seq. Ch. 10 11-51-120 22-22 11-51-122 22-3 11-51-123 22-22 11-51-128 22-22 11-51-129 22-2 110-4 11-51-150 et seq. 22-15 11-51-180 22-2 11-51-200 et seq. Ch. 98 11-52-1 et seq. Ch. 38 58-19 11-52-2-11-52-7 Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 11-52-6 2-201 11-52-8, 11-52-9 2-199, 2-200 11-52-30 2-202 11-52-30-11-52-36 App. A, § 1.2 11-52-31 2-203 11-52-50-11-52-54 App. A, § 1.2 11-52-70 et seq. App. B, § 1.2 11-52-75.1 App. B, § 3.2 11-52-77 App. A, § 4.3 11-52-79 Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 11-52-80, 11-52-81 App. B, § 2.3 11-52-80 et seq. 58-71 11-53-1 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. IX 11-53B-1 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. IX 11-68-1 et seq. Ch. 66 11-68-13 Ch. 66, Art. III 11-85-1 et seq. Ch. 38 11-89C-1 et seq. 50-1 50-106 11-90-1 et seq. Ch. 74 11-98-1 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. II 46-20 11-98-4(e) 46-20 11-98-5(a), 11-98-5(b) 46-21 12-11-30 106-387 12-12-53 106-64 12-14-1 et seq. Ch. 42 42-27 12-14-9 Ch. 42, Art. III 12-19-250 106-62 13A-1-1 et seq. Ch. 78 13A-1-2 78-1 13A-6-68 Ch. 78, Art. VIII 13A-7-20 et seq. 82-23 13A-7-24-13A-7-26 102-3 13A-7-29 82-24 90-2 13A-8-23 110-54 13A-9-70 et seq. Ch. 30 13A-10-12 1-18 13A-11-12 26-2 13A-11-13 26-1 13A-11-14 14-24 13A-12-20 10-49 13A-12-130 Ch. 78, Art. VIII 13A-12-200.1 et seq. Ch. 78, Art. VIII 13A-12-260 78-161 16-17-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 6 tit. 20, ch. 2 78-161 22-1-1 et seq. Ch. 62 22-11A-1 et seq. 62-13 22-15A-1 et seq. Ch. 54, Art. IV 22-15A-3 54-143 22-18-1 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. III 22-18-7 Ch. 46, Art. III 22-19-1 et seq. Ch. 26 22-19-3(1-4) 26-3 22-22-1(b)(3) 50-21 22-22A-1 et seq. 50-21 22-27-1 et seq. Ch. 90 22-27-2 90-1 22-27-47 Ch. 90 23-1-240 et seq. Ch. 86, Art. II tit. 24, chs. 2, 3 38-21 38-58 38-61 24-3-1 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. II 26-21-2 78-95 26-23A-3 78-95 28-1-1 et seq. Ch. 6 6-1 28-3A-21(15)(c) 6-4 28-3A-23(j) 6-7 28-4-70 et seq. 6-2 31-9-1 et seq. Ch. 34 31-9-10 Ch. 34 32-1-1 et seq. Ch. 106 32-1-1.1 106-383 32-1-3 Ch. 106, Art. VI 32-1-4-32-1-6 Ch. 106 32-5-1 Ch. 106 106-9 32-5-1 et seq. 106-1 32-5-1(e) Ch. 106, Art. III 32-5-152 106-96 32-5-213 106-383 32-5-313 106-62 Tit. 32, ch. 5A, art. 2 106-394 32-5A-1 et seq. 106-1 32-5A-7 106-383 32-5A-31 106-383 106-394 32-5A-32 106-383 32-5A-34 106-394 32-5A-35 106-383 106-394 32-5A-60 94-6 32-5A-112 106-383 32-5A-113 Ch. 106, Art. III 32-5A-130 106-12 32-5A-138 106-97 32-5A-139 Ch. 106, Art. V 32-5A-170- 
32-5A-178   
106-383 32-5A-191 1-8 78-1 32-13-1 106-257 106-296 32-13-1 et seq. Ch. 106, Art. V 32-15-1 et seq. Ch. 118 34-1A-1 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. II 34-1A-8 Ch. 22, Art. II 34-6-1 10-19 34-6-1 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. II 34-6-15 10-22 34-43-1 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. VIII 34-43-3 22-298 34-43-19 Ch. 22, Art. VIII 35-12-70 et seq. Ch. 70, Art. III 37-3-1 et seq. Ch. 118, Art. IV tit. 40 22-21 tit. 40, ch. 21, art. 2, tit. 40, 
ch. 21, art. 3 22-2 40-2-1 et seq. 22-2 40-2A-3 22-2 40-2a-3 22-2 40-8-1 50-1 40-12-1 et seq. Ch. 22 40-12-93 Ch. 22, Art. III 40-12-102 et seq. Ch. 54, Art. III 40-12-116 Ch. 22, Art. XIII 40-12-139 Ch. 22, Art. X 40-12-172 Ch. 22, Art. X 40-12-174 Ch. 22, Art. X 40-12-221 et seq. Ch. 98, Art. III 40-12-224 22-24 40-12-410 et seq. Ch. 86, Art. IV 40-23-1 et seq. Ch. 98 40-23-25 22-24 40-23-82 22-24 40-23-210 et seq. 98-28 40-26-1 et seq. Ch. 98, Art. IV 41-9-160 et seq. Ch. 18 41-9-166 58-19 41-16-50 Ch. 2, Art. V 41-22-1 et seq. 106-396  
